                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW EFFICIENT IS DYNAMIC COMPETITION? THE CASE OF PRICE AS INVESTMENT

                                         David Besanko
                                        Ulrich Doraszelski
                                        Yaroslav Kryukov

                                       Working Paper 23829
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23829


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




We thank Guy Arie, Joe Harrington, Bruno Jullien, Ariel Pakes, Robert Porter, Michael Raith,
Mike Riordan, Juuso Valimaki, and Mike Whinston for helpful discussions and suggestions. We
also thank participants at seminars at Carnegie Mellon University, DG Comp at the European
Commission, Helsinki Center for Economic Research, Johns Hopkins University, Toulouse
School of Economics, Tulane University, and University of Rochester for their useful questions
and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23829.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Besanko, Ulrich Doraszelski, and Yaroslav Kryukov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Efficient is Dynamic Competition? The Case of Price as Investment
David Besanko, Ulrich Doraszelski, and Yaroslav Kryukov
NBER Working Paper No. 23829
September 2017
JEL No. D21,D43,L13,L41

                                        ABSTRACT

We study industries where the price that a firm sets serves as an investment into lower cost or
higher demand. We assess the welfare implications of the ensuing competition for the market
using analytical and numerical approaches to compare the equilibria of a learning-by-doing
model to the first-best planner solution. We show that dynamic competition leads to low
deadweight loss. This cannot be attributed to similarity between the equilibria and the planner
solution. Instead, we show how learning-by-doing causes the various contributions to deadweight
loss to either be small or partly offset each other.

David Besanko                                  Yaroslav Kryukov
Department of Strategy                         University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
Kellogg School of Management                   Pittsburgh, PA 15219
Northwestern University                        yaro.kryukov@gmail.com
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
d-besanko@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Ulrich Doraszelski
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
doraszelski@wharton.upenn.edu
 How Efficient is Dynamic Competition? The Case of Price as
                         Investment∗
              David Besanko†             Ulrich Doraszelski‡           Yaroslav Kryukov§

                                          September 4, 2017



                                                Abstract
            We study industries where the price that a firm sets serves as an investment into lower
        cost or higher demand. We assess the welfare implications of the ensuing competition
        for the market using analytical and numerical approaches to compare the equilibria
        of a learning-by-doing model to the first-best planner solution. We show that dynamic
        competition leads to low deadweight loss. This cannot be attributed to similarity between
        the equilibria and the planner solution. Instead, we show how learning-by-doing causes
        the various contributions to deadweight loss to either be small or partly offset each other.


1       Introduction
In many important industrial settings, the price that a firm sets plays the role of an invest-
ment. The investment role arises when the firm’s price affects not only its current profit
but also its future competitive position vis-à-vis its rivals. Examples include competition
to accumulate production experience on a learning curve or to acquire a customer base in
markets with network effects or switching costs. In these settings, a firm’s current sales
translate into lower cost or higher demand in the future, and the firm is thus able to shape
the evolution of the industry by pricing aggressively. The emergence of “big data” and
the increased recognition of the importance of customer data obtained over time as a by-
product of sales—summarized by the popular catch phrase “data is the new oil of the digital
economy”—may make the investment role of price even more pervasive.
    ∗
     We thank Guy Arie, Joe Harrington, Bruno Jullien, Ariel Pakes, Robert Porter, Michael Raith, Mike
Riordan, Juuso Välimäki, and Mike Whinston for helpful discussions and suggestions. We also thank partic-
ipants at seminars at Carnegie Mellon University, DG Comp at the European Commission, Helsinki Center
for Economic Research, Johns Hopkins University, Toulouse School of Economics, Tulane University, and
University of Rochester for their useful questions and comments.
   †
     Kellogg School of Management,              Northwestern University,    Evanston,    IL 60208,       d-
besanko@kellogg.northwestern.edu.
   ‡
     Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, doraszelski@wharton.upenn.edu.
   §
     University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, yaro.kryukov@gmail.com.




                                                     1
   It is well understood that the investment role of price opens up a second dimension of
competition between firms, namely competition for the market. Competition is dynamic as
firms jostle for competitive advantage through the prices they set. For example, in their
review of the literature on network effects and switching costs, Farrell & Klemperer (2007)
point out that

     [f]or a firm, it [the presence of switching costs and proprietary network effects]
     makes market share a valuable asset, and encourages a competitive focus on
     affecting expectations and on signing up pivotal (notably early) customers, which
     is reflected in strategies such as penetration pricing; competition is shifted from
     textbook competition in the market to a form of Schumpeterian competition for
     the market in which firms struggle for dominance. (p. 1976)

This jostle for competitive advantage is a feature of both “new economy” industries (e.g.,
Amazon versus Barnes & Noble in e-book readers or Microsoft versus Sony in video game
consoles) and “old economy” industries (e.g., Boeing versus Airbus in aircraft and Intel
versus AMD in microprocessors).
   At the same time, several high-profile antitrust cases, such as United States v. Microsoft
in the late 1990s and European Union v. Google initiated in 2015 have taken aim at the
market leaders in industries where the investment role of price is presumably important. This
raises a question that is less well understood: does unfettered competition for the market
when price serves as an investment warrant regulatory scrutiny? The answer depends on
how efficient dynamic competition is. If it is not very efficient and leads to high deadweight
loss, then there potentially are gains to be had from intervening in the industry. However,
if dynamic competition is very efficient, then the upside from regulatory scrutiny is limited,
barring explicitly anti-competitive behavior. The goal of this paper is hence to take a step
toward assessing the efficiency of dynamic competition when price serves as an investment.
   It may seem intuitive that dynamic competition when price serves as an investment is
fairly efficient. This intuition becomes apparent by drawing a contrast with the rent-seeking
literature (Posner 1975). In rent-seeking models, firms compete for market dominance by
engaging in socially wasteful activities (e.g., lobbying). When price serves as an investment,
firms also compete for market dominance, though not through socially wasteful activities
but instead through low prices that transfer surplus to consumers. As a by-product of these
low prices, firms generate socially valuable learning economies in production or demand-side
economies of scale.
   However, this intuition is incomplete. First, prices that are too low relative to marginal
cost can cause deadweight loss from over-production, just as prices that are too high can
cause deadweight loss from under-production. Second, dynamic competition may give rise to


                                              2
equilibria that entail predation-like behavior and monopolization of the industry in the long
run (Dasgupta & Stiglitz 1988, Cabral & Riordan 1994, Athey & Schmutzler 2001, Besanko,
Doraszelski, Kryukov & Satterthwaite 2010, Besanko, Doraszelski & Kryukov 2014). This
can cause welfare losses from monopoly pricing and suboptimal product variety. Third, as
firms attempt to balance the gains from possibly monopolizing their industry against the
losses from pricing aggressively as they jostle for competitive advantage, dynamic competi-
tion can distort entry behavior and result in coordination failures similar to the ones in natu-
ral monopoly markets highlighted by Bolton & Farrell (1990). Finally, dynamic competition
can also distort exit behavior if firms are reluctant to exit an industry destined to be monop-
olized and become caught up in wars of attrition (Maynard Smith 1974, Tirole 1988, Bulow
& Klemperer 1999).
       In sum, dynamic competition when price serves as an investment may cause deadweight
losses through a number of distinct channels, and it is not a priori obvious what the magni-
tude of these deadweight losses may be. In this paper, we make a first attempt to assess how
efficient dynamic competition is. We do so in a model of learning-by-doing along the lines
of Cabral & Riordan (1994), Besanko et al. (2010), and Besanko et al. (2014) that involves
price competition in a differentiated products market with entry and exit. Learning-by-doing
is not only an important setting in its own right1 but also shares key features with other
settings such as network effects and switching costs (Besanko et al. 2014).
       We use a combination of analytical and numerical approaches to compare the Markov
perfect equilibria of our learning-by-doing model to the solution of a first-best problem
that has a social planner controlling pricing, entry, and exit decisions. Deadweight loss is
the difference in the expected net present value of total surplus. We carefully explore the
parameter space and multiple equilibria using the homotopy or path-following method in
Besanko et al. (2010). We show that dynamic competition does indeed tend to lead to low
deadweight loss. Deadweight loss is less than 10% of the maximum value added by the
industry in more than 65% of parameterizations and less than 20% of value added in more
than 90% of parameterizations.2 Moreover, the investment role of price tends to be socially
beneficial; if we shut it down, then deadweight loss increases—often substantially—in more
than 80% of parameterizations.
       We then point out that low deadweight loss does not arise because equilibrium behavior
   1
     For empirical studies of learning-by-doing in a broad set of industries, see Wright (1936), Hirsch (1952),
DeJong (1957), Alchian (1963), Levy (1965), Kilbridge (1962), Hirschmann (1964), Preston & Keachie (1964),
Baloff (1971), Dudley (1972), Zimmerman (1982), Lieberman (1984), Gruber (1992), Irwin & Klenow (1994),
Jarmin (1994), Pisano (1994), Bohn (1995), Hatch & Mowery (1998), Benkard (2000), Shafer, Nembhard &
Uzumeri (2001), Thompson (2001), and Thornton & Thompson (2001).
   2
     The maximum value added by the industry is the difference in the expected net present value of total
surplus of the first-best planner solution and an industry that remains empty forever. We explain the rationale
for this normalization in Section 3.2.



                                                      3
and the industry dynamics that it implies are similar to the first-best planner solution.
On the contrary, especially the “best” equilibria that entail the lowest deadweight loss are
remarkably different from the first-best planner solution. We further show in an analytically
tractable special case of our learning-by-doing model that there is nothing about dynamic
competition when price serves as an investment that precludes potentially costly distortions
in equilibrium entry and exit behavior. Too much or early entry, respectively, too little or
late entry lead to wasteful duplication and delay (Bolton & Farrell 1990), and too much or
early exit, respectively, too little or late exit similarly lead to welfare losses. In addition,
what we call cost-inefficient exit leads to welfare losses if a lower-cost firm exits the industry
while a higher-cost firm does not.
       We next seek to identify the mechanisms through which dynamic competition leads to
low deadweight loss. We decompose deadweight loss into a pricing distortion that captures
differences in equilibrium pricing behavior from the first-best planner solution and a remain-
ing non-pricing distortion that subsumes a suboptimal number of firms and products being
offered by these firms, a suboptimal exploitation of learning economies, and cost-inefficient
exit. The low deadweight loss boils down to three regularities in these components.
       First, while the pricing distortion tends to be the largest contributor to deadweight loss,
in the best equilibria it is quite low and it is “not so bad” in the “worst” equilibria that entail
the highest deadweight loss. We provide analytical bounds on the pricing distortion. The
bounds make plain that this regularity is rooted in learning-by-doing itself. In particular, the
bounds tighten as firms move down their learning curves and improve their cost positions.
Second, the non-pricing distortion in the worst equilibria tends to be low because competition
for the market resolves itself quickly and winnows out firms in a fairly efficient way. Third,
in the best equilibria the non-pricing distortion tends to be higher. Dynamic competition
tends to lead to over-entry and under-exit.3 Too many firms have social costs in terms of
incurred setup costs and forgone scrap values but also offsetting social benefits in terms of
additional product variety. Learning-by-doing again accentuates these benefits by making
the additional product variety less costly to procure.
       All in all, we show that dynamic competition when price serves as an investment works
remarkably well, not because competition for the market is a “magic bullet” that achieves
full efficiency, but because the various contributions to deadweight loss either are small or
partly offset each other. And this, in turn, happens because of learning-by-doing itself.

Related literature.         Our paper is related to a large literature on dynamic competition in
settings where price plays an investment role. Besides the aforementioned models of learning-
   3
    Interestingly, this contrasts with static models of imperfect competition with free entry (Dixit & Stiglitz
1977, Koenker & Perry 1981, Besanko, Perry & Spady 1990, Anderson, de Palma & Thisse 1992).



                                                      4
by-doing, this includes the models of network effects in Mitchell & Skrzypacz (2006), Chen,
Doraszelski & Harrington (2009), Dube, Hitsch & Chintagunta (2010), and Cabral (2011);
switching costs in Dube, Hitsch & Rossi (2009) and Chen (2011); experience goods in Berge-
mann & Välimäki (1996) and Ching (2010); and habit formation in Bergemann & Välimäki
(2006). As we show in Besanko et al. (2014), these models share key features with our
leaning-by-doing model. In particular, a firm has two distinct motives for pricing aggres-
sively, namely to acquire competitive advantage or overcome competitive disadvantage—the
so-called advantage-building motive—and to prevent its rivals from acquiring competitive
advantage—the advantage-denying motive.4
   While the literature has generally focused on characterizing equilibrium behavior rather
than anatomizing its implications for welfare, it has raised some red flags regarding the
efficiency of dynamic competition. Bergemann & Välimäki (1997) show that the equilib-
rium in their experience-goods model is inefficient because of an informational externality
between firms (see also Rob (1991) and Bolton & Harris (1999)). The literature on network
effects shows that an inferior product can be adopted and persist as the standard either
because consumers’ expectations are misaligned or favor the inferior product (Biglaiser &
Cremer 2016, Halaburda, Jullien & Yehezkel 2016). Nevertheless, none of these papers
directly addresses the question whether the investment role of price is socially beneficial.
Our learning-by-doing model also focuses more directly on entry and exit as generic ele-
ments of models of firm and industry dynamics (Jovanovic 1982, Hopenhayn 1992, Ericson
& Pakes 1995).
       Competition for the market is often conceptualized through sequential winner-take-all
R&D races to produce disruptive innovations. In these Schumpeterian models of creative
destruction, an incumbent temporarily assumes a monopoly position only to be dislodged by
an entrant who has successfully invested in a superior technology (Aghion & Howitt 1992).
Evans & Schmalensee (2002) argue that an excessive focus on short-run market power in
this setting can obscure just how vulnerable to disruptive innovations market leaders can be,
a perspective that has influenced the direction of antitrust policy in the U.S. as it pertains
to high-tech industries. Segal & Whinston (2007) show that antitrust policies that protect
entrants at the expense of incumbents can have the salutary effect of increasing the rate of
innovation. Our paper complements this literature by investigating the welfare implications
of competition for the market in a very different type of setting, namely one where price
   4
     The advantage-denying motive also arises in price-setting models with costly quantity or capacity adjust-
ment and, perhaps more surprisingly, quantity-setting models with costly price adjustments (menu costs).
This is because in these latter models a firm’s quantity has a direct effect on its rival’s price in the current
period and thus competitive position in the subsequent period (see Lapham & Ware (1994) and Jun & Vives
(2004) and the references therein). Finally, the advantage-denying motive arises in some investment models,
such as advertising models where goodwill accumulates according to a firm’s “share of voice” or advertising
is combative (see Jorgensen & Zaccour (2004) and the references therein).



                                                       5
takes on the role of the investment.
    Finally, similar to our analysis, Pakes & McGuire’s (1994) find in a quality-ladder model
that deadweight loss can be quite low even though equilibrium behavior and industry dy-
namics differ markedly from the first-best planner solution. Different from our analysis,
however, this finding pertains to a single parameterization, so it is not clear to what extent
it generalizes. In addition, in the quality-ladder model price does again not serve as an
investment, meaning that the mechanisms through which dynamic competition leads to low
deadweight loss are different.

Organization of paper.       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
sets up our learning-by-doing model. Section 3 develops the first-best planner problem and
the welfare metrics we use in the subsequent analysis. Section 4 provides an analytical
characterization of equilibria and associated deadweight loss for a special case of our model.
Sections 5 and 6 present our numerical analysis of equilibria and associated deadweight
loss over a wide range of the parameter space and summarize the regularities that emerge.
Section 7 introduces our decomposition of deadweight loss and provides analytical bounds
on some of its components. Section 8 ties together the insights from the preceding sections
and offers a summary explanation of why dynamic competition leads to low deadweight loss
when price serves as an investment.
    Throughout the paper we distinguish between propositions that are established through
formal arguments and results. A result either establishes a possibility through a numerical
example or summarizes a regularity through a systematic exploration of the parameter space.
Unless indicated otherwise, proofs of propositions are in the Appendix. The Online Appendix
contains additional results and technical details to support the analysis in the paper.


2    Model
We study a discrete-time, infinite-horizon dynamic stochastic game between two firms in an
industry that is characterized by learning-by-doing. At any point in time, firm n ∈ {1, 2}
is described by its state en ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M }. A firm can be either an incumbent firm that
actively produces or a potential entrant. State en = 0 indicates a potential entrant. States
en ∈ {1, . . . , M } indicate the cumulative experience or stock of know-how of an incumbent
firm. By making a sale in the current period, an incumbent firm can add to its stock of know-
how and, through learning-by-doing, lower its production cost in the subsequent period.
Competitive advantage and industry leadership are therefore determined endogenously in
our model. The industry’s state is the vector of firms’ states e = (e1 , e2 ). It completely
describes the number of incumbent firms—and therefore the extent of product variety—


                                              6
along with their cost positions. If e1 > e2 (e1 < e2 ), then we refer to firm 1 as the leader
(follower) and to firm 2 as the follower (leader).
    In each period, firms first set prices and then decide on exit and entry. During the price-
setting phase, the state changes from e to e′ depending on the outcome of the pricing game
between the incumbent firms. In particular, if firm 1 makes the sale and adds to its stock
of know-how, the state changes to e′ = e1+ = (min{e1 + 1, M }, e2 ); if firm 2 makes the sale,
the state changes to e′ = e2+ = (e1 , min{e2 + 1, M }).
    During the exit-entry phase, the state then changes from e′ to e′′ depending on the exit
decisions of the incumbent firms and the entry decisions of the potential entrants. We model
the entry of firm n as a transition from state e′n = 0 to state e′′n = 1 and exit as a transition
from state e′n ≥ 1 to state e′′n = 0. As the exit of an incumbent firm creates an opportunity
for a potential entrant to enter the industry, re-entry is possible. The state at the end of the
current period finally becomes the state at the beginning of the subsequent period.
    Before analyzing firms’ decisions and the equilibrium of our dynamic stochastic game,
we describe the remaining primitives.

Learning-by-doing and production cost.                     Incumbent firm n’s marginal cost of produc-
tion c(en ) depends on its stock of know-how through a learning curve with a progress ratio
ρ ∈ [0, 1]:                            (
                                           κρlog2 en       if   1 ≤ en < m,
                            c(en ) =                                                               (1)
                                           κρlog2 m        if   m ≤ en ≤ M.

Because marginal cost decreases by 100(1 − ρ)% as the stock of know-how doubles, a lower
progress ratio implies stronger learning economies.
    The marginal cost for a firm without prior experience, c(1), is κ > 0. Once the firm
reaches state m, the learning curve “bottoms out,” and there are no further experience-
based cost reductions. We accordingly refer to an industry in state e as a mature duopoly
if e ≥ (m, m) and as a mature monopoly if either e1 ≥ m and e2 = 0 or e1 = 0 and e2 ≥ m.

Demand.         The industry draws customers from a large pool of potential buyers. One buyer
enters the market each period and purchases one unit of either one of the “inside goods”
that are offered by the incumbent firms at prices p = (p1 , p2 ) or an “outside good” at an
exogenously given price p0 . The probability that firm n makes the sale is given by the logit
specification
                                     exp( v−p n
                                            σ )        exp( −pσ n )
                          Dn (p) = P2        v−pk
                                                  = P 2          −pk
                                                                     ,
                                    k=0 exp( σ )      k=0 exp( σ )

where v is gross utility and σ > 0 is a scale parameter that governs the degree of product
differentiation. As σ → 0, goods become homogeneous and the firm that sets the lowest price


                                                       7
makes the sale for sure.5 If firm n is a potential entrant, then we set its price to infinity so
that Dn (p) = 0.
       Throughout we assume that the outside good is supplied competitively and priced at its
marginal cost of production c0 ≥ 0. The price of the outside good p0 = c0 determines the
overall level of demand for the inside goods. As it decreases, the market becomes smaller,
and ultimately the industry is no longer viable.

Scrap values and setup costs.                To facilitate the subsequent computations, we “purify”
mixed exit and entry strategies. If incumbent firm n exits the industry, it receives a scrap
value Xn drawn from a symmetric triangular distribution FX (·) with support [X − ∆X , X +
∆X ], where EX (Xn ) = X and ∆X > 0 is a scale parameter. If potential entrant n enters the
industry, it incurs a setup cost Sn drawn from a symmetric triangular distribution FS (·) with
support [S − ∆S , S + ∆S ], where ES (Sn ) = S and ∆S > 0 is a scale parameter. Scrap values
and setup costs are independently and identically distributed across firms and periods, and
their realization is observed by the firm but not its rival.
    Although in our model a firm formally follows a pure strategy in making its exit or entry
decision, the dependence of its decision on its randomly drawn, privately known scrap value,
respectively, setup cost implies that its rival perceives the firm as if it was following a mixed
strategy. As ∆X → 0 and ∆S → 0, the scrap value is fixed at X and the setup cost at S and
we revert to mixed exit and entry strategies (Doraszelski & Satterthwaite 2010, Doraszelski
& Escobar 2010).

2.1       Firms’ decisions
To analyze the pricing and exit decisions of incumbent firms and the entry decisions of
potential entrants, we work backwards from the exit-entry phase to the price-setting phase.
Combining exit and entry decisions, we let φn (e′ ) denote the probability, as viewed from the
perspective of its rival, that firm n decides not to operate in state e′ : if en > 0 so that firm
n is an incumbent, then φn (e′ ) is the probability of exiting; if e′n = 0 so that firm n is an
entrant, then φn (e′ ) is the probability of not entering.
       We use Vn (e) to denote the expected net present value (NPV) of future cash flows to
firm n in state e at the beginning of the period and Un (e′ ) to denote the expected NPV
of future cash flows to firm n in state e′ after pricing decisions but before exit and entry
decisions are made. The price-setting phase determines the value function Vn along with
the policy function pn with typical element Vn (e), respectively, pn (e); the exit-entry phase
determines the value function Un along with the policy function φn with typical element
Un (e′ ), respectively, φn (e′ ).
   5
       If there is more than one such firm, each of them makes the sale with equal probability.


                                                        8
Exit decision of incumbent firm.               To simplify the exposition, we focus on firm 1; the
derivations for firm 2 are analogous. If incumbent firm 1 exits the industry, it receives the
scrap value X1 in the current period and perishes. If it does not exit, its expected NPV is
                                                                                
                       b1 (e′ ) = β V1 (e′ )(1 − φ2 (e′ )) + V1 (e′1 , 0)φ2 (e′ ) ,
                       X

where β ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. The     h hprobability ofiiincumbent firm 1 exiting the
                   ′                    ′
industry in state e is therefore φ1 (e ) = EX 1 X1 ≥ X       b1 (e′ ) = 1 − FX (Xb1 (e′ )), where 1 [·]
is the indicator function and X b1 (e′ ) is the critical level of the scrap value above which exit
occurs. Moreover, the expected NPV of incumbent firm 1 in the exit-entry phase is given
by the Bellman equation
                                                h        n              oi
                                U1 (e′ ) = EX max X        b1 (e′ ), X1
                                                                            h                 i
                                                                                        b1 (e′ ) , (2)
  = (1 − φ1 (e′ ))β V1 (e′ )(1 − φ2 (e′ )) + V1 (e′1 , 0)φ2 (e′ ) + φ1 (e′ )EX X1 |X1 ≥ X

        h                 i
                  b1 (e′ ) is the expectation of the scrap value conditional on exiting the
where EX X1 |X1 ≥ X
industry.

Entry decision of potential entrant.                 There is a large queue of potential entrants.
Depending on the number of incumbent firms, up to two potential entrants can enter the
industry in each period. If a potential entrant does not enter, it perishes. If it enters, it
becomes an incumbent firm without prior experience in the subsequent period. Hence, upon
entry, the expected NPV of potential entrant 1 is
                                                                                   
                       Sb1 (e′ ) = β V1 (1, e′2 )(1 − φ2 (e′ )) + V1 (1, 0)φ 2 (e′ ) .

In addition, potential entrant 1 incurs the setup cost S1 in the current period. The prob-
ability                                                                      ′                  ′
   h h of potentialiientrant 1 not entering the industry in state e is therefore φ1 (e ) =
ES 1 S1 ≥ Sb1 (e′ ) = 1 − FS (Sb1 (e′ )), where Sb1 (e′ ) is the critical level of the setup cost be-
low which entry occurs. Moreover, the expected NPV of potential entrant 1 in the exit-entry
phase is given by the Bellman equation
                                            h   n                  oi
                               U1 (e′ ) = ES max Sb1 (e′ ) − S1 , 0
                    n                                                      h                  io
    = (1 − φ1 (e′ )) β[V1 (1, e′2 )(1 − φ2 (e′ )) + V1 (1, 0)φ2 (e′ )] − ES S1 |S1 ≤ Sb1 (e′ ) ,   (3)




                                                     9
        h                  i
where ES S1 |S1 ≤ Sb1 (e′ ) is the expectation of the setup cost conditional on entering the
industry.6

Pricing decision of incumbent firm.               In the price-setting phase, the expected NPV of
incumbent firm 1 is
                                                                 2
                                                                 X                              
                 V1 (e) = max D1 (p1 , p2 (e))(p1 − c(e1 )) +          Dn (p1 , p2 (e))U1 en+
                           p1
                                                                 n=0
                                                         2
                                                         X                                   
      = max D1 (p1 , p2 (e))(p1 − c(e1 )) + U1 (e) +           Dn (p1 , p2 (e)) U1 en+ − U1 (e) ,   (4)
          p1
                                                         n=1

                                                     P2
where we let e0+ = e and use the fact that               n=0 Dn (p)      = 1. Because the maximand on
the right-hand side of Bellman equation (4) is strictly quasiconcave in p1 (given p2 (e) and
e), the pricing decision p1 (e) is uniquely determined by the first-order condition

                 σ                                                          
 p1 (e) −                 − c(e1 ) + U1 e1+ − U1 (e) + Υ(p2 (e)) U1 (e) − U1 e2+ = 0, (5)
            1 − D1 (p(e))

where p(e) = (p1 (e), p2 (e)) and
                                                                        
                                                                  p2 (e)
                                     D2 (p(e))          exp     −   σ
                       Υ(p2 (e)) =               =                        
                                   1 − D1 (p(e))   exp − pσ0 + exp − p2σ(e)

is the probability of firm 2 making a sale conditional on firm 1 not making a sale.
    The pricing decision p1 (e) impounds two distinct goals beyond static profit D1 (p(e))(p1 (e)−
                                                
c(e1 )): the advantage-building motive U1 e1+ − U1 (e) and the advantage-denying motive
                 
U1 (e) − U1 e2+ . The advantage-building motive is the reward that the firm receives by
winning a sale and moving down its learning curve. The advantage-denying motive is the
penalty that the firm avoids by preventing its rival from winning the sale and moving down its
learning curve. As we show in Besanko et al. (2014), the advantage-building and advantage-
denying motives arise in a broad class of dynamic models and together capture the investment
role of price.

2.2     Equilibrium and industry dynamics
Because the demand and cost specification is symmetric, we restrict ourselves to symmetric
Markov perfect equilibria (MPE) in pure strategies of our learning-by-doing model. Exis-
                                                    h                 i
  6                                                           b1 (e′ ) in equation (2) and
   See Appendix A for closed-form expressions for EX X1 |X1 ≥ X
  h                  i
ES S1 |S1 ≤ Sb1 (e′ ) in equation (3).


                                                    10
tence follows from the arguments in Doraszelski & Satterthwaite (2010). In a symmetric
equilibrium, the decisions taken by firm 2 in state e are identical to the decisions taken
by firm 1 in state (e2 , e1 ). More formally, we have V2 (e) = V1 (e2 , e1 ), U2 (e) = U1 (e2 , e1 ),
p2 (e) = p1 (e2 , e1 ), and φ2 (e) = φ1 (e2 , e1 ). It therefore suffices to determine the value and
policy functions V1 , U1 , p1 , and φ1 of firm 1.
        Despite the restriction to symmetric equilibria, there is a substantial amount of multi-
plicity (as in Besanko et al. 2010, Besanko et al. 2014). Because the literature offers little
guidance regarding equilibrium selection, we make no attempt to do so and thus view all
equilibria that arise for a fixed set of primitives as equally likely. In doing, so we take the
ex ante perspective of a regulator that over time will confront a sequence of industries but
at present has little detailed knowledge about these industries.
        To study the evolution of the industry under a particular equilibrium, we use the policy
functions p1 and φ1 to construct the matrix of state-to-state transition probabilities that
characterizes the Markov process of industry dynamics. From this, we compute the transient
distribution over states in period t, µt , starting from state (0, 0) (the empty industry with
just the outside good) in period 0. In line with our ex ante perspective, we have in mind a
nascent industry in which two firms have developed new products that can potentially draw
customers away from an established product (the outside good) but have not yet brought
them to market.7 The typical element µt (e) is the probability that the industry is in state
e in period t. Depending on t, the transient distributions can capture short-run or long-run
(steady-state) dynamics. We think of period 500 as the long run and, with a slight abuse of
notation, denote µ500 by µ∞ . We use the transient distribution in period 500 rather than the
limiting (or ergodic) distribution to capture long-run dynamics because the Markov process
implied by the equilibrium may have multiple closed communicating classes.


3        First-best planner, welfare, and deadweight loss
3.1       First-best planner
Our welfare benchmark is a first-best planner who makes pricing, exit, and entry decisions to
maximize the expected NPV of total surplus (consumer plus producer surplus).8 In contrast
to the market, the planner centralizes and coordinates decisions across firms as in Bolton &
    7
     Starting from state (0, 0) “stacks the deck” against finding small deadweight losses by fully recognizing
any distortions in the entry process (see Section 4). It is also an interesting setting in its own right as sellers of
next-generation products aiming to establish a “footprint” are a pervasive feature of the business landscape,
and one where the investment role of price is particularly salient.
   8
     Mermelstein, Nocke, Satterthwaite & Whinston (2014) consider the expected NPV of total surplus and,
to a lesser extent, also the expected NPV of consumer surplus as possible objectives of an antitrust authority.
We follow them in using the same discount factor for planner and firms.




                                                         11
Farrell (1990). To “stack the deck” against finding small deadweight losses, we assume an
omniscient planner that has access to privately known scrap values and setup costs.9
      Combining exit and entry decisions, we let ψ F1,1B (e′ ) denote the probability that the
planner in state e′ decides to operate both firms in the subsequent period, ψ F1,0B (e′ ) the
probability that the planner decides to operate only firm 1, ψ F0,1B (e′ ) the probability that the
planner decides to operate only firm 2, and ψ F0,0B (e′ ) the probability that the planner decides
to operate neither firm.
      We use V F B (e) to denote the expected NPV of total surplus in state e at the beginning of
the period and U F B (e′ ) the expected NPV of total surplus in state e′ after pricing decisions
but before exit and entry decisions are made. The price-setting phase determines the value
function VF B along with the policy functions pFn B for n ∈ {1, 2}; the entry-exit phase
determines the value function UF B along with the policy functions ψ Fι B for ι ∈ {0, 1}2 .
We refer to ι = (ι1 , ι2 ) as the operating decisions of the first-best planner. Note that
P             FB ′                                                                       ′
   ι∈{0,1}2 ψ ι (e ) = 1 and that the probability that firm 1 does not operate in state e is
             P
φF1 B (e′ ) = 1ι2 =0 ψ F0,ιB2 (e′ ).

Operating decisions.           Define
                     
                     
                     
                      βV F B (e′1 ι1 , e′2 ι2 ) + X1 (1 − ι1 ) + X2 (1 − ι2 )   if   e′1 6= 0, e′2 > 0,
                     
                          βV F B (ι1 , e′2 ι2 ) − S1 ι1 + X2 (1 − ι2 )          if   e′1 = 0, e′2 > 0,
 UιF B (e′ , X, S) =                                                                                       (6)
                     
                     
                          βV F B (e′1 ι1 , ι2 ) + X1 (1 − ι1 ) − S2 ι2          if   e′1 > 0, e′2 = 0,
                     
                                βV F B (ι , ι ) − S ι − S ι
                                             1   2      1 1     2 2              if   e′1 = 0, e′2 = 0

to be the expected NPV of total surplus in state e′ given operating decisions ι ∈ {0, 1}2 ,
scrap values X = (X1 , X2 ), and setup costs S = (S1 , S2 ). Equation (6) distinguishes between
firm n actively producing in the current period (e′n > 0) and it being inactive (e′n = 0). If
firm n is active, then the first-best planner receives the scrap value Xn upon deciding not
to operate it in the subsequent period (ιn = 0); if firm n is inactive, then the planner incurs
the setup cost Sn upon deciding to operate it (ιn = 1). The optimal operating decisions are
                                               
                                U F B e′ , X, S = max UιF B (e′ , X, S),
                                                     ι∈{0,1}2


with associated operating probabilities
                                                                         
                       ψ Fι B e′ = EX,S 1 U F B e′ , X, S = UιF B (e′ , X, S)                              (7)
  9
      As Bolton & Farrell (1990) discuss, a central authority may often have more limited information.




                                                      12
for ι ∈ {0, 1}2 . Finally, the Bellman equation in the exit-entry phase is
                                                                      
                                     U F B (e′ ) = EX,S U F B e′ , X, S .                                    (8)

Pricing decisions.           In the price-setting phase, the expected NPV of total surplus is

                                             2
                                             X                                  2
                                                                                X                    
             V F B (e) = max CS(p) +                 Dn (p)(pn − c(en )) +            Dn (p)U F B en+ ,      (9)
                            p
                                             n=1                                n=0

where the first term
                                     2
                                     X                       !                 2
                                                                                 X                    !
                                                     v − pn                                      −pn
                CS(p) = σ ln               exp                     = v + σ ln          exp                  (10)
                                                       σ                                          σ
                                     n=0                                         n=0


is consumer surplus and the second term is the static profit of incumbent firms.10 Because
the outside good is priced at cost, its profit is zero.
       The solution to the maximization problem on the right-hand side of Bellman equation
(9) can be shown to exist and to be unique and is given by
                                                                        
                                pFn B (e) = c(en ) − U F B en+ − U F B (e)

for n ∈ {1, 2}. The pricing decision pFn B (e) reflects the marginal cost of production c(en ) of
incumbent firm n net of the marginal benefit to society of moving the firm down its learning
curve.

Solution and industry dynamics.                       The solution to the first-best planner problem exists
and is unique from the contraction mapping theorem. Without loss of generality, we take the
solution to be symmetric in that V F B (e) = V F B (e2 , e1 ), U F B (e) = U F B (e2 , e1 ), pF1 B (e) =
pF2 B (e2 , e1 ), and ψ Fι B (e) = ψ Fι2B                            2
                                        ,ι1 (e2 , e1 ) for ι ∈ {0, 1} .
       We again use the policy functions to construct the matrix of state-to-state transition
probabilities that characterizes the Markov process of industry dynamics and compute the
transient distribution over states in period t, µFt B , starting from state (0, 0) in period 0.

3.2      Welfare and deadweight loss
To capture both short-run and long-run dynamics, our welfare metric is the expected NPV of
total surplus. Under a particular equilibrium, total surplus in state e is the sum of consumer
  10
   If firm n is inactive, then we again set its price to infinity so that Dn (p) = 0 and its contribution to
CS(p) is zero.




                                                              13
and producer surplus:
                                       T S(e) = CS(e) + P S(e),

where, with a slight abuse of notation, we denote CS(p(e)) by CS(e), and P S(e) includes
                        P
the static profit Π(e) = 2n=1 Dn (p(e))(pn (e) − c(en )) of incumbent firms as well as their
expected scrap values and the expected setup costs of potential entrants.11 The expected
NPV of total surplus is
                                              ∞
                                              X          X
                                     T Sβ =         βt        µt (e) T S(e),                            (11)
                                              t=0         e

where, recall, µt (e) is the probability that the industry is in state e in period t.
         Under the first-best planner solution, we define the expected NPV of total surplus T SβF B
analogously. By construction, T SβF B = V F B (0, 0). The deadweight loss arising in equilib-
rium therefore is
                                        DW Lβ = T SβF B − T Sβ .                                        (12)

         Because DW Lβ is measured in arbitrary monetary units, we normalize it to better
gauge its size and to make it more readily comparable across parameterizations. While
it seems natural to express DW Lβ as a percentage of T SβF B , in our learning-by-doing model
both T SβF B and T Sβ vary linearly with gross utility v (because consumer surplus does; see
equation (10)). Because v cancels out of DW Lβ , we can therefore choose v to make DW Lβ
any desired percentage of T SβF B . Note that the chosen value does not affect the behavior of
industry participants in any way.
         To avoid this issue, we normalize DW Lβ by the maximum value added by the industry:

                                         V Aβ = T SβF B − T Sβ∅ ,

                     v−p0
where T Sβ∅ =        1−β    is the expected NPV of total surplus if the industry remains empty
forever with just the outside good. V Aβ can be interpreted as a bound on the contribution
of the inside goods to the expected NPV of total surplus. Similar to DW Lβ , V Aβ does not
                                              DW Lβ
depend on v. We henceforth refer to            V Aβ      as the relative deadweight loss.


4         Is dynamic competition necessarily fully efficient?
In contrast to rent-seeking models, firms in our learning-by-doing model jostle for competitive
advantage by pricing aggressively rather than by engaging in socially wasteful activities. To
the extent that rents can be efficiently transferred from firms to consumers, one may thus
conjecture that dynamic competition is necessarily fully efficient. This conjecture, however,
    11
    See Appendix A for the expression for P S(e) and its counterpart P S F B (e) under the first-best planner
solution.


                                                         14
overlooks that dynamic competition extends beyond pricing into exit and entry. Even if
pricing is efficient, exit and entry may not be. Distortions in exit and entry can take the
form of over-exit (too much or early exit), under-exit (too little or late exit), over-entry (too
much or early entry), under-entry (too little or late entry), and cost-inefficient exit where
the lower-cost firm exits the industry while higher-cost firm does not.
       We highlight distortions in exit and entry and demonstrate that dynamic competition
is not necessarily fully efficient in an analytically tractable special case of our model with a
two-step learning curve, homogeneous goods, and mixed exit and entry strategies:

Assumption 1 (Two-step learning curve)

   1. M = m = 2;

   2. σ = 0;

   3. ∆X = ∆S = 0.

Because goods are homogeneous by part (2) of Assumption 1, the firm that sets the lowest
price makes the sale. Moreover, aggregate demand for the inside goods is inelastic at prices
below p0 . There are therefore no distortions in pricing.
       To rule out uninteresting scenarios we further assume:

Assumption 2 (Parameter restrictions)

   1. p0 ≥ κ;

   2. S > X ≥ 0;
                                      
                         β
   3. β p0 − κ +        1−β   (p0 − ρκ) > S.

By part (1) of Assumption 2, the marginal cost of the outside good p0 = c0 is at least as
high as the marginal cost c(1) = κ of an incumbent firm at the top of its learning curve. By
part (2), the setup cost is positive and partially sunk and the scrap value is nonnegative.
By part (3), operating a single firm forever is socially beneficial.
       The first-best planner solution is straightforward. Because goods are homogeneous and
product variety is not socially beneficial, the planner operates the industry as a natural
monopoly. In state (0, 0) in period 0, the planner decides to operate a single firm (say firm
1) in the subsequent period. In state (1, 0) in period 1, firm 1 charges any price below p0 ,
makes the sale, and moves down its learning curve. The industry remains in state (2, 0) in
period t ≥ 2 and firm 1 again makes the sale. The expected NPV of total surplus is thus12
                                                                             
                              β2              v − p0              β
T SβF B   = v−p0 +β (v − κ)+     (v − ρκ)−S =        +β p0 − κ +     (p0 − ρκ) −S,
                             1−β              1−β                1−β
  12
       The term v − p0 arises because the consumer purchases the outside good in state (0, 0).


                                                       15
and the maximum value added by the industry is
                                                          
                                               β
                            V Aβ = β p0 − κ +     (p0 − ρκ) − S.
                                              1−β

In the Online Appendix, we provide further details on the first-best planner solution and
the equilibria mentioned hereafter.

Proposition 1 (Two-step learning curve) Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there exists the
equilibrium shown in Table 1. The deadweight loss is

                               φ1 (0, 0)(1 − β)        (1 − φ1 (0, 0))2        
                    DW Lβ =                     V Aβ +                  S − βX                (13)
                               1 − βφ1 (0, 0)2         1 − βφ1 (0, 0)2

and the relative deadweight loss is

                                  DW Lβ  φ (0, 0) − βφ1 (0, 0)2
                                        = 1                     .                             (14)
                                   V Aβ     1 − βφ1 (0, 0)2

               d(1−φ1 (0,0)2 )          d(DW Lβ /V Aβ )
Moreover,           dρ          < 0 and      dρ         > 0: as learning economies strengthen, the
probability                   2
               1 − φ1 (0, 0) that the industry “takes off” increases and the relative deadweight
       DW Lβ
loss    V Aβ   decreases.

   The deadweight loss arises because the entry process is decentralized and uncoordinated.
The industry can therefore suffer from over-entry and under-entry. To illustrate, we sketch
out the evolution of the industry in the equilibrium shown in Table 1. In state (0, 0) in
period 0, a single firm enters the industry with probability 2(1 − φ1 (0, 0))φ 1 (0, 0), both firms
enter with probability (1 − φ1 (0, 0))2 , and no firms enter with probability φ1 (0, 0)2 . The
industry continues to evolve as follows:

   • Case 1. If a single firm (say firm 1) enters, then in state (1, 0) in period 1 it charges a
       price just below the price of the outside good p0 , makes the sale, and moves down its
       learning curve. In state (2, 0) firm 1 remains in the industry (φ1 (2, 0) = 0) and firm 2
       does not enter (φ1 (0, 2) = 1). The industry remains in state (2, 0) in period t ≥ 2, and
       firm 1 again makes the sale.

   • Case 2: Over-entry. If both firms enter, then in state (1, 1) in period 1 they charge
       a price less than static marginal cost κ. One of the firms (say firm 1) makes the sale
       and moves down its learning curve. In state (2, 1), the leader (firm 1) remains in the
       industry (φ1 (2, 1) = 0) and the follower (firm 2) exits (φ1 (1, 2) = 1). The industry
       moves to—and remains in—state (2, 0) in period t ≥ 2. Note that pricing in state


                                                 16
             e                     p1 (e)                        φ1 (e)                          V1 (e)                              U1 (e)
                                                                 S−βX
           (0, 0)                   ∞                   
                                                                 β
                                                                                                  –                                   0
                                                       β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX
           (0, 1)                   ∞                              1                               –                                   0
           (0, 2)                   ∞                              1                               –                                  0                   
                                                                                                  β                                    β
           (1, 0)                   p−
                                     0                             0                  p0 − κ +   1−β   (p0 − ρκ)       β p0 − κ +     1−β      (p0 − ρκ)
                                                  
                              β                                 (1−β)X
           (1, 1)   κ−       1−β   (p0 − ρκ) − X        
                                                                 β
                                                                                                 X                                   X
                                                       β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX
           (1, 2)                    κ                             1                              X                                   X
                                                                                                 p0 −ρκ                         β
           (2, 0)                   p−
                                     0                             0                              1−β                          1−β   (p0 − ρκ)
                                                                                                     β                          β
           (2, 1)                   κ−                             0                 (1 − ρ)κ   + 1−β   (p0   − ρκ)            1−β   (p0 − ρκ)
                                                                (1−β)X
           (2, 2)                   ρκ                        β                                   X                                   X
                                                             1−β
                                                                 (p0 −ρκ)−βX

     Table 1: Equilibrium. Two-step learning curve. In column labelled p1 (e), superscript − indicates that firm 1 charges just below
     the price stated.
                        e    p1 (e)          φ1 (e)                   V1 (e)                       U1 (e)
17




                                                      S−βX
                      (0, 0)         ∞       
                                                      β
                                                                                      –                                0
                                            β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX
                      (0, 1)         ∞                   1                             –                                0
                      (0, 2)         ∞                   1                             –                               0                  
                                                                                      β                                  β
                      (1, 0)         p−
                                      0                  0                p0 − κ +   1−β   (p0 − ρκ)      β p0 − κ +    1−β   (p0 − ρκ)
                                                     (1−β)X
                      (1, 1)          κ      
                                                      β
                                                                                     X                                 X
                                            β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX

                      (1, 2)          κ       (1−β)X−β(1−ρ)κ                        X                                 X
                                                      β
                                            β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX
                                                                                     p0 −ρκ                       β
                      (2, 0)         p−
                                      0                  0                            1−β                        1−β   (p0 − ρκ)
                                                       (1−β)X
                      (2, 1)         κ−      
                                                      β
                                                                              (1 − ρ)κ + X                             X
                                            β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX
                                                       (1−β)X
                      (2, 2)         ρκ           β                                   X                                 X
                                                 1−β
                                                     (p0 −ρκ)−βX

     Table 2: Equilibrium with cost-inefficient exit. Two-step learning curve. In column labelled p1 (e), superscript − indicates that
     firm 1 charges just below the price stated.
                                                                                                      
                                                                                  β
         (1, 1) is so aggressive that both firms incur a loss of −               1−β (p0   − ρκ) − X       that fully
         dissipates any future gains from monopolizing the industry.

       • Case 3: Under-entry. If no firm enters, then the above process repeats itself in state
         (0, 0) in period 1.

In short, the intuition that dynamic competition is necessarily fully efficient is incomplete.
In the equilibrium shown in Table 1, while the industry evolves towards the monopolistic
structure that the first-best planner operates, this may happen slowly over time due to either
over-entry or under-entry.13 Wasteful duplication and delay (Bolton & Farrell 1990) are both
integral parts of the equilibrium.14
       The equilibrium shown in Table 1 further entails a war of attrition (Maynard Smith
1974, Tirole 1988, Bulow & Klemperer 1999) in state (2, 2), although state (2, 2) is off the
equilibrium path starting from state (0, 0). The war of attrition arises because a firm is
better off staying in the industry if its rival exits but worse off if its rival stays. As a firm
hopes to outlast its rival, it clings to the industry. The resulting non-operating probability
                     (1−β)X
is φ1 (2, 2) =    β                ∈ (0, 1), whereas the first-best planner ceases to operate one of
                 1−β
                     (p0 −ρκ)−βX
the two firms in state (2, 2). Because the exit process is decentralized and uncoordinated,
the industry can suffer not only from over-exit but also from under-exit.15
       Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there exist two other equilibria. Even in this special case of
our model, multiple equilibria are endemic. These equilibria differ from the one in Table 1
only in the exit-entry phase in state (1, 0). In the first equilibrium, the incumbent firm
exits the industry and the potential entrant enters (φ1 (1, 0) = 1 and φ1 (0, 1) = 0); in the
second equilibrium, the incumbent firm and the potential entrant play mixed strategies
                         S−βX                                                       (1−β)X
(φ1 (1, 0) =    
                         β
                                            ∈ (0, 1) and φ1 (0, 1) =       
                                                                                     β
                                                                                                          ∈ (0, 1)).
               β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX                                   β p0 −κ+ 1−β (p0 −ρκ) −βX
Because the exit-entry phase in state (1, 0) is off the equilibrium path starting from state
(0, 0), however, these equilibria give rise to the deadweight loss in equations (13) and (14).
                                                                       β
       Finally, under the additional assumption that X ≥              1−β κ(1 − ρ),    there exists the equilib-
rium, shown in Table 2, with cost-inefficient exit. In state (2, 1), the incumbent firms play
                                                                                         1 (0,0)(1−β)
  13
     The first term in equation (13) is due to under-entry and the “discount factor” φ1−βφ             2 captures the
                                                                                               1 (0,0)
stochastic length of time over which under-entry may occur; the second term is due to over-entry and the
                    (1−φ (0,0))2
“discount factor” 1−βφ1 (0,0)2 captures the stochastic length of time over which over-entry can occur after
                         1
potentially many periods of under-entry.
  14
     Treating the entry process as decentralized and uncoordinated by focusing on symmetric equilibria “stacks
the deck” against finding small deadweight losses. While asymmetric or correlated equilibria can avoid
wasteful duplication and delay, as Bolton & Farrell (1990) discuss it is far from clear how the firms will “find”
one of these equilibria without some process of explicit coordination.
  15
     Coordination failures in exit and entry may be exacerbated if there are more than two firms (Cabral
1993, Vettas 1998). Intuitively, the support of the binomial distribution becomes more spread out with more
draws.



                                                         18
mixed strategies. Hence, the lower-cost firm may exit the industry while the higher-cost firm
does not. Note that this equilibrium entails cost-inefficient exit not only in an ex post sense
but also in an ex ante sense as the lower-cost firm exits the industry with higher probability
than the higher-cost firm (φ1 (2, 1) > φ1 (1, 2)).


5         Numerical analysis and equilibrium
The special case of a two-step learning curve relies on extreme values of key parameters.
In doing so, it assumes away a meaningful role for product variety and competition from
the outside good that can be a source of distortions in pricing. Unfortunately, analytic
tractability rapidly declines beyond the two-step learning curve. Moreover, while theoretical
analysis has enabled us to establish that dynamic competition is not necessarily fully efficient,
theoretical analysis is ill-suited to answer the question of how efficient dynamic competition
is. We therefore turn to numerical analysis.

5.1        Computation and parameterization
To thoroughly explore the equilibrium correspondence and search for multiple equilibria
in a systematic fashion, we use the homotopy or path-following method in Besanko et al.
(2010).16 We caution that the homotopy algorithm cannot be guaranteed to find all equilibria
and refer to reader to Besanko et al. (2010) and Borkovsky, Doraszelski & Kryukov (2010,
2012) for additional discussion. We solve the first-best planner problem using value function
iteration combined with quasi-Monte Carlo integration (Halton sequences of length 10, 000)
to evaluate the operating probabilities in equation (7) and the Bellman equation (8).
         Our learning-by-doing model has four key parameters: the progress ratio ρ ∈ [0, 1], the
degree of product differentiation σ > 0, the price of the outside good p0 = c0 ≥ 0, and
the expected scrap value X ∈ [−∆X , S + ∆S + ∆X ].17 To explore how the equilibria vary
with these parameters, we compute six two-dimensional slices through the equilibrium cor-
respondence along (ρ, σ), (ρ, p0 ), (ρ, X), (σ, p0 ), (σ, X), and (X, p0 ). We choose sufficiently
large upper bounds for σ and p0 so that beyond them “things don’t change much anymore.”
Back-of-the-envelope calculations yield σ ≤ 10 and p0 ≤ 20. Throughout we hold the re-
maining parameters fixed at the values in the second column of Table 3. While this baseline
parameterization is not intended to be representative of any particular industry, it is neither
entirely unrepresentative nor extreme.
    16
     The equilibrium correspondence is H−1 (ω) = {x|H(x, ω) = 0}, where ω = (ρ, σ, p0 , X, . . .) are the
parameters of the model, x = (V1 , U1 , p1 , φ1 ) are the value and policy functions, and H(x, ω) = 0 are the
Bellman equations and optimality conditions that define an equilibrium.
  17
     The bounds on X follow from the economic requirement that upon exit a firm’s assets are valuable
(Xn ≥ 0) but that their value is limited by the firm’s initial outlay at the time of its inception (Xn ≤ Sn ).


                                                     19
         parameter                             value     grid
         maximum stock of know-how M            30
         cost at top of learning curve κ        10
         bottom of learning curve m             15
         progress ratio ρ                      0.75      ρ ∈ {0, 0.05, . . . , 1}
         gross utility v                        10
         product differentiation σ               1       σ ∈ {0.2, 0.3, . . . , 1, 1.3, 1.6, 2,
                                                           2.5, 3.2, 4, 5, 6.3, 7.9, 10}
         price of outside good p0                10      p0 ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 20}
         scrap value X, ∆X                    1.5, 1.5   X ∈ {−1.5, −1, . . . , 7.5}
         setup cost S, ∆S                     4.5, 1.5
         discount factor β                      0.95


                     Table 3: Baseline parameterization and grid points.


   An industry without firms is unlikely to attract the attention of a regulator. We therefore
exclude extreme parameterizations for which the industry is not viable in the sense that the
probability 1 − φ1 (0, 0)2 that the industry “takes off” is below 0.01. Unsurprisingly, these
parameterizations involve a highly attractive outside good with p0 < 5.
   Due to the large number of parameterizations and multiplicity of equilibria, we require a
way to summarize them. In a first step, we average an outcome of interest over the equilibria
at a parameterization. This random sampling is in line with our decision to refrain from
equilibrium selection and ensures that parameterizations with many equilibria carry the
same weight as parameterizations with few equilibria.
   In a second step, we randomly sample parameterizations. To make this practical, we
represent a two-dimensional slice through the equilibrium correspondence with a grid of
values for the parameters spanning the slice. The third column of Table 3 lists the grid
points we use for the four key parameters. We mostly use uniformly spaced grid points,
except for σ > 1, where the grid points approximate a log scale in order to explore very high
degrees of product differentiation. We associate each point in a two-dimensional grid with
the corresponding average over equilibria. We then pool the points on the six slices through
the equilibrium correspondence along (ρ, σ), (ρ, p0 ), (ρ, X), (σ, p0 ), (σ, X), and (X, p0 ) and
obtain the distribution of the outcome of interest.

5.2   Equilibrium and first-best planner solution
To illustrate the types of behavior that can emerge in our learning-by-doing model, we
examine the equilibria that arise at the baseline parameterization in Table 3. For two of these
three equilibria Figure 1 shows the pricing decision of firm 1, the non-operating probability
of firm 2, and the time path of the probability distribution over industry structures (empty,

                                               20
monopoly, and duopoly).18
       The upper panels of Figure 1 exemplify what we call an aggressive equilibrium in Besanko
et al. (2014). The pricing decision in the upper left panel exhibits a deep well in state (1, 1)
with p1 (1, 1) = −34.78. A well is a preemption battle where firms vie to be the first to
move down from the top of their learning curves. Such a battle is likely to ensue because
φ1 (0, 0) = 0.04 implies that the probability that both firms enter the industry in period
0 is 0.92. After the industry has emerged from the preemption battle in state (1,1), the
leader (say firm 1) continues to price aggressively (p1 (2, 1) = 0.08). Indeed, the pricing
decision exhibits a deep trench along the e1 -axis with p1 (e1 , 1) ranging from 0.08 to 1.24
for e1 ∈ {2, . . . , 30}.19 A trench is a price war that the leader wages against the follower.
We can think of a trench is an endogenous mobility barrier in the sense of Caves & Porter
(1977). In the trench the follower (firm 2) exits the industry with a positive probability
of φ2 (e1 , 1) = 0.22 for e1 ∈ {2, . . . , 30} as the upper middle panel shows. The follower
remains in this exit zone as long as it does not win a sale. Once the follower exits, the leader
raises its price and the industry becomes an entrenched monopoly.20 This sequence of events
resembles conventional notions of predatory pricing.21 The industry may also evolve into a
mature duopoly if the follower manages to crash through the mobility barrier by winning a
sale but, as the upper right panel of Figure 1 shows, this is far less likely than an entrenched
monopoly.
       The lower panels of Figure 1 are typical for what we call an accommodative equilibrium
in Besanko et al. (2014). There is a shallow well in state (1, 1) with p1 (1, 1) = 5.05 as the
lower left panel shows. A preemption battle is again likely to ensue because φ1 (0, 0) = 0.05
implies that the probability that both firms enter the industry in period 0 is 0.91. After
the industry has emerged from the preemption battle in state (1, 1), the leader enjoys a
competitive advantage over the follower. Without mobility barriers in the form of trenches,
however, this advantage is temporary and the industry evolves into a mature duopoly as the
lower right panel shows.

First-best planner solution.               Figure 2 is analogous to Figure 1 and illustrates the first-
best planner solution. In state (0, 0) in period 0, the planner decides to operate a single firm
(say firm 1) in the subsequent period since ψ F1,0B (0, 0) = ψ F0,1B (0, 0) = 0.5. In period t ≥ 1,
  18
     The third equilibrium is essentially intermediate between the two shown in Figure 1.
  19
     Because prices are strategic complements, there is also a shallow trench along the e2 -axis with p1 (1, e2 )
ranging from 3.63 to 4.90 for e2 ∈ {2, . . . , 30}.
  20
     While our model allows for re-entry, whether it actually occurs depends on how a potential entrant
assesses its prospects in the industry. In this particular equilibrium, φ2 (e1 , 0) = 1.00 for e1 ∈ {2, . . . , 30}, so
that the potential entrant does not enter if the incumbent firm has moved down from the top of its learning
curve.
  21
     In Besanko et al. (2014) we formalize the notion of predatory pricing and disentangle it from mere
competition for efficiency on a learning curve.


                                                          21
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                   empty
                                                                                                   monopoly
                                                                                    0.8            duopoly
         10                                    1

          8                                   0.8
                                                                                    0.6
          6                                   0.6




                                                                            prob.
 p (e)




                                      φ (e)
    1




          4                               2   0.4
                                                                                    0.4
          2                                   0.2

          0                          30        0                       30           0.2
         30                        25         30                      25
           25                    20             25                  20
             20               15                  20              15
               15            10                     15           10
                  10                                   10       5 e                  0
                     5     5    e                         5
              e        0 1       1                 e        0 0     1                     0   20       40
                2                                    2
                                                                                                   T
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                   empty
                                                                                                   monopoly
                                                                                    0.8            duopoly
         10                                    1

          8                                   0.8
                                                                                    0.6
          6                                   0.6
                                                                            prob.
 p (e)




                                      φ (e)
    1




                                          2




          4                                   0.4
                                                                                    0.4
          2                                   0.2

          0                         30         0                      30            0.2
         30                       25          30                     25
           25                   20              25                 20
             20              15                   20             15
               15           10                      15          10
                 10                                   10       5 e                   0
                    5     5    e1                        5
              e2      0 1                          e2      0 0     1                      0   20       40
                                                                                                   T

Figure 1: Aggressive (upper panels) and accommodative (lower panels) equilibrium. Pricing
decision of firm 1 (left panels), non-operating probability of firm 2 (middle panels), and
time path of probability distribution over industry structures (right panels). Dots above
the surface in left panels are p1 (e1 , 0) for e1 > 0 and dots in middle panels are φ2 (0, e2 ) for
e2 > 0 and φ2 (e1 , 0) for e1 ≥ 0. Baseline parameterization.




                                                       22
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                  empty
                                                                                                  monopoly
                                                                                   0.8            duopoly
          10                                   1

           8                                  0.8
                                                                                   0.6
           6                                  0.6




                                                                           prob.
 p (e)




                                      φ (e)
    1




                                          2
           4                                  0.4
                                                                                   0.4
           2                                  0.2

           0                         30        0                      30           0.2
          30                       25         30                     25
            25                   20             25                 20
              20              15                  20             15
                15           10                     15          10
                  10                                  10       5 e                  0
                     5     5    e1                       5
               e2      0 1                         e2      0 0     1                     0   20       40
                                                                                                  T

Figure 2: First-best planner solution. Pricing decision of firm 1 (left panel), non-operating
probability of firm 2 (middle panel), and time path of probability distribution over industry
structures (right panel). Dots beside the surface in left panel are p1 (e1 , 0) for e1 > 0 and dots
in middle panel are φ2 (0, e2 ) for e2 > 0 and φ2 (e1 , 0) for e1 ≥ 0. Baseline parameterization.


the planner marches firm 1 down its learning curve. As the left panel shows, pF1 B (e) = 3.25
if e1 ∈ {15, . . . , 30} so that at the bottom of its learning curve firm 1 charges a price equal
to marginal cost. In short, the planner operates the industry as a natural monopoly.
         As the middle panel shows, there is an exit zone somewhat similar to the one in the
aggressive equilibrium. Although state (1, 1) is off the equilibrium path starting from state
(0, 0), ψ F1,0B (1, 1) = ψ F0,1B (1, 1) = 0.04 implies that if both firms are at the top of their learning
curves, then the first-best planner ceases to operate one of them with probability 0.07 to
receive the scrap value. On the other hand, if both firms are part of the way down their
learning curves, then ψ F1,1B (e) = 1 for e ≥ (3, 3) implies that the planner continues to operate
both to secure the social benefit of product variety.
         Outside the baseline parameterization in Table 3, the first-best planner does not neces-
sarily operate the industry as a natural monopoly. In particular, if the degree of product
differentiation is sufficiently large, then the planner immediately decides to operate both
firms and continues to do so as they move down their learning curves.

Industry structure, conduct, and performance.                      To succinctly describe an equilib-
rium and compare it to the first-best planner solution, we use several metrics of industry




                                                      23
                                                       aggr.    accom.   planner    counter-
                                                      eqbm.     eqbm.    solution    factual
         structure:
         expected short-run number of firms N1           1.92     1.91       1.00       2.00
         expected long-run number of firms N∞            1.08     2.00       1.00       2.00
         conduct:
         expected long-run average price p∞             8.28      5.24      3.25        5.24
         expected time to maturity T m                 19.09     37.54     15.02       53.91
         performance:
         expected NPV of consumer surplus CSβ           93.87   103.29    131.66       56.88
         expected NPV of total surplus T Sβ             96.02   105.45    110.45       92.02
         deadweight loss DW Lβ                          14.43     5.01         –       18.43
                                  DW L
         relative deadweight loss V Aβ β              13.06%    4.54%          –     16.69%


Table 4: Industry structure, conduct, and performance. Aggressive and accommodate equi-
librium, first-best planner solution, and static non-cooperative pricing counterfactual. Base-
line parameterization.


structure, conduct, and performance.22 The second, third, and fourth columns of Table 4
show these metrics for the aggressive and accommodative equilibrium and the planner solu-
tion. We discuss the fifth column of Table 4 in Section 6.1.
       The expected short-run number of firms N1 is just above 1.90 in both equilibria, compared
to N1F B = 1.00 in the first-best planner solution. In the aggressive equilibrium, the expected
long-run number of firms N∞ is 1.08, quite close to the planner solution. In contrast, in
the accommodative equilibrium, N∞ = 2.00. The aggressive equilibrium therefore mainly
involves over-entry and the accommodative equilibrium involves both over-entry and under-
exit.
       The expected long-run average price pF∞B = 3.25 in the first-best planner solution is equal
to marginal cost at the bottom of the learning curve. It is much higher in both equilibria. In
the aggressive equilibrium, in particular, p∞ = 8.28 reflects the fact that the industry most
likely evolves into an entrenched monopoly.
    The expected time to maturity T m is the expected time until the industry first becomes
either a mature monopoly or a mature duopoly; it measures the speed at which firms move
down their learning curves. Learning economies are exhausted fastest in the first-best planner
solution with T m,F B = 15.02, followed by the aggressive equilibrium with T m = 19.10 and
the accommodative equilibrium with T m = 37.50. This large gap arises because sales are
split between the inside goods in the accommodative equilibrium, as well as at least initially
with the outside good.
  22
       See Appendix A for formal definitions.



                                                 24
    As the industry is substantially more likely to be monopolized in the aggressive equi-
librium than in the accommodative equilibrium, the expected NPV of consumer surplus
CSβ is lower, as is the expected NPV of total surplus T Sβ . Consequently, the deadweight
loss DW Lβ is higher in the aggressive equilibrium than in the accommodative equilibrium.
                                              DW Lβ
However, the relative deadweight loss          V Aβ   seems modest, with 13.06% of the maximum
value added by the industry in the aggressive equilibrium and 4.54% in the accommodative
equilibrium.


6    Does dynamic competition lead to low deadweight loss?
                                    DW Lβ
The relative deadweight loss         V Aβ   is modest more generally. Summarizing a large number

                      1



                     0.8



                     0.6
               CDF




                     0.4



                     0.2                                                      All MPE
                                                                              Best MPE
                                                                              Worst MPE
                      0
                           0     0.05       0.1      0.15         0.2        0.25         0.3
                                                   DWLβ /V Aβ

                                                           DW L
Figure 3: Distribution of relative deadweight loss V Aββ . All equilibria (solid line), best equi-
librium (dotted line), and worst equilibrium (dashed line). Parameterizations and equilibria
within parameterizations weighted equally.

of parameterizations and equilibria, Figure 3 shows the cumulative distribution function
           DW Lβ
(CDF) of    V Aβ       as a solid line. Result 1 highlights some findings:

                                                  DW Lβ
Result 1 The relative deadweight loss              V Aβ   is less than 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2 in 26.40%,
                                                                                    DW Lβ
65.83%, and 92.03% of parameterizations, respectively. The median of                 V Aβ   is 0.0777.

                                                     DW Lβ
    There is a large relative deadweight loss         V Aβ   for a small number of parameterizations.
Under these parameterizations, the industry almost fails to take off (in the sense that 1 −
φ1 (0, 0)2 ≈ 0.01) because the outside good is highly attractive. Near this “cusp of viability”


                                                     25
the contribution of the inside goods to the expected NPV of total surplus is small and thus
V Aβ ≈ 0.
     Recall that we average over equilibria at a given parameterization to obtain the dis-
                DW Lβ
tribution of     V Aβ .   To look behind these averages, we consider the best equilibrium with
the highest value of T Sβ at a given parameterization as well as the worst equilibrium with
                                                                                DW Lβ
the lowest value of T Sβ . Figure 3 shows the resulting distributions of         V Aβ   using a dot-
ted line for the best equilibrium and a dashed line for the worst equilibrium, and Result 2
summarizes:

                                                                          DW Lβ
Result 2 (1) For the best equilibrium, the relative deadweight loss        V Aβ   is less than 0.05,
0.1, and 0.2 in 44.25%, 71.11%, and 92.10% of parameterizations, respectively. The median
     DW Lβ                                                                              DW Lβ
of    V Aβ   is 0.0571. (2) For the worst equilibrium, the relative deadweight loss      V Aβ   is less
than 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2 in 18.67%, 56.40%, and 91.80% of parameterizations, respectively.
                   DW Lβ
The median of       V Aβ   is 0.0922.

                                                                       DW Lβ
Hence, even in the worst equilibria the relative deadweight loss        V Aβ   is modest for a wide
range of parameterizations.
     In Appendix C we offer formal definitions of aggressive and accommodative equilibria
and link them to the worst, respectively, best equilibria. Although this link is far from
perfect, to facilitate the exposition and build intuition, in what follows we associate the best
equilibrium with an accommodative equilibrium and the worst equilibrium—to the extent
that it differs from the best equilibrium—with an aggressive equilibrium. If the equilibrium
is unique, then we associate it with an accommodative equilibrium.

6.1     Deadweight loss in perspective: static non-cooperative pricing coun-
        terfactual
                                  DW Lβ
Is a relative deadweight loss      V Aβ   of 10% of the maximum value added by the industry
“small” and a relative deadweight loss of 30% “large”? To put these percentages in perspec-
tive, we show that the deadweight loss is lower than expected in view of the traditional role
of price as affecting current profit but not the evolution of the industry. To this end, we
shut down the investment role of price. In the price-setting phase, incumbent firm 1 is thus
left to maximize static profit

                                  max D1 (p1 , pSN
                                                2 (e))(p1 − c(e1 )),
                                    p1




                                                 26
and the pricing decision pSN
                          1 (e) in this static non-cooperative pricing counterfactual is
uniquely determined by the first-order condition

                                                               σ
                                  pSN
                                   1 (e) = c(e1 ) +                      ,
                                                        1 − D1 (pSN (e))
                              
where pSN (e) = pSN      SN
                 1 (e), p2 (e) . The expected NPV of incumbent firm 1 is


                                V1SN (e) = D1 (pSN (e))(pSN
                                                         1 (e) − c(e1 ))
                                        2
                                        X                                   
                        +U1SN (e)   +         Dn (pSN (e)) U1SN en+ − U1SN (e)
                                        n=1

and, in contrast to the pricing decision, accounts for the impact of a sale on the value of con-
tinued play. Finally, the exit-entry phase is as described in Section 2.1.23 Our computations
always led to a unique solution.
       The fifth column of Table 4 shows our metrics for industry structure, conduct, and perfor-
mance for the static non-cooperative pricing counterfactual at the baseline parameterization.
Similar to the accommodative equilibrium, the counterfactual involves both over-entry and
                             SN = 2.00). Learning economies are exhausted even more
under-exit (N1SN = 2.00 and N∞
slowly than in the accommodative equilibrium (T m,SN = 53.91 > 37.45 = T m ) because
firms ignore the investment role of price in making their pricing decisions. The deadweight
loss DW Lβ increases more than threefold relative to the accommodative equilibrium and by
more than a quarter relative to the aggressive equilibrium.
       The investment role of price is socially beneficial more generally. Figure 4 shows the
                                                   DW LSN
                                                       β                   DW LSN
                                                                               β
distribution of the deadweight loss ratio          DW Lβ .    Note that    DW Lβ     is independent of our
normalization by V Aβ . Result 3 summarizes:

Result 3 DW LSN
             β  is at least as large as DW Lβ in 80.11% of parameterizations, at least
twice as large in 44.01% of parameterizations, and at least five times as large in 13.66% of
                                          DW LSN
                                              β
parameterizations. The median of          DW Lβ     is 1.7842.

       DW LSN
           β  is smaller than DW Lβ in a number of parameterizations that mostly involve
an unattractive outside good (p0 ≥ 15). The outside good constrains pricing decisions and
profitability much more in a monopolistic than in a duopolistic industry. A less attractive
outside good lifts this constraint and sharpens the incentive to monopolize the industry in
equilibrium. But if firms ignore the investment role of price in the static non-cooperative
pricing counterfactual, then a duopolistic industry with a lower deadweight loss emerges.
  23
    Our static non-cooperative pricing counterfactual loosely corresponds to the version of the war of attrition
presented in Tirole (1988), with the addition of learning-by-doing and product differentiation.



                                                      27
                        1



                       0.8



                       0.6
                 CDF




                       0.4



                       0.2



                        0
                          −2              −1                 0                 1                  2
                        10              10              10                  10                10
                                                    DWLSN
                                                       β /DWLβ

                                                             DW LSN
Figure 4: Distribution of deadweight loss ratio DW Lββ . Log scale. Parameterizations and
equilibria within parameterizations weighted equally.


       Generally speaking, we conclude that dynamic competition leads to low deadweight loss.
The deadweight loss is low not only relative to the maximum value added by the industry,
it is also smaller than the deadweight loss that arises if firms ignore the investment role of
price.24 Put differently, the investment role of price is by and large socially beneficial. The
static non-cooperative pricing counterfactual also shows that a low deadweight loss is almost
certainly not hardwired into the primitives of our learning-by-doing model. Instead, there
is something in the nature of the investment role of price and dynamic competition that in
equilibrium leads to low deadweight loss.

6.2       Differences between equilibria and first-best planner solution
Dynamic competition leads to low deadweight loss despite distortions in pricing, exit, and
entry. Indeed, as we next show, there are typically substantial differences between the
equilibria and the first-best planner solution. Paradoxically, the best equilibrium can differ
even more from the planner solution than the worst equilibrium.
       Recall that too low prices cause deadweight loss from overproduction, just as too high
prices cause deadweight loss from underproduction. To illustrate that the equilibria involve
prices that are too low, we first define 1 [p1 (e) < c(e1 ) for some e ∈ {1, . . . , M } × {0, . . . , M }]
  24
       It is also smaller than the deadweight loss that arises if firms collude in their pricing, exit, and entry
                                                                                         DW LCO
decisions. For the baseline parameterization in Table 3, the relative deadweight loss V Aββ in the collusive
solution is 14.32% of the maximum value added by the industry. In the Online Appendix, we provide further
details on the collusive solution.


                                                        28
to indicate that a price is below the marginal cost of production in at least one state. Second,
                                                                            
we define 1 p1 (e) < pF1 B (e) for some e ∈ {1, . . . , M } × {0, . . . , M } to indicate that a price
is below the first-best planner solution in some state. Result 4 summarizes the distribution
of these indicators:

Result 4 (1) p1 (e) < c(e1 ) for some e ∈ {1, . . . , M } × {0, . . . , M } in all equilibria in
79.75% of parameterizations. (2) p1 (e) < pF1 B (e) for some e ∈ {1, . . . , M } × {0, . . . , M } in
all equilibria in 55.70% of parameterizations.

We caution that the states with too low prices are not necessarily on the equilibrium path
starting from state (0, 0).
       We next turn from pricing to exit and entry and compare the expected short-run and
long-run number of firms between the equilibria and the first-best planner solution. Figure 5
shows the distribution of N1 − N1F B as a solid line and Result 5 highlights some findings:

                      1
                              All MPE
                              Best MPE
                     0.8      Worst MPE



                     0.6
               CDF




                     0.4



                     0.2



                      0
                      −2   −1.5     −1      −0.5       0        0.5     1       1.5       2
                                                   N1 − N1F B


Figure 5: Distribution of N1 − N1F B . All equilibria (solid line), best equilibrium (dotted
line), and worst equilibrium (dashed line). Parameterizations and equilibria within param-
eterizations weighted equally.


Result 5 N1 is larger than N1F B in 78.78% of parameterizations and smaller than N1F B in
0.15% of parameterizations. The median of N1 − N1F B is 0.7733.25

Thus, the equilibria typically have too many firms in the short run, consistent with over-
entry. They very rarely have too few firms in the short run. Figure 5 also breaks out the
  25
    In stating Result 5, we take N1 to be equal to N1F B if N1 − N1F B < 0.0001 to account for the limited
precision of our computations. We proceed analogously in stating Result 6.


                                                   29
best equilibrium as a dotted line and the worst equilibrium as a dashed line. Similar to our
examples in Section 5.2, there is no discernible difference between the best and the worst
equilibrium.
                                            F B as a solid line and breaks out the best
   Figure 6 shows the distribution of N∞ − N∞
equilibrium as a dotted line and the worst equilibrium as a dashed line. Result 6 summarizes:


                      1
                             All MPE
                             Best MPE
                     0.8     Worst MPE



                     0.6
               CDF




                     0.4



                     0.2



                      0
                      −2   −1.5   −1     −0.5       0      0.5    1      1.5     2
                                                      FB
                                                N∞ − N∞


Figure 6: Distribution N∞ − N∞F B . All equilibria (solid line), best equilibrium (dotted line),

and worst equilibrium (dashed line). Parameterizations and equilibria within parameteriza-
tions weighted equally.


                                F B in 53.77% of parameterizations and smaller than
Result 6 (1) N∞ is larger than N∞
  F B in 5.07% of parameterizations. The median of N         FB
N∞                                                     ∞ − N∞ is 0.0038. (2) For the
                                     F B in 59.21% of parameterizations and smaller than
best equilibrium, N∞ is larger than N∞
 F B in 0.94% of parameterization. The median of N − N F B is 0.1327. (3) For the worst
N∞                                                ∞   ∞
                                F B in 58.77% of parameterizations and smaller than N F B
equilibrium, N∞ is larger than N∞                                                    ∞
                                                   F B is 0.0167.
in 6.27% of parameterizations. The median of N∞ − N∞

Thus, the equilibria regularly have too many firms in the long run, consistent with under-
exit. This tendency is exacerbated in the best equilibrium. The equilibria very rarely have
too few firms in the long run.
   We finally turn to the speed at which firms move down their learning curves. Recall
that the expected time to maturity T m depends on both the number of incumbent firms and
their pricing decisions. Figure 7 shows the distribution of T m − T m,F B as a solid line and


                                                30
breaks out the best equilibrium as a dotted line and the worst equilibrium as a dashed line.
Result 7 summarizes:

                          1
                                      All MPE
                                      Best MPE
                         0.8          Worst MPE



                         0.6
                   CDF




                         0.4



                         0.2



                          0
                         −100   −80     −60   −40   −20     0        20   40      60       80   100
                                                       T m − T m,F B


Figure 7: Distribution of T m − T m,F B . All equilibria (solid line), best equilibrium (dotted
line), and worst equilibrium (dashed line). Parameterizations and equilibria within param-
eterizations weighted equally.


Result 7 (1) T m is larger than T m,F B in 90.69% of parameterizations and smaller than
T m,F B in 8.35% of parameterizations.26 The median of T m − T m,F B is 5.2502. (2) For
the best equilibrium, T m is larger than T m,F B in 91.97% of parameterizations and smaller
than T m,F B in 6.46% of parameterization. The median of T m − T m,F B is 11.3581. (3) For
the worst equilibrium, T m is larger than T m,F B in 90.49% of parameterizations and smaller
than T m,F B in 8.69% of parameterizations. The median of T m − T m,F B is 6.6216.

The speed of learning in the equilibria is generally too slow. Moreover, the best equilibrium
exhausts learning economies even more slowly than the worst equilibrium. This is because
pricing is initially less aggressive and more firms split sales in an accommodative equilibrium
than in an aggressive equilibrium.


7         Why does dynamic competition lead to low deadweight
          loss?
Section 6 leaves us with a puzzle. Dynamic competition leads to low deadweight loss, but this
is not because the equilibrium resembles the first-best planner solution. On the contrary, the
    26
         In stating Result 7, we take T m to be equal to T m,F B if T m − T m,F B < 0.1.


                                                          31
best equilibrium can differ even more from the planner solution than the worst equilibrium.

7.1      Decomposition
To better understand why dynamic competition leads to low deadweight loss, we quantify
the importance of three factors that together make up deadweight loss: pricing conduct, exit
and entry conduct, and market structure. We accordingly decompose the deadweight loss
in equation (12) as

                   DW Lβ = T SβF B − T Sβ = DW LPβ R + DW LEE      MS
                                                           β + DW Lβ ,


where
                            ∞
                            X          X                                               
               DW LPβ R =         βt       µt (e) CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e)) ,              (15)
                            t=0        e
                            X∞         X                                                 
               DW LEE
                   β  =           βt       µt (e) P S F B (e) − ΠF B (e) − (P S(e) − Π(e)) ,            (16)
                            t=0        e
                                           ∞
                                           X          X                      
                        DW LM
                            β
                              S
                                =                βt         µFt B (e) − µt (e) T S F B (e),             (17)
                                           t=0        e

                       P2
and, recall, Π(e) =      n=1 Dn (p(e))(pn (e)             − c(en )). ΠF B (e) is defined analogously.
       CS(e) + Π(e) is the sum of consumer surplus and the static profit of the incumbent firms
in state e. The pricing distortion DW LPβ R in equation (15) is the incremental deadweight
loss due to state-wise differences in pricing conduct between the equilibrium and the first-best
planner solution.27
       P S(e) − Π(e) is the difference of producer surplus and the static profit of the incumbent
firms in state e and thus the part of producer surplus that accounts for scrap values and
setup costs. The exit and entry distortion DW LEE
                                               β  in equation (16) is therefore the incre-
mental deadweight loss due to state-wise differences in exit and entry conduct between the
equilibrium and the first-best planner solution. Expected inflows from scrap values in state
e contribute positively to P S(e) − Π(e) and expected outflows from setup costs negatively.
A positive value of DW LEE
                        β  thus reflects a tendency for over-entry or under-exit relative to
the first-best planner solution while a negative value reflects a tendency for under-entry or
over-exit.
       The market structure distortion DW LM
                                           β
                                             S in equation (17) is the incremental deadweight

loss due to differences in the evolution of the industry over time between the equilibrium
  27
    In our model, there is no distinction between price and quantity distortions. As demand is invertible,
consumer surplus in equation (10) can be written as a function of quantities rather than prices.




                                                            32
and the first-best planner solution. Recall that the state e completely describes the num-
ber of incumbent firms—and therefore the extent of product variety—along with their cost
positions. A negative value of DW LM
                                   β
                                     S therefore indicates that the equilibrium puts more

weight on more favorable market structures with higher values of T S F B (e) than the planner
solution; a positive value indicates the reverse. Note that T S F B (e) is high if firms’ cost
positions in state e in relation to the price of the outside good yield large gains from trade.
T S F B (e) is also high if a large number of firms fosters product variety. Perhaps less obvi-
ously, T S F B (e) is high if in state e there are too many firms from the perspective of the
first-best planner, thus allowing the planner to receive scrap values by ceasing to operate
excess firms. Of course, these last two effects of the number of firms are mutually exclu-
sive. The factors contributing to a negative value of DW LM
                                                          β
                                                            S are therefore over-entry and

under-exit as well as fast exploitation of learning economies. The factors contributing to a
positive value of DW LM
                      β
                        S are under-entry, over-exit, slow exploitation of learning economies,

and cost-inefficient exit. Cost-inefficient exit contributes to a positive value of DW LM
                                                                                        β
                                                                                          S in

the same way as slow exploitation of learning economies by rendering firms’ cost positions
less favorable. Table 5 summarizes the distortions that the signs of DW LEE
                                                                         β  and DW LM
                                                                                    β
                                                                                      S

indicate.
     term                          positive                           negative
     DW LEE
          β         over-entry, under-exit              under-entry, over-exit
     DW LMβ
            S       under-entry, over-exit, slow ex-    over-entry, under-exit, fast ex-
                    ploitation of learning economies,   ploitation of learning economies
                    cost-inefficient exit


                    Table 5: Decomposition terms and contributing distortions.

    DW LEE        M S can offset each other as they depend on over-entry and under-exit
        β and DW Lβ
in opposite ways. We therefore define the non-pricing distortion as DW LN
                                                                        β
                                                                          P R = DW LEE +
                                                                                    β
DW LM S
    β . It reflects (1) the net social loss from a suboptimal number of firms (setup costs
net of scrap values net of social benefits of product variety), (2) the gross social loss from
a suboptimal exploitation of learning economies, and (3) the gross social loss from cost-
inefficient exit.

Examples.       Table 6 illustrates the decomposition for the aggressive and accommodative
equilibria at the baseline parameterization. The pricing distortion DW LPβ R = 10.78 is the
largest part of deadweight loss DW Lβ = 14.43 in the aggressive equilibrium. It is mainly
driven by the high expected long-run average price p∞ = 8.28 (see Table 4) that results as
the industry most likely evolves into a mature monopoly. In the accommodative equilibrium,
the pricing distortion DW LPβ R = 2.35 is a smaller part of deadweight loss DW Lβ = 5.01

                                               33
                                 DW Lβ        DW LPβ R       DW LEE
                                                                 β         DW LMβ
                                                                                  S      DW LN
                                                                                             β
                                                                                               PR

             aggr. eqbm.          14.43         10.78           4.67          -1.01          3.66
             accom. eqbm.          5.01          2.35           7.32          -4.67          2.66


Table 6: Decomposition. Aggressive and accommodative equilibrium. Baseline parameteri-
zation.

because the industry evolves into a mature duopoly. Interestingly, DW LPβ R is small even
though the expected long-run average price p∞ = 5.24 is almost two-thirds larger than in
the first-best planner solution (pF∞B = 3.25).28
       In the accommodative equilibrium, the largest part of deadweight loss DW Lβ = 5.01
is the exit and entry distortion DW LEE
                                     β  = 7.32. This reflects both wasteful duplication
of setup costs due to over-entry and scrap values that firms forgo in equilibrium due to
under-exit. The latter is analogous to the wasteful duplication of per-period, avoidable fixed
costs that arises in the standard war of attrition model in Tirole (1988).29 In contrast, in
the aggressive equilibrium DW LEE
                               β  = 4.67 is a smaller part of DW Lβ = 14.43 because the
follower is likely to eventually exit the industry and receive the scrap value.
       In both equilibria, the market structure distortion DW LM
                                                               β
                                                                 S is negative, indicating that

the industry spends more time in favorable market structures than in the first-best planner
solution. This is driven by over-entry and under-exit as opposed to fast exploitation of
learning economies. Indeed, in both equilibria learning economies are exhausted more slowly
(T m = 19.10 and T m = 37.50, see again Table 4) than in the planner solution (T m,F B =
15.02).
       As DW LM
              β
                S partially offsets DW LEE , the non-pricing distortion DW LN P R = 3.66 is
                                        β                                   β
much smaller than the pricing distortion DW LPβ R = 10.78 in the aggressive equilibrium.
In the accommodative equilibrium the non-pricing distortion DW LN
                                                                β
                                                                  P R = 2.66 is slightly

larger than the pricing distortion DW LPβ R = 2.35.

General results.          These patterns generalize. Summarizing a large number of parameter-
                                                                            DW LP
                                                                                β
                                                                                  R   DW LEE
                                                                                          β    DW LM
                                                                                                   β
                                                                                                     S
izations and equilibria, Figure 8 shows the distribution of                 DW Lβ   , DW Lβ  ,  DW Lβ ,        and
DW LNP
    β
       R

 DW Lβ .      We scale each term of the decomposition by DW Lβ to better gauge its size.
Result 8 highlights some findings:

  28
                                               
     Dynamic first-best prices pF B      FB
                                 1 (e), p2 (e) , in turn, coincide with static first-best prices (c(e1 ), c(e2 )) if
e ≥ (m, m).
  29
     In the Online Appendix, we establish that our model with scrap values is equivalent to a model with
per-period, avoidable fixed costs but without scrap values.




                                                        34
                        1
                                   PR
                                   EE
                                   MS
                       0.8
                                   NPR


                       0.6
                 CDF




                       0.4



                       0.2



                        0
                        −2       −1.5    −1     −0.5      0      0.5      1           1.5        2
                                         DWLYβ /DWLβ , Y ∈ {PR, EE, M S, NPR}

                                    DW LP R   DW LEE   DW LM S           DW LNP R
Figure 8: Distribution of DW Lββ , DW Lββ , DW Lββ , and                     β
                                                                          DW Lβ .    Parameterizations and
equilibria within parameterizations weighted equally.

Result 8 (1) The pricing distortion DW LPβ R is positive in 96.44% of parameterizations.30
                       DW LP R
The median of              β
                       DW Lβ     is 0.6565. (2) The exit and entry distortion DW LEE
                                                                                  β  is positive in
                                                          DW LEE
                                                              β
81.26% of parameterizations. The median of                DW Lβ       is 0.5728. (3) The market structure
                                                                                                     DW LM S
distortion DW LM
               β
                 S is negative in 70.07% of parameterizations. The median of                             β
                                                                                                      DW Lβ    is
−0 .2279 . (4) The non-pricing distortion             DW LN
                                                          β
                                                            PR    is positive in 92.03% of parameteriza-
                             DW LNP
                                 β
                                    R
tions. The median of          DW Lβ      is 0.3435.

DW LEE
    β  is typically positive by part (2) of Result 8 because of over-entry and under-exit.31
Also because of over-entry and under-exit, DW LM
                                               β
                                                 S is typically negative by part (3), as the

speed of learning in the equilibria is generally too slow (see Figure 7 and Result 7).32 Thus,
as highlighted in Result 9, DW LM
                                β
                                  S typically offsets DW LEE so that DW LN P R is very
                                                          β              β
often smaller than its largest component (in absolute value):
                                             n                    o
Result 9 |DW LN  β
                   P R | is smaller than max   DW LEE
                                                    β   , DW LM
                                                              β
                                                                S   in 88.64% of parame-
terizations.
  30                                                        DW LP R
       In stating Result 8, we take DW LP
                                        β
                                          R
                                            to be zero if       β
                                                             DW Lβ
                                                                       < 0.001. We proceed analogously for the
other terms of the decomposition.
  31
     DW LEEβ   is zero in 14.87% of parameterizations and negative in just 3.87% of parameterizations (see
again footnote 30).
  32
     DW LM β
             S
               can be positive if the degree of product differentiation σ is sufficiently large to ensure that the
industry evolves into a mature duopoly under the equilibrium and the first-best planner solution. In this
case, the positive value of DW LM  β
                                     S
                                       reflects mainly the slow exploitation of learning economies.


                                                       35
   Parts (1) and (4) of Result 8 show that generally both pricing and non-pricing distortions
contribute to deadweight loss. As Result 10 shows, the pricing distortion is often larger than
the non-pricing distortion:

Result 10 The pricing distortion DW LPβ R is larger than the non-pricing distortion DW LN
                                                                                        β
                                                                                          PR

in 73.23% of parameterizations.

   Armed with these patterns in the decomposition terms, we delve into the mechanisms
through which dynamic competition leads to low deadweight loss. We proceed separately
according to type of equilibrium.

7.2   Why is the best equilibrium so good?
The deadweight loss in the best equilibrium is small although it often differs greatly from
the first-best planner solution. Recall that we associate the best equilibrium with an accom-
modative equilibrium. To see why the deadweight loss in an accommodative equilibrium is
small, recall from Result 10 that the pricing distortion is often larger than the non-pricing
distortion. In a first step, we show that the pricing distortion DW LPβ R is small. In a sec-
ond step, we argue that the non-pricing distortion DW LN  β
                                                            P R is small because of the social

benefit of product variety.

Why is the pricing distortion small? At first blush, there appears to be no reason
for the pricing distortion in an accommodative equilibrium to be particularly small. At
the baseline parameterization, equilibrium prices (p1 (e), p2 (e)) substantially exceed static
first-best prices (c(e1 ), c(e2 )) even once the industry becomes a mature duopoly.
   Proposition 2, however, bounds the contribution CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e))
to the pricing distortion DW LPβ R by the demand for the outside good D0 (p(e)):

Proposition 2 Consider a symmetric state e = (e, e), where e > 0. If p0 ≥ κ, p1 (e) > c(e),
and D0 (p(e)) < 21 , then

                                              (p1 (e) − c(e))2
   CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e)) ≤                    D0 (p(e))(1 − D0 (p(e))).   (18)
                                                      σ

Note that the bound on the right-hand side of equation (18) approaches zero as the demand
for the outside good approaches zero. This often has bite: as the incumbent firms move
down their learning curves, they improve their cost positions relative to the price of the
outside good and drive the share of the outside good close to zero. Exceptions occur only if
learning economies are weak—ρ is close to 1—or inconsequential because the outside good
is highly attractive.

                                              36
   While the bound on the right-hand side of equation (18) relies on logit demand, the
intuition is more general. To a first-order approximation, the deadweight loss due to market
power decreases as demand becomes less price elastic (Harberger 1954). With logit demand,
a decrease in the price elasticity of aggregate demand for the inside goods is associated with
a decrease in the demand for the outside good. With linear demand, the aggregate demand
for the inside goods similarly becomes less elastic as their prices—and with them the demand
for the outside good—decrease.

Why is the non-pricing distortion small?            Recall that the non-pricing distortion DW LN
                                                                                               β
                                                                                                 PR =

DW LEE      M S reflects the net social loss from a suboptimal number of firms as well as
    β + DW Lβ
the gross social losses from suboptimal exploitation of learning economies and cost-inefficient
exit. Recall, too, that, broadly speaking, in particular accommodative equilibria have too
many firms, both in the short run and in the long run, consistent with over-entry and under-
exit (Results 5, 6, and parts (2) and (3) of Result 8). Negative values of DW LM
                                                                               β
                                                                                 S thus tend

to offset positive values of DW LEE
                                 β  (Result 9).
   Of course, too many firms give rise to a social loss from the wasteful duplication of setup
costs due to over-entry and scrap values that firms forgo in equilibrium due to under-exit.
However, there is a “silver lining”: too many firms give rise to a social benefit from additional
product variety. Because of the social benefit of product variety, the net social loss from
too many firms is small. This is especially relevant because accommodative equilibria tend
to arise when the degree of product differentiation σ is high (see Appendix C). Hence, the
social benefit of product variety tends to be large.
   Learning economies accentuate the silver lining of additional product variety. Suppose
the industry evolves into a mature duopoly in an accommodative equilibrium and into a
mature monopoly in the first-best planner solution, and that there is no further exit and
entry. Then there exists a period t∗ such that for period t ≥ t∗ , the equilibrium transient
distribution µt (e) puts all mass on state e, where e ≥ (m, m), and the first-best transient
distribution µFt B (e) puts all mass on state e, where either e1 ≥ m and e2 = 0 or e1 = 0
and e2 ≥ m. Because learning economies are exhausted and there is no further exit and
entry, we have T S F B (e) = T S F B (m, m) if e ≥ (m, m), and T S F B (e) = T S F B (m, 0) if
either e1 ≥ m and e2 = 0 or e1 = 0 and e2 ≥ m. Moreover, T S F B (m, m) = CS F B (m, m)
and T S F B (m, 0) = CS F B (m, 0) because the planner sets static first-best prices. Hence, the
market structure distortion DW LM
                                β
                                  S can be approximated as


       t ∗                                    ∗
       X       X                         β t +1  F B                     
              t   FB                FB
             β   µt (e) − µt (e) T S (e) −         CS (m, m) − CS F B (m, 0) ,
                                           1−β
       t=0     e


where the last term can be thought of as a reduction in DW LM S
                                                            β —and thus in the non-


                                               37
pricing distortion DW LN
                       β
                         P R —due to the social benefit of additional product variety. From

equation (10) it is straightforward to establish that

                              CS F B (m, m) − CS F B (m, 0)
                                                                    
                   −p0             −c(m)                   −p0           −c(m)
      = σ ln exp         + 2 exp             − ln exp            + exp             ,
                    σ                 σ                     σ              σ

where c(m) = κρlog2 m from equation (1), and

d(CS F B (m, m) − CS F B (m, 0))
                                 = − (2D1 (c(m), c(m)) − D1 (c(m), ∞)) κρlog2 m−1 log2 m < 0,
              dρ

since 2D1 (c(m), c(m)) =         2           >          1         = D1 (c(m), ∞).   Hence, as
                                    p −c(m)                    p −c(m)
                           2+exp − 0 σ                1+exp − 0 σ
learning economies strengthen, the reduction         in DW LM β
                                                                 S and DW LN P R due to
                                                                             β              the social
benefit of additional product variety increases.

7.3    Why is the worst equilibrium not so bad?
Recall that we associate the worst equilibrium with an aggressive equilibrium. To see why
the deadweight loss in an aggressive equilibrium is small (albeit not as small as in the best
equilibrium), we show in a first step that the pricing distortion DW LPβ R is small. In a second
step, we argue that the non-pricing distortion DW LN
                                                   β
                                                     P R is small because of a fairly efficient

winnowing out of firms.
   We emphasize that the arguments below do not imply that the deadweight loss in an
aggressive equilibrium is close to zero. Rather, each one speaks to an economic force in
the model that serves as a “headwind” that prevents the deadweight loss from becoming
excessively large.

Why is the pricing distortion small? There again appears to be no reason for the
pricing distortion in an aggressive equilibrium to be small. At the baseline parameteriza-
tion, the industry evolves into a mature monopoly. Proposition 2 bounds the contribution
CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e)) to the pricing distortion DW LPβ R by the degree of
                                                                   
product differentiation σ and the advantage-building motive U1 e1+ − U1 (e):




                                                 38
Proposition 3 Consider a state e = (e, 0), where e > 0. Then

                                  CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e))
    (                                                                                     
                   σ                       if       0 ≤ U1 e1+ − U1 (e) < σ 1 + exp p0 −c(e)
                                                                                        σ       ,
<                      
        σ + U1   e1+       − U1 (e)   otherwise.
                                                                                             (19)

Note that the bound on the right-hand side of equation (19) approaches σ as the incumbent
                                                
firm moves down its learning curve and U1 e1+ − U1 (e) approaches zero. While Propo-
sition 3 relies on logit demand, the intuition that the threat of substitution to the outside
good holds market power in check transcends the logit specification.
    Proposition 3 has bite because aggressive equilibria tend to arise when the degree of
product differentiation σ is low (see Appendix C). This is intuitive: pricing aggressively
to marginalize one’s rival or altogether force it from the industry is especially attractive if
products are close substitutes so that firms on an equal footing would fiercely compete.

Why is the non-pricing distortion small? While an aggressive equilibrium usually
involves delayed exit (relative to the first-best planner solution), it involves rather brisk
eventual exit. Thus, the industry usually quickly evolves towards the first-best market
structure in an aggressive equilibrium, which tends to keep DW LM S              N P R,
                                                                β , and thus DW Lβ
small. The small non-pricing distortion reflects the resulting relatively low net social loss
from a suboptimal number of firms. Put another way, in an aggressive equilibrium, this net
social loss is small because competition for the market resolves itself quickly and winnows
out firms in a fairly efficient way.


8       Summary and conclusion
We study industries where price serves as an investment. The investment role arises when a
firm’s price affects not only its current profit but also its future competitive position vis-à-
vis its rivals. Competition is dynamic as firms jostle for competitive advantage through the
prices they set.
    Our starting point is the conjecture that dynamic competition is necessarily fully efficient
in our learning-by-doing model because firms merely transfer rents to consumers by pricing
aggressively rather than engage in socially wasteful activities as in rent-seeking models. We
argue that this conjecture overlooks that dynamic competition extends beyond pricing into
exit and entry. As we show in the special case of a two-step learning curve, even if pricing is
efficient, exit and entry are not, and there are coordination failures (Bolton & Harris 1999)


                                                   39
and wars of attrition (Maynard Smith 1974, Tirole 1988, Bulow & Klemperer 1999). In sum,
dynamic competition when price serves as an investment is not a “magic bullet”.
   Still, our analysis suggests that in settings where price plays an investment role, dynamic
competition is fairly efficient. Deadweight loss tends to be low (Results 1 and 2) and the
investment role of price socially beneficial (Result 3). This is surprising because equilibrium
behavior and industry dynamics often differ markedly from the first-best planner solution.
In particular, dynamic competition tends to lead to too low prices (Result 4), too many firms
in the short run and in the long run (Results 5 and 6), and too slow learning (Result 7).
   So why is dynamic competition fairly efficient? The answer boils down to the key fun-
damental that gives rise to the investment role of price in the first place: learning-by-doing.
   The pricing distortion tends to be the largest contributor to deadweight loss (part (i)
of Result 8 and Result 10). Our bounds on the pricing distortion tighten as the incumbent
firms move down their learning curves (Propositions 2 and 3). If the industry evolves into a
mature duopoly in an accommodative equilibrium, this happens because the demand for the
inside goods becomes less elastic as the incumbent firms improve their cost positions relative
to the outside good and drive the share of the outside good close to zero. If the industry
evolves into a mature monopoly in an aggressive equilibrium, the bound further tightens as
the degree of product differentiation decreases and the threat of substitution to the outside
good holds market power in check. Moreover, this is precisely when aggressive equilibria
tend to arise in the first place.
   The non-pricing distortion comprises the exit and entry distortion and the market struc-
ture distortion. In an aggressive equilibrium, the non-pricing distortion tends to be low
despite the wasteful duplication of setup costs due to over-entry because competition for the
market resolves itself quickly and winnows out firms in a fairly efficient way. In an accom-
modative equilibrium, the non-pricing distortion tends to be higher. However, the market
structure distortion tends to partly offset the exit and entry distortion (parts (ii) and (iii)
of Result 8 and Result 9). Too many firms give rise not only to a social loss from incurred
setup costs due to over-entry and forgone scrap values due to under-exit, but also to a so-
cial benefit from additional product variety. Learning-by-doing accentuates this benefit by
making product variety less costly to procure.
   Put simply, when price serves as an investment, dynamic competition is fairly efficient
because of the efficiency-enhancing properties of the investment.
   From a regulatory perspective, our analysis suggests that in settings where price serves as
an investment, the upside from interventions and policies aimed at shaping competition for
the market is likely to be limited. As we show in Besanko et al. (2014), blunt pricing conduct
restrictions can lead to substantial welfare losses. Although more subtle pricing conduct
restrictions can lead to welfare gains, typically by eliminating equilibria that entail predation-


                                               40
like behavior, achieving these gains in practice requires detailed knowledge of demand and
cost primitives. Unless the regulator executes flawlessly based on this knowledge, it may
therefore be preferable not to intervene at all and tolerate the “not so bad” welfare losses
that typically arise under dynamic competition.
   A caveat to our analysis is that interventions and policies remain appropriate that fore-
stall collusion between firms that otherwise engage in competition for the market or ex-
clusionary practices by these firms, such as forcing customers to sign long-term exclusive
contracts. Our analysis should thus be interpreted as suggesting that there is little in the
fundamentals of dynamic competition when price serves as an investment that suggests that
antitrust actions have a sizeable upside.


Appendix A               Omitted expressions
Exit decision of incumbent firm.               The probability of incumbent firm 1 exiting the
industry in state e′ is
                               b1 (e′ ))
            φ1 (e′ ) = 1 − FX (X
                       
                               1                 if          b1 (e′ ) < X − ∆X ,
                                                              X
                       
                     =    1   [ 1 (e′ )−X ]
                               b
                               X
                                                       b1 (e′ ) ∈ [X − ∆X , X + ∆X ],
                         2 −    2∆X              if   X
                                                              b1 (e′ ) > X + ∆X
                                0                 if          X

and the expectation of the scrap value conditional on exiting the industry is
                                                R X+∆X
                   h                    i         −1
                                                 FX  (1−φ1 (e′ ))
                                                                    X1 dFX (X1 )
              EX                b1 (e′ ) =
                       X1 |X1 ≥ X
                                                            φ1 (e′ )
                                                   1                           
                                           =         ′
                                                        ZX (0) − ZX 1 − φ1 (e′ ) ,
                                                φ1 (e )

where
                                                      3
               
                                         − 61 X − ∆X                                            if     1 − φ ≤ 0,
                                                  2               3                                            
             1               1
                              2 ∆X − X FX−1 (1 − φ) + 31 FX−1 (1 − φ)                            if   1 − φ ∈ 0, 12 ,
ZX (1 − φ) = 2                                 2                3      3                                        
               
            ∆X 
               
                         1
                         2   ∆X + X FX−1 (1 − φ) − 13 FX−1 (1 − φ) − 13 X                        if   1 − φ ∈ 12 , 1 ,
                                       1
                                                   3 1 3
                                        6 X + ∆X      − 3X                                       if     1−φ ≥1

and                                    
                                       
                                        p−1                           if     1 − φ ≤ 0, 
                                       
                                    −1 + 2√(1 − φ)                     if   1 − φ ∈ 0, 12  ,
            FX−1 (1 − φ) = X + ∆X
                                  
                                      1 − 2φ                          if   1 − φ ∈ 21 , 1 ,
                                  
                                          1                            if     1 − φ ≥ 1.




                                                  41
Entry decision of potential entrant. The probability of potential entrant 1 not entering
the industry in state e′ is

              φ1 (e′ ) = 1 − FS (Sb1 (e′ ))
                         
                         
                                   1               if           Sb1 (e′ ) < S − ∆S ,
                                 [Sb1 (e′ )−S ]
                       =    1
                          2 − 2∆S                  if      Sb1 (e′ ) ∈ [S − ∆S , S + ∆S ],
                         
                                    0               if              Sb1 (e′ ) > S + ∆S

and the expectation of the setup cost conditional on entering the industry is
                                                R FS−1 (1−φ1 (e′ ))
                  h                  i                                S1 dFS (S1 )
                                                  S−∆S
                ES S1 |S1 ≤ Sb1 (e′ ) =
                                                           (1 − φ1 (e′ ))
                                                   1                               
                                            =                ZS 1 − φ1 (e′ ) − ZS (1) ,
                                                φ1 (e′ )

where
                                                   3
               
                                      − 16 S − ∆S                                          if      1 − φ ≤ 0,
                                              2               3                                            
             1          1
                         2 ∆S −  S FS−1 (1 − φ) + 31 FS−1 (1 − φ)                           if    1 − φ ∈ 0, 12 ,
ZS (1 − φ) = 2                             2                3      3                                        
            ∆S 
               
               
                     1
                     2   ∆S + S FS−1 (1 − φ) − 13 FS−1 (1 − φ) − 13 S                       if    1 − φ ∈ 12 , 1 ,
                                   1
                                                3        3
                                    6 S + ∆S       − 13 S                                   if      1−φ≥1

and                                     
                                        
                                         p−1                           if     1 − φ ≤ 0, 
                                        
                                     −1 +   2√(1 − φ)                   if   1 − φ ∈ 0, 12  ,
             FS−1 (1 − φ) = S + ∆S
                                   
                                       1 − 2φ                          if   1 − φ ∈ 12 , 1 ,
                                   
                                           1                            if     1 − φ ≥ 1.

Producer surplus (decentralized exit and entry).                        Producer surplus in state e is
                                                   2
                                                   X
                                        P S(e) =           P Sn (e),
                                                   n=1

where
                              2
                              X              n                   h                i
        P S1 (e) = Π1 (e) +                                                 b1 en+
                                    Dn (p(e)) 1 [e1 > 0] φ1 en+ EX X1 |X1 ≥ X
                              n=0
                                                         h                 i o
                     −1 [e1 = 0] 1 − φ1 en+              ES S1 |S1 ≤ Sb1 en+

is producer surplus of firm 1 in state e with

                                Π1 (e) = D1 (p(e))(p1 (e) − c(e1 )).

P S2 (e) and Π2 (e) are analogous.


                                                   42
Producer surplus (centralized exit and entry).                                        Producer surplus in state e is
                                                                           2
                                                                           X
                                               FB            FB
                                                                                            
                                          PS        (e) = Π        (e) +         Dn pF B (e)
                                                                           n=0
      n                                                                                  
  ×       ψ F1,1B EX,S −1 [e1 = 0] S1 − 1 [e2 = 0] S2 |U F B en+ , X, S = U1,1
                    e   n+                                                  FB
                                                                                 en+ , X, S
                                                                                         
  +ψ F1,0B en+ EX,S −1 [e1 = 0] S1 + 1 [e2 > 0] X2 |U F B en+ , X, S = U1,0 FB
                                                                                 en+ , X, S
                                                                                        
   +ψ F0,1B en+ EX,S 1 [e1 > 0] X1 − 1 [e2 = 0] S2 |U F B en+ , X, S = U0,1FB
                                                                                en+ , X, S
                                                                                        o
  +ψ F0,0B en+ EX,S 1 [e1 > 0] X1 + 1 [e2 > 0] X2 |U F B en+ , X, S = U0,0FB
                                                                               en+ , X, S
                             P2                                                                         
with ΠF B (e) =                  n=1 Dn    pF B (e) pFn B (e) − c(en ) and pF B (e) = pF1 B (e), pF2 B (e) .

Industry structure, conduct, and performance. The expected short-run and long-run
number of firms is
                        X                     X
                   N1 =    µ1 (e) N (e), N∞ =   µ∞ (e) N (e),
                                              e                                   e

where number of firms in state e is
                                                                   2
                                                                   X
                                                      N (e) =            1 [en > 0] .
                                                                   n=1

   The expected long-run average price is
                                                           X          µ∞ (e)
                                                  p∞ =                           p(e),
                                                                   1 − µ∞ (0, 0)
                                                         e≥(0,0)

where (share-weighted) average price in state e is
                                                     2
                                                     X       Dn (p1 (e), p2 (e))
                                            p(e) =                                 pn (e).
                                                           1 − D0 (p1 (e), p2 (e))
                                                     n=1

   The expected time to maturity is

                                          T m = E [ min {t ≥ 0|et ∈ Ω}| e0 = (0, 0)] ,

where et is the state of the industry in period t and

                        Ω = {(m, 0), . . . , (M, 0), (0, m), . . . , (0, M ), (m, m), . . . , (M, M )}

is the set of states in which the industry is either a mature monopoly or a mature duopoly.
min {t ≥ 0|et ∈ Ω} is the so-called first passage time into the set of states Ω. It can be shown
that T m is the solution to a system of linear equations (Kulkarni 1995, equation (4.72)).
    The expected NPV of consumer surplus CSβ is defined analogously to the expected NPV


                                                                    43
of total surplus T Sβ in equation (11).


Appendix B              Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. The proof proceeds in two steps. First, we show that given the
policy functions, the value functions solve the Bellman equations (2), (3), and (4). Second,
we show that there is no profitable one-shot deviation in any state of the industry. The
details of this analysis are presented in the Online Appendix.
Proof of Proposition 2. Define the sum of consumer surplus and static profit to be

                              Φ(p) = CS(p, p) + 2D1 (p, p)(p − c(e)).

Using this definition, in a symmetric state e = (e, e), where e > 0, we can write

               CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e)) = Φ(pF1 B (e)) − Φ(p1 (e)).

   We have
                                    1
                         Φ′ (p) = − (p − c(e))D0 (p, p)(1 − D0 (p, p)),                         (20)
                                   σ
                         1
             Φ′′ (p) = − 2 ((p − c(e))(1 − 2D0 (p, p)) + σ) D0 (p, p)(1 − D0 (p, p)).           (21)
                        σ
Hence, Φ(p) is strictly quasiconcave in p and attains its maximum at p = c(e). Thus, we
obtain
               CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e)) ≤ Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)).       (22)
    We bound the right-hand side of equation (22). Let pe be such that D0 (e         p, pe) = 12 , so
1−2D0 (p, p) ≥ 0 for all p ≤ pe because D0 (p, p) increases in p. Equation (21) implies that Φ(p)
is strictly concave in p over the interval [c(e), pe]. This interval is non-empty: the assumption
p0 ≥ κ coupled with κ ≥ c(e) implies D0 (c(e), c(e)) ≤ D0 (κ, κ) ≤ 31 < 21 = D0 (e         p, pe). As
D0 (p, p) increases in p, it must be that c(e) < pe.
    By assumption, p1 (e) ∈ [c(e), pe]. From Theorem 21.2 in Simon & Blume (1994) and
equation (20) we therefore have

                          Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)) ≤ Φ′ (p1 (e))(c(e) − p1 (e))
                       (p1 (e) − c(e))2
                   =                    D0 (p1 (e), p1 (e))(1 − D0 (p1 (e), p1 (e))).           (23)
                               σ
This establishes Proposition 2.
Proof of Proposition 3. Define the sum of consumer surplus and static profit to be

                             Φ(p) = CS(p, ∞) + D1 (p, ∞)(p − c(e)).

Using this definition, in a state e = (e, 0), where e > 0, we can write

               CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e)) = Φ(pF1 B (e)) − Φ(p1 (e)).



                                                   44
   We have
                                     1
                           Φ′ (p) = − (p − c(e))D0 (p, ∞)(1 − D0 (p, ∞)),
                                     σ
                          1
              Φ′′ (p) = − 2 ((p − c(e))(1 − 2D0 (p, ∞)) + σ) D0 (p, ∞)(1 − D0 (p, ∞)).
                         σ
Hence, Φ(p) is strictly quasiconcave in p and attains its maximum at p = c(e). Thus, we
obtain
                 CS F B (e) + ΠF B (e) − (CS(e) + Π(e)) ≤ Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)),
                                                 
where Φ(c(e)) = v − c(e) + σ ln 1 + exp c(e)−p σ
                                                 0
                                                     .
    p1 (e) is uniquely determined by the solution to the first-order condition (5); it can be
written as
                                                                                         !!!
                      1+
                                                      p0 − c(e) + U1 e1+ − U1 (e)
p1 (e) = c(e) − U1 e        − U1 (e) + σ 1 + W exp                                       −1     ,
                                                                       σ

                                                                p0 −c(e)             U1 (e1+ )−U1 (e)
where W (·) is the Lambert W function. Defining x =                 σ      and y =          σ         ,   this
can be further written as

                         p1 (e) = c(e) + σ (−y + 1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))) .

Hence,
                                                                                            
                                      1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))                    y
  Φ(p1 (e)) = v − c(e) + σ ln                                       +                        −1
                                        W (exp(x + y − 1))            1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))

and

                             Φ(c(e)) = v − c(e) + σ ln (1 + exp(−x)) .

It follows that

                                          Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e))
                                                                                              
                                      1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))                      y
  = σ ln (1 + exp(−x)) − ln                                         −                          +1
                                        W (exp(x + y − 1))              1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))
                                                                                                  (24)
                                                                                                                
                                                                          yW (exp(x + y − 1))
= σ ln (1 + exp(x)) − ln (1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))) − W (exp(x + y − 1)) +                                             .
                                                                         1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))
                                                                                    (25)

   Some properties of the Lambert W function are that W (z) is increasing in z, W (0) = 0,
and W (z exp(z)) = z for all z ≥ 0.




                                                  45
   Case 1: y < 1 + exp(x). We first show that if y < 1 + exp(x), then
                                                              
                                        1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))
                ln (1 + exp(−x)) − ln                            + 1 < 1.            (26)
                                          W (exp(x + y − 1))

To see this, note that equation (26) is equivalent to
                                                                    
                                              1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))
                      ln (1 + exp(−x)) ≤ ln
                                                W (exp(x + y − 1))
                                                      1
                              ⇔ exp(−x) <
                                            W (exp(x + y − 1))
                               ⇔ exp(x) > W (exp(x + y − 1)) .

If y = 1+exp(x), then the right-hand side is W (exp(x + exp(x))) = W (exp(x) exp(exp(x))) =
exp(x). Moreover, because W (z) is increasing in z, exp(x) > W (exp(x + y − 1)) for all
y < 1 + exp(x).
     Consider equation (24). From equation (26) it follows that
                                                                       
                                                            1
                  Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)) < σ 1 − y                           .
                                                 1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))
                        1
Moreover, 0 <   1+W (exp(x+y−1))   < 1. Therefore, if y < 0, then

                               Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)) < σ (1 + |y|)                     (27)

and, if y ≥ 0, then

                                     Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)) < σ.                        (28)

   Case 2: y ≥ 1 + exp(x). We first show that if y ≥ 1 + exp(x), then

          ln (1 + exp(x)) − ln (1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))) − W (exp(x + y − 1)) < 1.    (29)

To see this, note that

            ln (1 + exp(x)) − ln (1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))) − W (exp(x + y − 1))
          ≤ ln (1 + exp(x)) − ln (1 + W (exp(x + exp(x)))) − W (exp(x + exp(x)))
                = ln (1 + exp(x)) − ln (1 + exp(x)) − exp(x) = − exp(x) < 1.

   Consider equation (25). From equation (29) it follows that
                                                                    
                                                W (exp(x + y − 1))
                Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)) < σ 1 + y                          .
                                              1 + W (exp(x + y − 1))
                 W (exp(x+y−1))
Moreover, 0 <   1+W (exp(x+y−1))   < 1. Because y ≥ 1 + exp(x) > 0, we have

                               Φ(c(e)) − Φ(p1 (e)) < σ (1 + y) .                     (30)


                                                46
   Collecting equations (27), (28), and (30) establishes Proposition 3.


Appendix C              Aggressive and accommodative equilibria
We offer formal definitions of aggressive and accommodative equilibria, but note from the
outset that any attempt to classify equilibria is fraud with difficulty because the different
equilibria lie on a continuum and thus morph into each other in complicated ways as we vary
the parameters of the model.
   Our definition of an aggressive equilibrium hones in on a trench in the pricing decision,
and our definition of an accommodative equilibrium on a lack of exit from a duopolistic
industry:

Definition 1 An equilibrium is aggressive if

           p1 (e) < p1 (e1 , e2 + 1),   p2 (e) < p2 (e1 , e2 + 1),   φ2 (e) > φ2 (e1 , e2 + 1)

for some state e > (0, 0) with e1 > e2 .

Definition 2 An equilibrium is accommodative if

                                          φ1 (e) = φ2 (e) = 0

for all states e > (0, 0).

These definitions are not exhaustive. The percentage of equilibria classified as aggressive is
96.88%, the percentage of equilibria classified as accommodative is 1.99%, and the percentage
of unclassified equilibria is 1.13%. Our computations always led to a unique accommodative
equilibrium but often to multiple aggressive equilibria at a given parameterization.
    An aggressive equilibrium exists if the degree of product differentiation σ is sufficiently
low. As competition in a duopolististic industry becomes fiercer, monopolizing the industry
becomes more attractive. Other factors contributing to the existence of an aggressive equi-
librium are a high expected scrap value X and a high price of the outside good p0 . The first
factor makes it easier for a firm to induce its rival to exit the industry and the second makes
monopolizing the industry more attractive by allowing the surviving firm to charge a higher
price. Conversely, an accommodative equilibrium exists if the degree of product differentia-
tion σ is sufficiently high. Other factors contributing to the existence of an accommodative
equilibrium are a low expected scrap value X and a low price of the outside good p0 .
    Our definitions of aggressive and accommodative equilibria are linked, however imper-
fectly, to worst, respectively, best equilibria. Table 7 shows that 49.09% of parameterizations
have a unique equilibrium and that the equilibrium is classified as accommodative in 83.40%
of these parameterizations. Moreover, 50.91% of parameterizations have multiple equilibria
and the worst equilibrium is classified as aggressive in 97.96% of these parameterizations.
However, the best equilibrium is classified as accommodative in 40.54% of these parameteri-
zations and as aggressive in 43.36% of these parameterizations. This far from perfect link ap-
pears to reflect that our definition of an accommodative equilibrium is quite stringent. While
there is an aggressive equilibrium at all parameterizations with multiple equilibria, there may

                                                   47
                       unique equilibrium     multiple equilibria     multiple equilibria
                                                                    incl. accomm. eqbm.
                              49.09%               50.91%                   21.98%
                                               best     worst         best        worst
     aggressive                3.32%          43.36% 97.96%          5.84%       96.85%
     accommodative            83.40%          40.54%    1.36%       93.93%       3.15%
     unclassified             13.28%          16.10%    0.68%        0.22%       0.00%


Table 7: Percentage of parameterizations with a unique equilibrium, multiple equilibria, and
multiple equilibria including an accommodative equilibrium (upper panel) and, within each
of these, percentage of parameterizations at which the best or worst equilibrium is aggressive,
accommodative, or unclassified (lower panel). Unweighted.

not be an accommodative equilibrium. The rightmost column of Table 7 restricts attention
to parameterizations with multiple equilibria that include an accommodative equilibrium.
The best equilibrium is classified as accommodative in 93.93% of these parameterizations
and the worst equilibrium is classified as aggressive in 96.85% of these parameterizations. To
facilitate the exposition and build intuition, we therefore associate the best equilibrium with
an accommodative equilibrium and the worst equilibrium—to the extent that it differs from
the best equilibrium—with an aggressive equilibrium. If the equilibrium is unique, then we
associate it with an accommodative equilibrium.


References
Aghion, P. & Howitt, P. (1992), ‘A model of growth through creative destruction’, Econo-
    metrica 60(2), 323–351.
Alchian, A. (1963), ‘Reliability of progress curves in airframe production’, Econometrica
    31(4), 679–693.
Anderson, S., de Palma, A. & Thisse, J. (1992), Discrete choice theory of product differen-
    tiation, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Athey, S. & Schmutzler, A. (2001), ‘Investment and market dominance’, Rand Journal of
    Economics 32(1), 1–26.
Baloff, N. (1971), ‘Extension of the learning curve: Some empirical results’, Operational
    Research Quarterly 22(4), 329–340.
Benkard, L. (2000), ‘Learning and forgetting: The dynamics of aircraft production’, Ameri-
    can Economic Review 90(4), 1034–1054.
Bergemann, D. & Välimäki, J. (1996), ‘Learning and strategic pricing’, Econometrica
    64(5), 1125–1149.
Bergemann, D. & Välimäki, J. (1997), ‘Market diffusion with two-sided learning’, Rand
    Journal of Economics 28(4), 773–795.

                                              48
Bergemann, D. & Välimäki, J. (2006), ‘Dynamic price competition’, Journal of Economic
    Theory 127, 232–263.
Besanko, D., Doraszelski, U. & Kryukov, Y. (2014), ‘Efficiency or predation: What drives
    pricing when there is learning-by-doing?’, American Economic Review 104(3), 868–897.
Besanko, D., Doraszelski, U., Kryukov, Y. & Satterthwaite, M. (2010), ‘Learning-by-doing,
    organizational forgetting, and industry dynamics’, Econometrica 78(2), 453–508.
Besanko, D., Perry, M. & Spady, R. (1990), ‘The logit model of monopolistic competition:
    Brand diversity’, Journal of Industrial Economics 38(4), 397–415.
Biglaiser, G. & Cremer, J. (2016), The value of incumbency for heterogeneous platforms,
     Working paper, Toulouse School of Economics, Toulouse.
Bohn, R. (1995), ‘Noise and learning in semiconductor manufacturing’, Management Science
    41(1), 31–42.
Bolton, P. & Farrell, J. (1990), ‘Decentralization, duplication, and delay’, Journal of Political
     Economy 98(4), 803–826.
Bolton, P. & Harris, C. (1999), ‘Strategic experimentation’, Econometrica 67(2), 349–372.
Borkovsky, R., Doraszelski, U. & Kryukov, Y. (2010), ‘A user’s guide to solving dynamic
    stochastic games using the homotopy method’, Operations Research 58(4), 1116–1132.
Borkovsky, R., Doraszelski, U. & Kryukov, Y. (2012), ‘A dynamic quality ladder model with
    entry and exit: Exploring the equilibrium correspondence using the homotopy method’,
    Quantitative Marketing and Economics 10(2), 197–229.
Bulow, J. & Klemperer, P. (1999), ‘The generalized war of attrition’, Journal of Political
    Economy 89(1), 175–189.
Cabral, L. (1993), ‘Experience advantages and entry dynamics’, Journal of Economic Theory
    59, 403–416.
Cabral, L. (2011), ‘Dynamic price competition with network effects’, Review of Economic
    Studies 78, 83–111.
Cabral, L. & Riordan, M. (1994), ‘The learning curve, market dominance, and predatory
    pricing’, Econometrica 62(5), 1115–1140.
Caves, R. & Porter, M. (1977), ‘From entry barriers to mobility barriers: Conjectural de-
    cisions and contrived deterrence to new competition’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
    91(2), 241–262.
Chen, J. (2011), How do switching costs affect market concentration and prices in network
    industries?, Working paper, UC Irvine, Irvine.
Chen, J., Doraszelski, U. & Harrington, J. (2009), ‘Avoiding market dominance: Product
    compatibility in markets with network effects’, Rand Journal of Economics 49(3), 455–
    485.

                                               49
Ching, A. (2010), ‘A dynamic oligopoly structural model for the prescription drug market
    after patent expiration’, International Economic Review 51(4), 1175–1207.

Dasgupta, P. & Stiglitz, J. (1988), ‘Learning-by-doing, market structure and industrial and
    trade policies’, Oxford Economics Papers 40(2), 246–268.

DeJong, J. (1957), ‘The effects of increasing skills on cycle time and its consequences for
    time standards’, Ergonomics 1(1), 51–60.

Dixit, A. & Stiglitz, J. (1977), ‘Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity’,
     American Economic Review 67(3), 297–308.

Doraszelski, U. & Escobar, J. (2010), ‘A theory of regular Markov perfect equilibria in dy-
    namic stochastic games: Genericity, stability, and purification’, Theoretical Economics
    5, 369–402.

Doraszelski, U. & Satterthwaite, M. (2010), ‘Computable Markov-perfect industry dynam-
    ics’, Rand Journal of Economics 41(2), 215–243.

Dube, J., Hitsch, G. & Chintagunta, P. (2010), ‘Tipping and concentration in markets with
   indirect network effects’, Journal of Marketing Research 29(2), 216–249.

Dube, J., Hitsch, G. & Rossi, P. (2009), ‘Do switching costs make markets less competitive?’,
   Journal of Marketing Research 46, 435–445.

Dudley, L. (1972), ‘Learning and productivity changes in metal products’, American Eco-
    nomic Review 62(4), 662–669.

Ericson, R. & Pakes, A. (1995), ‘Markov-perfect industry dynamics: A framework for em-
     pirical work’, Review of Economic Studies 62, 53–82.

Evans, D. & Schmalensee, R. (2002), Some economic aspects of antitrust analysis in dynam-
    ically competitive industries, in A. Jaffe, J. Lerner & S. Stern, eds, ‘Innovation policy
    and the economy’, Vol. 2, NBER, Cambridge, pp. 1–49.

Farrell, J. & Klemperer, P. (2007), Coordination and lock-in: Competition with switching
     costs and network effects, in M. Armstrong & R. Porter, eds, ‘Handbook of Industrial
     Organization’, Vol. 3, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 1967–2072.

Gruber, H. (1992), ‘The learning curve in the production of semiconductor memory chips’,
    Applied Economics 24, 885–894.

Halaburda, H., Jullien, B. & Yehezkel, Y. (2016), Dynamic competition with network exter-
    nalities: Why history matters, Working paper, Toulouse School of Economics, Toulouse.

Harberger, A. (1954), ‘Monopoly and resource allocation’, American Economic Review
    44(2), 77–87.

Hatch, N. & Mowery, D. (1998), ‘Process innovation and learning by doing in semiconductor
    manufacturing’, Management Science 44(1), 1461–1477.


                                             50
Hirsch, W. (1952), ‘Progress functions of machine tool manufacturing’, Econometrica
     20(1), 81–82.

Hirschmann, W. (1964), ‘Profit from the learning curve’, Harvard Business Review
     42(1), 125–139.

Hopenhayn, H. (1992), ‘Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long-run equilibrium’, Economet-
    rica 60(5), 1127–1150.

Irwin, D. & Klenow, P. (1994), ‘Learning-by-doing spillovers in the semiconductor industry’,
     Journal of Political Economy 102(6), 1200–1227.

Jarmin, R. (1994), ‘Learning by doing and competition in the early rayon industry’, Rand
    Journal of Economics 25(3), 441–454.

Jorgensen, S. & Zaccour, G. (2004), Differential games in marketing, Kluwer Academic
    Publishers, Dordrecht.

Jovanovic, B. (1982), ‘Selection and the evolution of industry’, Econometrica 50(3), 649–670.

Jun, B. & Vives, X. (2004), ‘Strategic incentives in dynamic duopoly’, Journal of Economic
     Theory 116, 249–281.

Kilbridge, M. (1962), ‘A model for industrial learning costs’, Management Science 8(4), 516–
     527.

Koenker, R. & Perry, M. (1981), ‘Product differentiation, monopolistic competition, and
    public policy’, Bell Journal of Economics 12, 217–231.

Kulkarni, V. (1995), Modeling and analysis of stochastic systems, Chapman and Hall, Lon-
    don.

Lapham, B. & Ware, R. (1994), ‘Markov puppy dogs and related animals’, International
    Journal of Industrial Organization 12, 569–593.

Levy, F. (1965), ‘Adaptation in the production process’, Management Science 11(6), 136–
    154.

Lieberman, M. (1984), ‘The learning curve and pricing in the chemical processing industries’,
    Rand Journal of Economics 15(2), 213–228.

Maynard Smith, J. (1974), ‘Theory of games and the evolution of animal conflicts’, Journal
   of Theoretical Biology 47, 209–221.

Mermelstein, B., Nocke, V., Satterthwaite, M. & Whinston, M. (2014), Internal versus
   external growth in industries with scale economies: A computational model of optimal
   merger policy, Working paper, Northwestern University, Evanston.

Mitchell, M. & Skrzypacz, A. (2006), ‘Network effects and long-run market shares’, Economic
    Theory 29(3), 621–648.


                                             51
Pakes, A. & McGuire, P. (1994), ‘Computing Markov-perfect Nash equilibria: Numerical
    implications of a dynamic differentiated product model’, Rand Journal of Economics
    25(4), 555–589.

Pisano, G. (1994), ‘Knowledge, integration, and the locus of learning: An empirical analysis
    of process development’, Strategic Management Journal 15, 85–100.

Posner, R. (1975), ‘The social costs of monopoly and regulation’, Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 83(4), 807–828.

Preston, L. & Keachie, E. (1964), ‘Cost functions and progress functions: An integration’,
     American Economic Review 54(2), 100–107.

Rob, R. (1991), ‘Learning and capacity expansion under demand uncertainty’, Review of
    Economic Studies 58(4), 655–675.

Segal, I. & Whinston, M. (2007), ‘Antitrust in innovative industries’, American Economic
    Review 97(5), 1703–1730.

Shafer, S., Nembhard, D. & Uzumeri, M. (2001), ‘The effects of worker learning, forgetting,
    and heterogeneity on assembly line productivity’, Management Science 47(12), 1639–
    1653.

Simon, C. & Blume, L. (1994), Mathematics for economists, Norton, New York.

Thompson, P. (2001), ‘How much did the Liberty shipbuilders learn? New evidence for an
   old case study’, Journal of Political Economy 109(1), 103–137.

Thornton, R. & Thompson, P. (2001), ‘Learning from experience and learning from others:
    An exploration of learning and spillovers in wartime shipbuilding’, American Economic
    Review 91(5), 1350–1368.

Tirole, J. (1988), The theory of industrial organization, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Vettas, N. (1998), ‘On entry, exit, and coordination with mixed strategies’, European Eco-
    nomic Review 44(2), 1557–1576.

Wright, T. (1936), ‘Factors affecting the cost of airplanes’, Journal of Aeronautical Sciences
    3(4), 122–128.

Zimmerman, M. (1982), ‘Learning effects and the commercialization of new energy technolo-
   gies: The case of nuclear power’, Bell Journal of Economics 13(2), 297–310.




                                             52
