NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TWO GREAT TRADE COLLAPSES:
THE INTERWAR PERIOD & GREAT RECESSION COMPARED
Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
Working Paper 23825
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23825

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

Preliminary version of a paper prepared for IMF-BNM-IMFER Conference on Globalization in
the Aftermath of the Crisis and the IMF Economic Review. The research on which this paper is
based was in part funded by the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007- 2013) / ERC grant agreement no. 249546. The paper draws
on many collaborations, and I am extremely grateful to my co-authors: Miguel Almunia, Agustín
Bénétrix, Roberto Bonfatti, Alan de Bromhead, Barry Eichengreen, Alan Fernihough, Ronald
Findlay, William Hynes, David Jacks, Markus Lampe, Gisela Rua, and Jeffrey Williamson. The
usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Two Great Trade Collapses: The Interwar Period & Great Recession Compared
Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 23825
September 2017
JEL No. F13,F14,N70
ABSTRACT
In this paper, I offer some preliminary comparisons between the trade collapses of the Great
Depression and Great Recession. The commodity composition of the two trade collapses was
quite similar, but the latter collapse was much sharper due to the spread of manufacturing across
the globe during the intervening period. The increasing importance of manufacturing also meant
that the trade collapse was more geographically balanced in the later episode. Protectionism was
much more severe during the 1930s than after 2008, and in the UK case at least helped to skew
the direction of trade away from multilateralism and towards Empire. This had dangerous
political consequences.

Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
All Souls College
University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
and NBER
kevin.orourke@all-souls.ox.ac.uk

1. Introduction

Economic historians have always known that globalization is neither new nor
irreversible: the world economy has seen many waves of integration and
disintegration over the centuries. When globalization goes into reverse, this is
typically not because technologies are unlearned, although there are surely
exceptions to this, as there are to any rule. Rather, all that new technologies can do
is to define the limits of what is feasible. How close societies actually get to the
technological frontier depends on politics. When globalization unravels, this is
typically because some perturbation to the system has disturbed either existing
domestic political equilibria favoring openness, or the geopolitical system as a
whole. These perturbations can be long drawn out affairs – shifts in comparative
advantage, creating winners and losers, or growth differentials across nations,
upsetting the international balance of power – or they can be short and sharp, as in
the case of financial crises.
Southeast Asia is a particularly good location in which to reflect upon the
ebbs and flows of globalization over the course of the centuries. There have been
two traditional trade routes between East and West Eurasia.1 The first went
overland, from China, through the Takla Makan desert to Transoxiana, and from
there onto either Europe in the West, or India in the south. And the second went by
sea, in three stages: from China to Southeast Asia, from Southeast Asia to India, and
from India to Arabia. Chinese goods might be transshipped across the Isthmus of Kra,
or shipped through the Straits of Malacca or the Sunda Strait. As a general rule,
1

For a lengthy discussion of these, see Findlay and O’Rourke (2007).
1

trade by sea was cheaper and faster than overland trade, although the land route
flourished when geopolitical stability made it possible to travel safely across Central
Asia, notably during the pax Mongolica of the 13th and 14th centuries. An indication
of the scale of the trade flows comes from the famous Belitung shipwreck dating
from around 830 (Flecker, 2001). This contained large quantities of Chinese ceramics
and other trade goods (about 60,000 items in all) with designs indicating that many
of these had been produced specifically for the Middle Eastern market.
In a series of important publications (e.g. Reid, 1988 and 1993), Anthony Reid
has written about Southeast Asia's "Age of Commerce", stretching from some time
in the early 15th century to the middle of the 17th. Southeast Asian trade was given
a major boost by the Ming voyages of discovery, which took place between 1405 and
1433 under the naval leadership of Zheng He. These led to a dramatic increase in
Chinese imports of goods such as pepper and sandalwood, sufficient to have left a
trace in the European price record. As imports into the most important market of
the period, China, soared, the residual supply of spices available to the peripheral
European market fell sharply, leading to a sharp spike in prices (Figure 1).

Figure 1. English and Flemish real pepper prices, 1400 – 1500

Although the Ming voyages ceased, Southeast Asian trade continued to
expand for two centuries, in part due to the arrival of new traders, particularly from
Europe and Japan, and in part due to the upturn in global trade fuelled largely by
American silver. Thereafter, Southeast Asian trade went into sharp decline. While
there were several reasons for this, an important one was the establishment by the

2

Dutch East India Company, the VOC, of an effective hegemony in much of the region.
They were able to monopolize not just the trade in cloves, but the production as
well, with an immediate and striking impact on both the volume of exports, which
stagnated, and the export price, which collapsed (Figure 2 ). The Euro-Asian price
gap for cloves soared (Figure 3): despite the global reach of the great European
trading companies, in some cases they led to a dramatic disintegration of markets, as
measured by the gap between consumer and producer prices, with extremely
negative consequences for Southeast Asia. Globalization has not been unidirectional,
in this region or anywhere else in the world.

Figure 2. Southeast Asian clove exports and prices, 1500 – 1789

Figure 3. Clove price gaps, Amsterdam-Southeast Asia, 1580s-1880s

Since 2008, journalists, politicians, and in some cases economists who should
have known better, have woken up to the possibility that our own era's globalization
might also some day go into reverse. In a historical perspective, this would not be so
surprising – we have lived through an admittedly short, but very sharp global
economic crisis (which has not been particularly short on the periphery of the
Eurozone), superimposed upon a long run shift in comparative advantage that has
placed traditional manufacturing communities in the rich countries of the world
under considerable pressure. The political disasters of 2016 suggest that we should
take the risk seriously, although it is important to point out that, to date, there has

3

not been a major reversal of trade policy, despite the increasing number of
government interventions documented by Simon Evenett and colleagues.2
A comparison that is frequently made is with the 1930s, a canonical era of
deglobalization, although the interwar period is usually used primarily as a
bogeyman, rather than analyzed in any detail. In this paper, I want to offer some
preliminary comparisons between the trade collapses of the Great Depression and
Great Recession. What is similar between the two episodes, and what are the major
differences? Why was the later trade collapse so much sharper, and why was the
subsequent recovery more impressive? Why did the earlier episode lead to so much
more protectionism, and what was the impact of higher barriers to trade? And what
were the long run political implications of the 1930s collapse in trade?

2. Two great trade collapses: some basic facts and compositional issues

Panel A of Figure 4 plots indices of the volume of world trade during and after the
Great Depression of 1929 to 1933, and the Great Recession of 2008-9. Both series
are plotted relative to their values in the month when world industrial output hit its
pre-crisis peak: June 1929, and April 2008, respectively. As can be seen, the trade
collapse in the latter episode was much sharper than in the former. One year into
the Great Recession, in April 2009, the volume of world trade was 18% below its precrisis level, whereas world trade was "only" 8% lower in June 1930 than it had been a
year earlier. This was both striking and alarming, but also puzzling, given that a year
into the two crises, world industrial output had declined by very similar amounts
2

See http://www.globaltradealert.org See also Bown (2016).
4

(Figure 4, Panel B). Trying to explain this apparently greater elasticity of trade with
respect to output became a major focus of subsequent applied research, although
explicit comparisons were only rarely made between the Great Recession and the
earlier episode.3

Figure 4. Two great trade collapses and industrial depressions

Appealing to the emergence in recent decades of global value chains does
not, on its own, resolve the issue. If gross trade flows are higher relative to net flows
today than they were 80 years ago, this can explain a bigger absolute trade collapse,
but it cannot on its own explain a bigger percentage trade collapse, since the gross
flows enter into both the numerator and the denominator of this figure. However, if
imports of some categories of goods fall more than others during sharp recessions,
and if the categories that are particularly badly affected disproportionately involve
value chains, then you can indeed expect to see a large percentage decline in trade
(O’Rourke, 2009). It is not the value chains in themselves, but their interaction with
compositional effects, that can help to explain the very high elasticity of trade with
respect to output and income that was seen after 2008.
There has been a great deal of work exploring the composition of the Great
Recession’s trade collapse (e.g. Levchenko et al., 2010; Bricongne et al., 2012 ;
Gopinath et al., 2012 ). If those categories of expenditure that fall the most during
economic crises (investment and expenditure on consumer durables) are particularly

3

Exceptions include Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2009), Almunia et al. (2010), and
Eaton et al. (2011).
5

import-intensive, this can obviously help to explain the very sharp downturn in
trade. It turns out that these asymmetric falls in expenditure are very important in
explaining the 2008-9 trade collapse, although the existence not only of vertical
supply chains, but of inter industry linkages, complicates the analysis (Bems et al.,
2010, 2011, 2013; Bussière et al., 2013; Eaton et al., 2016).
But this still doesn't explain why the elasticity of trade with respect to output
was so much greater during the Great Recession than during the Great Depression.
After all, expenditure on capital equipment and consumer durables falls particularly
sharply during all economic crises. Were these expenditures less import-intensive
during the 1930s than today? If so, it should be the case that the commodity
composition of the two trade collapses differed greatly. Indeed, given that we are
talking about two economic episodes separated by eight decades, it might seem
strange if that were not the case.
What was the composition of the trade collapse during 2008-9? In a
particularly detailed study, Levchenko et al. (2010) divide US trade flows into 10
categories, depending on sector and end-use, and distinguishing between durable
and non-durable goods. These are: foods, feeds, and beverages; industrial supplies
and materials (both durable, and non-durable); petroleum and products; automotive
vehicles, engines, and parts; other consumer goods (both durable, and non-durable);
other capital goods (aircraft, computers, and other); and other goods. They find that
trade in automobiles declined very sharply, on both the export and import side; that
trade in industrial supplies was also particularly badly hit; that the value of
petroleum imports (there were no exports) fell more than any other category; and
that trade fell by much less in the food and consumer goods categories (especially

6

non-durable consumer goods). More generally, trade in goods fell by a lot more than
trade in services, while trade in durable goods fell by a lot more than trade in nondurables.4
What about the Great Depression? In on-going work with Alan de Bromhead,
Alan Fernihough, and Markus Lampe (de Bromhead et al., 2017a), I explore the
commodity composition of the 1929-1931 trade collapse in the United Kingdom. This
was roughly comparable to the 2008-9 trade collapse in the United States, in that
the UK maintained a generally free trade policy during the period. The collapse in
British imports thus reflected collapsing British import demand, just as was true in
the US during the later episode. We divide British imports and exports into the same
categories as used by Levchenko et al., excluding computers that were not relevant
during the earlier period. We then calculated the percentage declines in the value of
UK imports and exports for each of these nine categories during 1929-31, and
compared these with the corresponding US declines during 2008-9.
We find a striking, positive correlation between the commodity composition
of trade in both episodes: on the import side, there were particularly small declines
in imports of food and consumer goods, and particularly large declines in imports of
industrial supplies and automobiles. Exports of industrial supplies were particularly
badly hit in both episodes, while exports of consumer non-durables declined by a
comparatively small amount. The similarity between the two episodes is impressive,
especially for imports, and especially given that we are comparing the trade
experiences of two different countries separated by more than eight decades. While

4

See also Bricongne et al., 2012 and Gopinath et al.,2012.
7

it is too soon to generalize from such results, it seems as though similar expenditure
and compositional effects may have been at work during both episodes.
If the underlying economic forces during the two trade collapses were
similar, what explains the higher elasticity of trade with respect to output during the
later episode? The most plausible explanation rests on the changing structure of
international trade more generally, which in turn reflects changing patterns of
comparative advantage and growth. It is to these that I now turn.

3. The changing structure of international trade

The most obvious difference between the global economies of 1929 and 2008 is the
way in which modern manufacturing has spread across the globe in recent decades.
This process began in the late 19th century in Latin America and East Asia, but in
Southeast Asia only began in earnest in the 1960s, despite a precocious start in the
Philippines (O’Rourke and Williamson, eds., 2017). Manufacturing’s share of GDP
was well under 10% in Malaysia as late as 1960, and was only a little higher in
Indonesia. By the end of the century, rapid industrial growth had led to these shares
peaking at around 30% in those two countries, and at 35% in Thailand (Bassino and
Williamson, 2017).
Southeast Asia’s delayed industrial start was largely due to patterns of
comparative advantage: resource- and land-rich, and labor scarce, unskilled wages
were high there relative to in India or China, while colonial educational policies
meant that skilled labor was relatively scarce as well. Over time, population growth
lowered relative wages in the region, while independent governments invested in

8

education. ISI spurred some industrial growth, but small markets meant that it was
less effective than elsewhere in the periphery. Trade liberalization and FDI would
eventually play crucial roles in spurring further manufacturing and aggregate growth
in the region (ibid.).
As a result of developments like this all around the developing world, the
international division of labor that had developed in the 19th century, and still
applied in the 1930s, gradually started to unravel. Despite the early industrial growth
in China, Japan, and elsewhere mentioned earlier, it still made sense in 1950 to think
of the world economy as being divided into an industrialized North and a nonindustrialized South. In 1937, primary products accounted for 96% of merchandise
exports in Africa and Australasia, and 98% in Latin America (Yates, 1959, pp. 227-30).
As late as 1953 “developed economies” (excluding Japan) accounted for 90.6% of
world manufacturing output, slightly more than in 1913 (Bairoch, 1982, p. 304), and
for over 90% of the world’s manufactured exports (Yates 1959, p. 228).5 As late as
the mid-1960s, manufactures accounted for less than 10% of Southern exports to
the industrialized economies: North-South trade still largely consisted of an
exchange of Northern manufactures for Southern primary products.
All of this has changed beyond recognition. Thanks to industrialization in Asia
and elsewhere, a substantial majority of Southern exports to the North now consist
of manufactured goods. And as the world as a whole has industrialized and become
richer, a much greater share of world trade in general now involves manufactured
goods. In 1929, manufactures accounted for 44% of global merchandise trade; by
2007, this figure had increased to 70% (Almunia et al., 2010, p. 228). This matters for
5

The latter calculation excludes Soviet bloc countries.
9

the volatility of international trade, for the simple reason that manufacturing output
and trade is more volatile than primary production and primary products trade.
Between 1929 and 1932, world manufacturing output fell by 30%, while agricultural
primary production remained constant; world manufacturing trade fell by over 40%
between 1929 and 1933, while non-manufacturing trade fell by less than 7% (Figure
5). Similarly, world manufacturing output fell by 10% between 2008 and 2009, while
agricultural output actually rose; world manufacturing trade fell by 15% between
2008 and 2009, as compared with declines of just 2% and 5% for agricultural
products and fuels and minerals, respectively (Figure 6).

Figure 5. World output and trade during the Great Depression

Figure 6. World output and trade during the Great Recession

Clearly, the fact that the world economy is now more heavily concentrated in
volatile manufacturing can help to explain why trade fell more sharply during the
Great Recession than in the first year of the Great Depression. Indeed, when the
focus is limited to manufacturing trade alone, the declines experienced during 192930 and 2008-9 were identical (15% in both cases: Figure 7, Panel A). The difference is
that manufacturing trade was a minority of total trade in the earlier episode, and a
majority in the later one. Panel B of Figure 7 takes the sectoral trade indices in Figure
5, Panel B, and calculates two weighted averages of these. The first, which is the
series labeled “Great Depression”, uses 1929 weights for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing (44% and 56% respectively), and yields a one-year decline in trade

10

between 1929 and 1930 of 6%, close to the 7.5% decline actually experienced during
the Great Depression. The second, labeled “Great Depression with Great Recession
weights”, uses 2007 weights (70% and 30%), and produces a one-year decline of
10%, not so far from the 12% decline experienced during the Great Recession. It
seems as though compositional effects can plausibly explain why trade fell so much
more violently during the Great Recession than it had done during the first year of
the Great Depression, and they may have also played some role in the relatively
rapid recovery of trade from 2009 onwards.

Figure 7. The changing composition of world trade 1929-2007 and the Great Trade
Collapse

4. Regional impacts

The spread of manufacturing across the world also had implications for the regional
composition of the Great Trade Collapse of 2008-9, as compared with the trade
collapse of the interwar period. The volume of exports fell in an almost identical
manner in both advanced and emerging economies after 2008, although this
average trend for the emerging economies disguises some regional variation, with
exports from Africa and the Middle East, and especially Latin America, falling less
then elsewhere (Figure 8). In sharp contrast, while the volume of exports from
Europe, including the USSR, fell by 31.5% between 1929 and 1932, and while they
fell by 41.5% from North America during the same period, they fell by only 4.5%
from the rest of the world. On the other hand, the value of exports from the various

11

regions of the world fell by quite similar amounts over the same period (Findlay and
O'Rourke 2007, p. 450).

Figure 8. Regional export volumes during and after the Great Recession

The contrast between these interwar value and volume figures reflects the
catastrophic deterioration in the developing world's terms of trade during the Great
Depression. Its output may not have declined to any great extent, but falling export
prices led to a depression in the developing world anyway. To take just two
examples: between 1929 and 1931, the gold price of rubber fell by an astonishing
84% in Malaysia, while the price of tea fell by 62% (Findlay and O'Rourke 2007, p.
449).
This terms of trade collapse across the developing world had a variety of
political implications. In Latin America, declining export earnings made it increasingly
difficult to service countries' international debt obligations, and Eichengreen and
Portes (1986) find that the size of the terms of trade shock experienced by individual
countries helps to predict whether or not they defaulted on those debts. Elsewhere,
plantation economies suffered greatly, despite the efforts of colonial governments
to protect plantation owners. Anthony Reid (2015, p. 320) considers this to have
been the beginning of a necessary and healthy rebalancing of Southeast Asian
economies, away from an artificial dependence on cash crop exports, organized by
the colonizers, towards a more natural situation in which Asian peasants and
manufacturers, and intra-Asian trade flows, played a greater role.

12

In some countries, however, it was the peasants themselves who produced
the cash crops for export whose prices were now plummeting, and there the political
consequences of falling commodity prices were often severe – especially when
colonial administrators insisted on continuing payment of taxes, particularly poll
taxes. In Burma, a widespread peasant revolt broke out in December 1930, and was
only suppressed after two years of fighting, while Vietnam also saw a peasant revolt
at the same time. In Africa, there was political unrest in Nigeria, rioting in Togo, and
outright rebellion in the Belgian Congo. In this way, the terms of trade shock
associated with the 1930s trade collapse helped to pave the way for post-1945
nationalist movements that would eventually sweep away the European empires
that still dominated vast areas of the world in the 1930s.
The newly independent countries that would emerge as a result of
decolonization in most cases pursued import substitution policies, at least initially.
The interwar period helped to promote post-war protectionism in this and many
other ways. And where countries had, in the 1930s, the political independence
required in order to make their own choices about trade policy, they typically used
that independence to erect a variety of trade barriers. It is to the rise of interwar
protection that I now turn.

5. Interwar trade policy: causes

Figure 9 compares the evolution of tariffs during the Great Depression and Great
Recession. In the former case, the series is the unweighted average of the average
tariff rate in 32 countries, provided by Clemens and Williamson (2004). The

13

individual country series are constructed by dividing import duties by the value of
imports, and are thus trade-weighted average tariffs. In the latter case, the series are
the figures provided by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators, for the
world as a whole, of the simple mean of the applied tariff rates within given product
categories. Since the interwar data are based on weighted average tariffs, while the
Great Recession data are based on unweighted averages, the series are not strictly
comparable. Given that weighted average tariffs tend to be downward biased (since
goods with higher tariffs are accorded lower weights) the comparison probably
understates the relative height of average tariffs during the earlier episode
(Anderson and Neary, 2005).

Figure 9. Average tariffs worldwide during and after the Great Depression and
Great Recession

As can be seen, there was no general increase in tariffs following the Great
Trade Collapse of 2008-9. Average tariffs if anything fell slightly, remaining within a
band of between 6 and 7%. In sharp contrast, interwar average tariffs rose from
14.5% in 1928 to over 22.5% in 1932. This greatly understates the increase in
interwar protection, since tariffs were far from being the only protectionist policy
device used during the period – and they were certainly not the most restrictive. The
1930s saw the widespread introduction of quotas and other quantitative restrictions
on trade, including the widespread adoption of exchange controls. Multiple
exchange rates were also used in many cases, biased against imports. Even the
United Kingdom, the traditional champion of free trade, switched towards a

14

protectionist policy in late 1931, following a strong showing by the Conservative
party in the general election which took place in October of that year. 6Despite the
increase in protectionist interventions since 2008 documented by Global Trade Alert,
the recent crisis has clearly seen nothing even remotely comparable to the
worldwide increase in protection of the 1930s.
Why were the two experiences so different? Effective post-war international
institutions, preventing backsliding on previous agreements to liberalize trade, are
surely an important part of the explanation. However, it should be remembered that
the interwar period also had an international institution, the League of Nations,
which attempted to liberalize trade during the period. The fact that this institution
proved ineffective was surely in large part endogenous to other political forces
operating both within countries and between them. Economic historians have
tended to emphasize the deeper causes of the failure of interwar economic
cooperation in general, and the failure to prevent the wholesale erection of tariff
barriers in particular. To some extent, these deeper causes had to do with the
underlying sources of political tension during the period, mostly related to the
aftermath of World War I. But they also had to do with flawed macroeconomic
policies and institutions.
No serious economic historian believes that interwar protection caused the
Great Depression, but the two phenomena were linked in the sense that they
shared, to a large extent, a common cause, namely the gold standard (Temin, 1989;
Eichengreen, 1992). In combination with the open international capital markets of

6

The Conservatives were the traditional protectionist party in Britain: to that extent,
today’s Tory Brexiteers are merely reverting to type.
15

the 1920s, the gold standard implied that negative monetary shocks were rapidly
generalized, as in the case of the infamous 1928 decision to raise interest rates in
the United States. Worse, when countries as a result found themselves in recession,
they had no macroeconomic policy instruments with which to respond. Staying on
gold ruled out activist monetary policy, while countries did not feel able to use
activist fiscal policy either. Indeed, their commitment to fiscal discipline meant that
in many cases they engaged in pro-cyclical austerity, in an effort to keep budget
deficits under control. And in many cases, to be fair, it seemed as though they had
little alternative, as new lending dried up on international capital markets. It was
only once countries had shaken off the "golden fetters" of the gold standard, and
regained macroeconomic policy-making independence, that they started to recover
– the United Kingdom in 1931, the United States and Germany in 1933, and the last
holdouts in the so-called Gold Bloc as late as 1935 or even 1936.
As Eichengreen and Irwin (2010) argue, the gold standard also played a key
role in promoting the protectionism of the interwar period. In part, this was simply
because anything that prolonged the depression necessarily heightened demands
for protection from import competition. And in part, the gold standard mattered for
protection because when governments were unable to combat the depression with
either fiscal or monetary policy, they inevitably turned, eventually, to those policy
instruments that were at their disposal, notably tariffs, quotas, and in many cases,
exchange controls.
But the gold standard also mattered for protection because of the way in
which it was dismantled. As Eichengreen and Irwin point out, the first best solution
would have been for all currencies to devalue against gold simultaneously. This is not

16

what happened – instead, some devalued earlier than others, in the process stealing
a competitive march on their rivals. Countries remaining on gold found themselves
with overvalued currencies, and the resulting balance of payments difficulties that
they faced, exacerbated by the fact that international borrowing was no longer
possible, led them to protect their domestic markets. As contemporary
commentators pointed out, resort to protection was greatest in those countries
staying on gold the longest: an irony, given that adherence to gold was supposed to
signal a commitment to a rules-based international economic order. And it was often
when countries finally decided to abandon gold that they started to pursue trade
liberalization. Thus, the United States left gold in 1933, and the following year
enacted the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, which Douglas Irwin (1998a)
considers to be the moment when the US pivoted towards its post-war role as
defender-in-chief of the multilateral international trading system.
Seen from this perspective, the big difference between the trade collapses of
the Great Recession and Great Depression was the macroeconomic responses to the
two crises. By 2009, central banks and governments around the world were engaging
in monetary, and in some cases, fiscal, stimulus. While many commentators have
since then decried the lack of ambition shown by governments when it came to fiscal
stimulus, there can be no doubt that the macroeconomic response to the Great
Recession was incomparably superior to the policies pursued during the 1930s. This
obviously explains why the Great Trade Collapse of 2008-9 was so short lived in
comparison with the trade collapse of 1929-33, but it also explains why there was so
much less protection during the later crisis than was experienced during the earlier
one.

17

6. Interwar trade policy: consequences

What was the impact of interwar protectionism? If it was effective, then it
should have disintegrated international commodity markets, driving wedges
between producer prices in exporting countries and consumer prices in importing
countries. Economic historians have spent considerable energy trying to document
the evolution of these international price gaps in previous periods, as a way of
gauging long-run trends in globalization. Comparatively little work has been done
exploring the impact of interwar protection on global markets (and I am unaware of
any work attempting to do the same for the period since the Great Recession,
perhaps because there is no reason to believe that international commodity markets
have in fact become less well integrated). However, what work has been done for
the interwar period suggests that protection did impede international commodity
market integration.
When using prices in order to accurately measure trends in commodity
market integration, or disintegration, it is important to compare like with like. Hynes
et al. (2012) therefore use price data extracted from the International Yearbook of
Agricultural Statistics, published annually by the International Institute of
Agriculture, the forerunner of the FAO. The yearbooks contained 374 weekly price
series for a great variety of commodities and locations. From these price series, we
were able to extract 27 pairs giving price quotations for identical commodities in two
different cities – for example, "Danish, creamery for export" butter quoted in both

18

Copenhagen and London, or "No. 2 winter, American" wheat quoted in both Chicago
and Liverpool.
Armed with these pairs of price series, we were able to calculate commodity
and city-pair specific price gaps, annually. We did so in two ways. First, we estimated
threshold auto-regressions (TARs), annually, allowing us to calculate the trade costs
(as a percentage of destination prices) above which price gaps have to rise before
arbitrage takes place. Second, we averaged the weekly prices to get annual averages,
and directly calculated the resulting percentage price gaps. Both methods tell a
consistent story. International price gaps had increased sharply during World War I,
but fell thereafter as the international economy gradually returned to normal. On
average, for those commodities for which city-pair price data were available for
1913, the TAR methodology indicated that trade costs were 60% higher in 1922 than
they had been before the war. By 1929, they were only 42% higher, but in 1933 they
were 159% higher. As late as 1938, markets were still much less well integrated than
they had been in 1929: average trade costs were 168% higher than they had been in
1913. These findings are consistent with the increase in average trade costs between
1929 and 1933 estimated by Jacks et al. (2011), who follow Head and Ries (2001) and
use gravity techniques and data on bilateral aggregate trade flows.
These higher percentage trade costs were more the result of changes in the
numerator (trade costs) than in the denominator (prices). Higher freight rates were
not to blame, since, contra Estevadeordal et al. (2003), they fell in real terms
between 1925-29 and 1930-34. Trade policy seems like a much more plausible
candidate: comparisons between price gaps involving the UK and countries inside
the Empire such as Canada (which faced no agricultural tariffs when exporting to the

19

UK) and countries outside, such as Argentina, which did face agricultural tariffs when
exporting to Britain, clearly indicate that trade policy was an important factor driving
higher trade costs during this period. However, there is also anecdotal evidence
suggesting that scarce credit and uncertainty may have been increasing trade costs
during the period, even between countries such as Canada and the UK.
It seems as though commodity markets disintegrated during the 1930s. What
were the implications of interwar protectionism for trade flows? The current
consensus is probably that, while protectionism depressed trade flows overall, its
impact was minor relative to the enormous collapse of output and incomes
experienced during the period.7 In an early contribution, Irwin (1988b) used partial
equilibrium techniques (and econometrically estimated elasticities), and found that
even in the absence of any change in tariff rates (but accounting for the income
declines of the period), US imports would have declined by 31.9% between 1930:II
and 1932:III, as compared with the 41.2% reduction that actually took place. Even in
the absence of the Smoot-Hawley revisions to tariff schedules (but accounting for
the impact of income declines and deflation), US imports would have fallen by 38.3%
over the period, or by almost as much as actually occurred. The finding is therefore
that trade declines were primarily due to falling income, with deflation also playing
an important role (by raising the ad valorem equivalent of specific tariffs), and
Smoot-Hawley being a relatively unimportant player in the process.8

7

Madsen (2001) is an exception.

8

Estevadeordal, Frantz and Taylor (2003) estimate a gravity trade model using
pooled data for 1913, 1928 and 1938. They find large negative coefficients on
average tariffs, although these are often statistically insignificant at conventional
levels. They also find that world trade could have been about 50% higher in the
20

Perhaps it is not so surprising that protection has emerged in the cliometric
literature as a relatively minor contributor to the world trade collapse of 1929-33 –
world income and output fell by so much during this period that it can plausibly
account for the majority of declining trade, leaving relatively little for rising trade
barriers to explain. But the quantitative literature has also tended to downplay the
impact of trade policy on a second striking feature of world trade during this period
– its decreasingly multilateral nature.
Folke Hilgert wrote particularly frequently on the subject. As early as 1935,
he noted that the traditional multilateral payments system, which had been
established in the nineteenth century, had broken down (Hilgerdt, 1935). Rapidly
industrializing economies in Continental Europe and the United States traditionally
paid for their increasing imports of food and raw materials by running an export
surplus in manufacturing goods vis-à-vis the UK. The UK, in its turn, financed this
manufacturing deficit in large part with the income it made on its enormous
overseas investments, but also by means of a manufacturing export surplus to its
colonial empire. Debtor countries financed their debts by exporting primary
products, both to Britain itself, and to Continental Europe and North America.
All this changed dramatically during the 1930s: “We may characterize the
change that occurred as a disintegration of world trade: while previously
international settlement took place within a world-wide network of multilateral
1930s than it actually was if world tariffs had stayed at their 1913 levels. However,
their counterfactual does not address the issue of what the impact was of the
increase in protection after 1929 on world trade between 1929 and 1932. Similarly,
Jacks et al. (2011) do not address the issue of what caused the trade collapse of
1929-33, although they find that for the entire 1921-39 period, rising trade costs
fully offset the impact of GDP growth on world trade flows.

21

transactions, there was in the ‘thirties a tendency to achieve settlement either in
bilateral exchange between two countries, or within the limited range of countries
attached to each other by political or other ties” (League of Nations, 1942, pp. 90-1;
cited in Eichengreen and Irwin 1995, p. 1). Table 1 gives the League of Nation's data
on the share of major countries' exports going to, or imports coming from, their
empires or spheres of influence. As can be seen, these shares increased
systematically after 1929. The increase occurred during the Depression years in the
cases of Britain, France, the United States, and Portugal; it occurred after 1932 in the
cases of Germany, Italy, and Japan. The share of Italian exports going to her colonies
and Ethiopia rose from 2 to 23% between 1929 and 1938, while the share of German
exports going to southeast Europe rose from 5 to 13%, and the share of Japanese
exports going to Korea and Taiwan rose from 17 to 33%. There were also large
increases in imperial trade shares in both Britain and France.

Table 1. The share of formal and informal empire trade, 1929-1938

In a pioneering paper, Eichengreen and Irwin (1995) downplay the role of
trade blocs in creating the trade balkanization of the period. Using the League of
Nation’s data on bilateral trade, they find that pairs of countries that both belonged
to the British Commonwealth traded more heavily with each other in the 1930s.
However, they also find that this effect was already present in 1928, before Britain
moved to protection, and before the 1932 Ottawa agreements set in place
preferential trade policies within the Empire. They conclude that “the tendency
toward regionalisation commonly ascribed to the formation of trade and currency

22

blocs was already evident prior to the regional policy initiatives of the 1930s; to a
considerable extent it is attributable to ongoing historical forces such as commercial
and financial linkages between countries forged over many years.” Subsequent
literature (Wolf and Ritschl 2011, Gowa and Hicks 2013), also using data on
aggregate trade, has come to similar conclusions, although Gowa and Hicks (2013)
find that trade policy may have boosted trade between the UK and her Dominions in
a hub and spoke manner (though not between the Dominions).
In a recent paper, co-authored with Alan de Bromhead, Alan Fernihough, and
Markus Lampe, I revisit the question of whether trade policy was responsible for the
shift towards intra-imperial trade, but adopt an entirely different empirical approach
in tackling the issue (de Bromhead et al. 2017b). Rather than exploring the
relationship between bilateral aggregate trade flows, on the one hand, and joint
membership of an imperial bloc, on the other, we explore in granular detail the
changing trade policies pursued by the United Kingdom, and ask whether these can
help to explain the increasing share of UK imports coming from the Empire. To this
end, we construct a database of UK imports of 258 product categories
(commodities), from 42 countries, between 1924 and 1938. We also calculate
commodity and country-specific tariff rates, and code a series of dummy variables
indicating whether quantitative restrictions of various kinds applied to imports of
particular commodities from particular countries in particular years. This allows us to
compute elasticities of substitution between varieties of the same good coming from
different countries (for example, wheat coming from France and Canada).
We then plug those elasticities into a simple model of the UK economy, and
calculate counterfactual import flows, for each commodity and trading partner,

23

assuming that the shift to protection in 1931 had not taken place (that is, holding the
structure of protection fixed at its 1930 level in subsequent years). Having done this,
we can calculate counterfactual Imperial shares of UK imports; by comparing these
counterfactual shares with the actual shares, we obtain estimates of the impact of
protection on the share of the British Empire in the UK’s imports.
That impact was large. If trade policy had remained frozen at its 1930 level,
the Empire would have accounted for between 30% and 32% of UK imports in 1935,
whereas in fact it accounted for 39%. On a conservative estimate, trade policy
accounted for 70% of the shift between 1930 and 1933, and 60% of the shift
between 1930 and either 1934 or 1935. Discriminatory trade policy may not have
been the major factor reducing trade flows during this period, but it had a major
impact on the direction of those flows.
A trade theorist, impressed by the extent to which imports from some parts
of the world were able to substitute for imports from elsewhere, might conclude
that the welfare impact of interwar trade policies was not that great – at least, if it
turns out that the results obtained for Britain can be generalized. But that would be
to miss the political context of the period, and the real significance of these
discriminatory trade policies, and the formation of imperial or quasi-imperial trade
blocs. Contemporaries and subsequent historians, looking back at the experience of
the interwar period, were in little doubt that the move away from multilateralism
was one of the most destructive and dangerous features of the interwar economy. It
obviously reflected the growing political tensions of the period, but observers felt
that it also contributed to them. Writing in 1941, J.B. Condliffe wrote that "it is now
so obvious as to hardly need statement that bilateral trade took on aggressive and

24

destructive aspects as international rivalries were sharpened in the era of what is
now known as pre-belligerancy" (Condliffe, 1941, p. 287).
Bilateral trade could be particularly worrying when countries were heavily
dependent on imported raw materials, since it inevitably led to concerns in some
cases about future access to such items. In 1935, Hilgerdt wrote that "As bilateralism
particularly renders the supply of raw materials to certain countries difficult, it
threatens to lead to an intensified fight for influence upon (or the domination of) the
undeveloped countries, and thereby to political controversies, which may adversely
affect all forms of peaceful collaboration between nations” (Hilgerdt, 1935, p. 188).
In particular, countries which financed their imports of raw materials from the
tropics, or “regions of recent settlement”, by exporting manufactured goods to the
UK and other rich countries, might find themselves facing "the problem of
commercial access to raw materials which overshadowed commercial and political
relations during the thirties" (Hilgerdt 1943, p. 404). Efficient specialization required
multilateral trade; "Failing this, there will always be a strong incentive for each
country to increase the efficiency of its economy by including foreign areas under its
domination. To ascertain the functioning of the multilateral trading system is
therefore not only an economic task, it is also an object of general policy, as it
reduces tensions of the kind that are instrumental in bringing about war" (ibid, p.
405).
In a recent paper co-authored with Roberto Bonfatti (Bonfatti and O'Rourke,
forthcoming), I develop a model that helps to elucidate the ways in which such
tensions might indeed bring about war. We consider a world in which a follower is
catching up on an established leader, and in which the follower cannot credibly pre-

25

commit to not use its greater power in the future. In this type of model, the typical
prediction is that the leader may therefore pre-emptively attack the follower, locking
in the benefits of its existing strong position before it is too late. However, it was
Japan that attacked the United States in 1941, not vice versa. In order to explain this
and various other cases, we introduce two new assumptions into the standard
model. First, we assume that the follower needs to import increasing amounts of
raw materials from the rest of the world, as it undergoes structural change; and
second, we assume that the leader, as the established hegemon, may be able to
blockade the follower’s trade.
The established leader may well be losing out to the catching-up follower in
terms of potential military power. However, industrial catching up is a double-edged
sword for the follower – while it makes its military apparatus potentially more
powerful, rapid growth and structural change also makes it more dependent on
imported raw materials. If the leader has the capacity to blockade these imports in
case of war, the follower may actually become militarily weaker, rather than
stronger, over time. In this case, it may be the follower that launches a pre-emptive
war on the leader, and not the other way around. The follower may also decide to
attack resource-rich peripheral areas in an attempt to become more self-sufficient,
or entirely self-sufficient, in raw materials, even if by doing so it runs the risk that the
leader will respond by declaring war on it. World War II obviously had many different
causes, but equally obviously a desire to achieve strategic self-sufficiency helps to
explain Japan's invasions of Manchuria, China, and Southeast Asia, as well as
Germany's invasions of Poland, and, especially, the Soviet Union (Barnhart 1987,
Tooze 2006). The breakdown of the multilateral trading system cannot explain Hitler,

26

or the outbreak of World War II, but it was surely one factor among several making
the world a much more dangerous place during the 1930s.

7. A final thought

Let me end where I began, in Southeast Asia, at the heart of the old sea
routes linking East and West. One of the most obvious features of Southeast Asian
geography is the natural bottlenecks or choke points through which trade has to
pass on its way in either direction: in particular the Malacca Straits, but also the
Isthmus of Kra and the Sunda Straits. Whatever power was in control of these
bottlenecks could potentially earn lucrative rents, based on taxing the trade passing
through them. Between the seventh and eleventh centuries, a state known as
Srivijaya, based in Palembang in south-eastern Sumatra, established a prosperous
and powerful trading empire based on control of the straits. A raid in 1025 by the
Chola dynasty of southern India ended Srivijayan hegemony, but the strategic
importance of the straits never diminished. A Portuguese apothecary named Tomé
Pires stayed in Malacca between 1512 in 1515, shortly after the Portuguese
conquered it. In his Suma Oriental, written during his stay there, he wrote
enthusiastically that "the Lord of Melaka has his hand on the throat of Venice" –
since by controlling the straits, Portugal could choke off the supply of Southeast
Asian spices going to her Venetian rival. Half a millennium later, the China Youth

27

Daily wrote that "It is no exaggeration to say that whoever controls the Strait of
Malacca will also have a stranglehold on the energy route of China".9
If the experience of the 1930s trade collapse is anything to go by,
discriminatory protection distorting the pattern of trade can be a very dangerous
thing. If the very first article of the GATT prohibited discriminatory trade policies, this
was for a good reason. Geography means that we will always live in a world in which
some countries are dependent on imported food and raw materials, sometimes
uncomfortably so. There will always be strategic vulnerabilities facing some states,
and geographical chokepoints to exacerbate these. Despite some protectionist
backsliding, the rule of law has generally held since 2008. Maintaining a rules-based,
multilateral, international trading system will be crucial going forward, not just on
economic grounds, but in order to keep the peace.

9

China Youth Daily, June 15, 2004.
28

References

Almunia, Miguel, Agustín Bénétrix, Barry Eichengreen, Kevin H. O’Rourke, Gisela Rua.
2010. "From Great Depression to Great Credit Crisis: similarities, differences and
lessons." Economic Policy Vol. 25 No. 62, pp. 219-265.

Anderson, James E., J. Peter Neary. 2005. Measuring the restrictiveness of
international trade policy. Cambridge, Mass. ; London: MIT Press.

Bairoch, Paul. 1982. "International industrialization levels from 1750 to 1980."
Journal of European Economic History Vol. 11 No. 2, pp. 269-331.

Barnhart, Michael A. 1987. Japan prepares for total war : the search for economic
security, 1919-1941. Ithaca ; London: Cornell University Press.

Bassino, Jean-Pascal , Jeffrey Gale Williamson. 2017. "From Commodity Booms to
Economic Miracles: Why Southeast Asian Industry Lagged Behind." Kevin Hjortshøj
O'Rourke and Jeffrey Gale Williamson, eds. The Spread of Modern Industry to the
Periphery since 1871. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, Kei-Mu Yi. 2010. "Demand Spillovers and the
Collapse of Trade in the Global Recession." IMF Economic Review Vol. 58 No. 2, pp.
295-326.

29

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, Kei-Mu Yi. 2011. "Vertical Linkages and the
Collapse of Global Trade." The American Economic Review Vol. 101 No. 3, pp. 308312.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C Johnson, Kei-Mu Yi. 2013. "The great trade collapse."
Annual Review of Economics Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 375-400.

Bonfatti, Roberto, Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. 2017. "Growth, Import Dependence,
and War." Economic Journal Vol. forthcoming.

Bown, Chad P. 2016. "Global Antidumping Database." The World Bank [available at
http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/gad/ ], June. [First version published in 2005].

Bricongne, Jean-Charles, Lionel Fontagné, Guillaume Gaulier, Daria Taglioni, Vincent
Vicard. 2012. "Firms and the global crisis: French exports in the turmoil." Journal of
International Economics Vol. 87 No. 1, pp. 134-146.

Bulbeck, David, Anthony Reid, Lay Cheng Tan, Yiqi Wu. 1998. Southeast Asian exports
since the 14th century : cloves, pepper, coffee, and sugar. Leiden: KITLV.

Bussière, Matthieu, Giovanni Callegari, Fabio Ghironi, Giulia Sestieri, Norihiko
Yamano. 2013. "Estimating Trade Elasticities: Demand Composition and the Trade
Collapse of 2008-2009." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics Vol. 5 No. 3,
pp. 118-151.

30

Clemens, Michael A., Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2004. "Why did the Tariff–Growth
Correlation Change after 1950?" Journal of Economic Growth Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 5-46.

Condliffe, J. B. 1941. The reconstruction of world trade : a survey of international
economic relations. London: George Allen & Unwin.

de Bromhead, Alan , Alan Fernihough, Markus Lampe, Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke.
2017a. "The anatomy of a trade collapse: The UK, 1929-33." Paper presented at
conference in honor of Tim Hatton, University of Essex, 26-7 June, 2017.

de Bromhead, Alan , Alan Fernihough, Markus Lampe, Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke.
2017. "When Britain turned inward: Protection and the shift towards Empire in
interwar Britain." Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper Vol. 11835.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, John Romalis. 2011. "Trade and the
Global Recession." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series Vol.
No. 16666.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, John Romalis. 2016. "Trade and the
Global Recession." American Economic Review Vol. 106 No. 11, pp. 3401-38.

Eichengreen, Barry J. 1992. Golden fetters : the gold standard and the Great
Depression, 1919-1939. New York ; Oxford: Oxford University Press.

31

Eichengreen, Barry, Douglas A. Irwin. 1995. "Trade blocs, currency blocs and the
reorientation of world trade in the 1930s." Journal of International Economics Vol. 38
No. 1–2, pp. 1-24.

Eichengreen, Barry, Douglas A. Irwin. 2010. "The Slide to Protectionism in the Great
Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?" The Journal of Economic History Vol. 70 No.
4, pp. 871-897.

Eichengreen, Barry, Kevin Hjortshøj O’Rourke. 2009. "A tale of two depressions."
VoxEU.org.

Eichengreen, Barry, Richard Portes. 1986. "Debt and default in the 1930s." European
Economic Review Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 599-640.

Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, Alan M. Taylor. 2003. "The Rise and Fall of
World Trade, 1870-1939." The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 118 No. 2, pp.
359-407.

Findlay, Ronald, Kevin H. O'Rourke. 2007. Power and plenty : trade, war, and the
world economy in the second millennium. Princeton, N.J. ; Woodstock, Oxfordshire
England: Princeton University Press.

32

Flecker, Michael. 2001. "A ninth-century AD Arab or Indian shipwreck in Indonesia:
First evidence for direct trade with China." World Archaeology Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 335354.

Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, Brent Neiman. 2012. "Trade Prices and the Global
Trade Collapse of 2008–09." IMF Economic Review Vol. 60 No. 3, pp. 303-328.
Gowa, Joanne, Raymond Hicks. 2013. "Politics, Institutions, and Trade: Lessons of the
Interwar Era." International Organization Vol. 67 No. 03, pp. 439-467.

Head, Keith, John Ries. 2001. "Increasing Returns versus National Product
Differentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade." The
American Economic Review Vol. 91 No. 4, pp. 858-876.

Hilgerdt, Folke. 1935. "The Approach to Bilateralism - A Change in the Structure of
World Trade." Index Vol. X No. 8, pp. 175-188.

Hilgerdt, Folke. 1943. "The Case for Multilateral Trade." The American Economic
Review Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 393-407.

Hynes, William, David S. Jacks, Kevin H. O'Rourke. 2012. "Commodity market
disintegration in the interwar period." European Review of Economic History Vol. 16
No. 2, pp. 119-143.

33

Irwin, Douglas A. . 1998a. "From Smoot-Hawley to Reciprocal Trade Agreements:
Changing the Course of U.S. Trade Policy in the 1930s." Michael D. Bordo , Claudia
Goldin and Eugene N. White eds. The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and
the American Economy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Irwin, Douglas A. 1998b. "The Smoot-Hawley Tariff: A Quantitative Assessment."
Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 80 No. 2, pp. 326-334.

Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner, Dennis Novy. 2011. "Trade booms, trade
busts, and trade costs." Journal of International Economics Vol. 83 No. 2, pp. 185201.

Nations, League of. 1939. Review of World Trade 1938. Geneva: League of Nations.

League of Nations. 1942. The network of world trade; a companion volume to
"Europe's trade.". Geneva: League of Nations.

Levchenko, Andrei A., Logan T. Lewis, Linda L. Tesar. 2010. "The Collapse of
International Trade during the 2008-09 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun." IMF
Economic Review Vol. 58 No. 2, pp. 214-253.

Madsen, Jakob B. 2001. "Trade Barriers and the Collapse of World Trade during the
Great Depression." Southern Economic Journal Vol. 67 No. 4, pp. 848-868.

34

O’Rourke, Kevin Hjortshøj, 2009. “Collapsing trade in a Barbie world”.
http://www.irisheconomy.ie/index.php/2009/06/18/collapsing-trade- in-a-barbieworld/

O'Rourke, Kevin H., Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. "When did globalisation begin?"
European Review of Economic History Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 23-50.

O'Rourke, Kevin H., Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2009. "Did Vasco da Gama matter for
European markets?" Economic History Review Vol. 62 No. 3, pp. 655-684.

O'Rourke, Kevin Hjortshøj, Jeffrey Gale Williamson. 2017. "The spread of modern
industry to the periphery since 1871." Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Reid, Anthony. 1988 and 1993 (2 volumes) . Southeast Asia in the age of commerce,
1450-1680. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Reid, Anthony. 2015. "A history of Southeast Asia : critical crossroads." Chichester:
John Wiley & Sons,.

Temin, Peter. 1989. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.

35

Tooze, J. Adam. 2006. The wages of destruction : the making and breaking of the
Nazi economy. London: Allen Lane.

Wolf, Nikolaus, Albrecht O. Ritschl. 2011. "Endogeneity of Currency Areas and Trade
Blocs: Evidence from a Natural Experiment." Kyklos Vol. 64 No. 2, pp. 291-312.

Yates, P. Lamartine. 1959. Forty years of foreign trade : a statistical handbook with
special reference to primary products and under-developed countries. London: Allen
& Unwin.

36

Share of
British Commonwealth, colonies, protectorates,
etc.
Phillippines
French colonies, protectorates and mandated
territories
Belgian Congo
Netherlands overseas territories
Italian colonies and Ethiopia
Portuguese overseas territories
Korea and Formosa
Kwantung
Manchuria
Rest of China
Total Japanese sphere of influence
Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary, Romania, Turkey,
Yugoslavia
Latin America
Total German sphere of influence

Source: League of Nations (1939, pp. 34-5).

Table 1. The share of formal and informal empire trade, 1929-1938

Germany

Belgium
Netherlands
Italy
Portugal
Japan

United States
France

Trade of
United Kingdom

20.9
3.8
5
1.1
10.4
26.2
4
2.7
4
36.9

30.2
2.9
12
3.9
5.5
1.5
7.9
12.3
6
1.9
5.8
26
5.5
11.2
16.7

36.4
6.1

1929

4.5
12.2
16.7

In imports
1932

12
15.6
27.6

25.8
8.3
8.8
1.8
10.2
30
1.6
9
4.4
45

41.9
4.8

1938

5
7.8
12.8

18.8
2.6
9.4
2.1
12.7
16.8
4.8
2.5
10.9
35

44.4
1.6

1929

3.9
4.3
8.2

31.5
1.3
5.9
3.6
13.9
21.6
6.8
1.5
7.3
37.2

45.4
2.8

In exports
1932

13.2
11.5
24.7

27.5
1.9
10.7
23.3
12.2
32.9
13.7
8.1
8
62.7

49.9
2.8

1938

400
350

1500=100

300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1400 1410 1420 1430 1440 1450 1460 1470 1480 1490 1500
Antwerp

England

Figure 1. English and Flemish real pepper prices, 1400 – 1500
Source: O’Rourke and Williamson (2009).

38

500

1200

450
350

800

Tons

300
250

600

200
400

150
100

200

50
0
1500

1550

1600

1650

Exports (left hand scale)

1700

1750

Price (right hand scale)

Figure 2. Southeast Asian clove exports and prices, 1500 – 1789
Source: Bulbeck et al. (1998, table 2.15, pp. 58–59).

39

0
1800

Dollars per ton

1000

400

Amsterdam price/Southeast Asian price

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1580

1630

1680

1730

1780

1830

1880

Figure 3. Clove price gaps, Amsterdam-Southeast Asia, 1580s-1880s
Source: O’Rourke and Williamson (2002), based on data in Bulbeck et al. (1998).

40

130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
1
6
11
16
21
26
31
36
41
46
51
56
61
66
71
76
81
86
91
96
101
106
111

40

June 1929 = 100

April 2008 = 100

Panel A. World trade
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
1
6
11
16
21
26
31
36
41
46
51
56
61
66
71
76
81
86
91
96
101
106

40

June 1928=100

April 2008=100

Panel B. World industrial output
Figure 4. Two great trade collapses and industrial depressions
Source: Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2009), updated using
http://www.cpb.nl/en/figure/cpb-world-trade-monitor-april-2017

41

130
120

1929=100

110
100
90
80
70
60
1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939

Agricultural primary

Non-agricultural primary

Semi-manufactured raw materials

Manufacturing

Panel A. World output
110

1929=100

100
90
80
70
60
50
1928

1930

1932

Manufacturing

1934

1936

1938

Non-manufacturing

Panel B. World trade
Figure 5. World output and trade during the Great Depression
Source: Almunia et al. (2010).

42

1940

125
120

2008=100

115
110
105
100
95
90
2008

2009

2010

2011

Agriculture

2012

2013

Manufacturing

2014

2015

2016

Services

Panel A. World output
120
115

2008=100

110
105
100
95
90
85
80
2008

2009

2010

Agricultural products

2011

2012

2013

2014

Fuels and mining products

Manufactures

Panel B. World trade
Figure 6. World output and trade during the Great Recession
Source: World Development Indicators, WTO

43

2015

120

1929 or 2008=100

110
100
90
80
70
60
50
1

2

3

4

Great Depression (1929=100)

5

6

7

Great Recession (2008=100)

Panel A. World manufacturing trade during two crises
120

1929=100

110
100
90
80
70
60
1929 1929.5 1930 1930.5 1931 1931.5 1932 1932.5 1933
Great Depression
Great Depression with Great Recession weights
Great Recession

Panel B. The impact of compositional shifts on the volume of world trade

Figure 7. The changing composition of world trade 1929-2007 and the Great Trade
Collapse
Sources: Panel A: as for Figures 6, 7; Panel B: Almunia et al. (2010), updated.
44

140.0

April 2008=100

130.0
120.0
110.0
100.0
90.0
80.0
70.0
Apr-08

Aug-09 Dec-10 May-12 Sep-13
Advanced

Feb-15

Jun-16

Emerging

Panel A. Advanced versus emerging economies
115.0

April 2008=100

110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
85.0
80.0
75.0
Apr-08

Oct-08

May-09

Advanced
Latin America

Nov-09

Emerging Asia

Jun-10
CEE

MENA

Panel B. Regional export declines
Figure 8. Regional export volumes during and after the Great Recession
Source: http://www.cpb.nl/en/figure/cpb-world-trade-monitor-april-2017

45

25

Per cent

20
15
10
5
0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Now: all products

Now: manufactured products

Now: primary products

Great Depression (2007=1928)

Figure 9. Average tariffs worldwide during and after the Great Depression and
Great Recession
Source: Clemens and Williamson (2004), World Development Indicators.

46

