                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SMOKING, HEALTH CAPITAL, AND LONGEVITY:
           EVALUATION OF PERSONALIZED CESSATION TREATMENTS IN
              A LIFECYCLE MODEL WITH HETEROGENEOUS AGENTS

                                        Li-Shiun Chen
                                         Ping Wang
                                           Yao Yao

                                     Working Paper 23820
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23820


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




We would like to thank Jerome Adda, Isaac Ehrlich, Chad Jones, Don Kenkel, and Rody
Manuelli for helpful comments and suggestions. Financial support from R01DA038076,
KL2RR024994 and K08DA030398 (Chen) and from the Weidenbaum Center on the Economy,
Government, and Public Policy (Wang) is gratefully acknowledged. Rongsheng Tang has
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Li-Shiun Chen, Ping Wang, and Yao Yao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Smoking, Health Capital, and Longevity: Evaluation of Personalized Cessation Treatments
in a Lifecycle Model with Heterogeneous Agents
Li-Shiun Chen, Ping Wang, and Yao Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 23820
September 2017
JEL No. D91,E20,I10

                                         ABSTRACT

Cigarette smoking leads to large healthcare and morbidity costs, and mortality losses, and
smoking cessation plays a key role in reducing health risk and economic costs. While medical
evidence suggests that some smokers are more likely to respond to medication treatment than
others depending on genetic markers, it remains unexplored whether pharmacogenetic testing is
cost-effective in treating potential quitters of smoking. We address this knowledge gap by
developing a lifecycle model in which individuals make smoking, health investment and
consumption-savings decisions. Depending on an individual's genotype, smoking may bring
enjoyment but deteriorates one's health, and the dynamic evolution of health capital determines
life expectancy. In addition to heterogeneous genotypes, individuals also differ in demographics.
We calibrate this model to fit key economic and medical observations in the U.S. We then
propose three smoking cessation policies, two with standard treatments and one personalized
depending on genetic markers, all under the same program costs. We construct two unified
measures of effectiveness and subsequently compute the cost-effectiveness ratio. We find that
personalized treatment is the most cost-effective: for each dollar of program cost, it generates
$8.94 value in effectiveness, which is 22-45% higher than those under standard treatments.

Li-Shiun Chen                                   Yao Yao
School of Medicine                              School of Economics and Finance
Washington University in St. Louis              Victoria University of Wellington
St. Louis, MO 63130                             Wellington, New Zealand
chenli@psychiatry.wustl.edu                     Yao.Yao@vuw.ac.nz

Ping Wang
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1208
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu
1        Introduction

Cigarette smoking is a leading preventable threat for global public health (Knopik et al., 2012;
McClure et al., 2013; Jha, et al., 2013; Whiteford et al., 2013). The costs of smoking include
healthcare costs, morbidity (productivity) costs, and mortality losses (Max et al., 2004; Baren-
dregt et al., 1997; Miller et al., 1999).1 While healthcare costs for smokers at a given age are
about 40 percent higher than those for nonsmokers in the short term (Barendregt et al., 1997),
smoking-attributable healthcare costs are estimated to be 6-8 percent of American personal health
expenditure (Miller et al., 1999). The estimated total costs of smoking in California in 1999 is
$475 per resident or $3,331 per smoker, with 54 percent due to healthcare, 10 percent due to
lost productivity from illness and 36 percent due to premature deaths, where the value of life lost
per death averaged $132,000 or 12.4 years (Max et al., 2004). In addition, there is a signi…cant
wage gap between smokers and nonsmokers, a negative wage e¤ect of tobacco about 10 percent for
males using data from the Netherlands (van Ours, 2004). Furthermore, it is evident that the costs
of smoking are higher when including the sizable negative external e¤ects associated with second
hand smoking.2
        Thus, smoking cessation plays a key role in diminishing the increased health risk and economic
costs (Jha, et al., 2013). Recent research shows that use of genetic markers in smoking cessation
treatments has great promise (Chen and Bierut, 2013; Kortmann et al., 2010; Bough et al., 2014;
Epstein, 2008). Di¤erent pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic markers have been implicated
in personalized therapeutic approaches including nicotinic acetylcholine receptor genes (nAChRs)
based on the Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) discovery (Tanner et al., 2015; Gold and
Lerman, 2012). For example, variants in the genes encoding the                    5      3      4 nicotinic receptor
subunits show promise as a biomarker for predicting increased risk for developing nicotine depen-
dence (Liu et al., 2010; Saccone et al., 2010; Tobacco and Genetics Consortium, 2010; Thorgeirsson
et al., 2010), and delayed smoking cessation (Chen et al., 2015).3 When receiving treatments, some
smokers are more likely to respond to medication treatment than others (Chen et al., 2012; Bergen
    1
        Economics of Tobacco Toolkit (WHO, 2011) provides a comprehensive review of methods of estimating the
economic costs of smoking.
   2
     Pickett et al. (2006) documents that 45.9 percent of American in counties without smoke-free law are exposed
to secondhand smoke using data from the 1999–2002 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. They …nd
that even in counties with extensive smoke-free law coverage, such exposure is still nonnegligible (12.5%).
   3
     They also help predicting increased risks for lung cancer (Amos et al., 2008; Thoreirsson et al., 2008) and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (Pillai et al., 2009).


                                                           1
et al., 2013).4
      Leveraging advances in genomics, the goal of precision medicine is to personalize treatments
based on an individual’s unique characteristics to maximize bene…ts and minimize risks resulting
from side e¤ects. Whether pharmacogenetic testing should be implemented in the clinic depends on
its cost-e¤ectiveness which require further investigation. Nonetheless, allowing physicians to select
medications for individuals based on genetic factors that predispose to treatment response rather
than on a trial and error basis via less precise non-personalized treatment may ultimately improve
successful smoking cessation rates (Sturgess et al., 2011). In the post-GWAS era, translational
research from several disciplines, including behavioral science, ethics and economics, should be
performed in parallel with ongoing genetic studies for smoking pharmacogenetic trials. This would
be a critical step to enable implementation of genetic insights into routine clinical practice in order
to reduce the global health burden of smoking (Furberg et al., 2010).
      Our paper is devoted to addressing the knowledge gap concerning cost-e¤ectiveness of person-
alized medicine treatment in smoking cessation. More speci…cally, we explore, under the same cost,
what outcome di¤erences are between personalized treatment and non-personalized treatments. To
undertake this task, we develop a lifecycle model in which key decisions on smoking, health and
savings as well as life expectancy are all endogenously determined. We take into account the three
main types of costs of smoking as in the literature. On the one hand, smoking accelerates health
depreciation, thereby increasing demand for medical care (healthcare cost) and reduces labor in-
come (morbidity cost). On the other hand, worse health results in lower life expectancy (mortality
cost).
      The main advantage of our approach for policy analysis is that we take into account individ-
uals’endogenous response in a dynamic lifecycle setting. Moreover, individuals are allowed to be
heterogeneous in their genotypes as newly advanced in the medical literature. Recent work shows
that e¤ects of cessation pharmacotherapy vary with haplotypes in the CHRNA5 nicotinic receptor
gene. Three common haplotypes span the CHRNA5 gene region (H1: 25%; H2: 44%; H3: 31%).
Using data from smoking cessation trials conducted at the University of Wisconsin Transdiscipli-
nary Tobacco Use Research Center (UW-TTURC), Chen et al. (2012) identi…ed the usefulness of
CHRNA5 genetic markers in predicting both cessation di¢ culty and treatment response (results
replicated by Bergen et al., 2013). While the high-risk haplotype (H3) is unequivocally associated
  4
      Increasing evidence suggests that the risk-bene…t ratio of the medication can also vary with a person’s genetic
background (Green and Guyer, 2011).



                                                          2
with heavy smoking and most di¢ culty in smoking cessation, smokers of this type respond well
to medication. In contrast, smokers with the low-risk haplotype (H1), though smoke less on av-
erage and are more likely to quit with counseling, do not bene…t from medication. Demographics
are also found to a¤ect smoking behavior (see a critical review by Chaloupka and Warner, 2000).
More speci…cally, male smokers typically smoke more cigarettes per day than women, and male
demand for cigarettes tends to be more price elastic than is female demand (Giovino et al., 1994;
Chaloupka, 1990; Chaloupka and Grossman, 1996). Blacks are less likely to smoke and smoke less
than whites (Chaloupka and Grossman, 1996). Research has also shown a substantially positive
e¤ect of education on health (Kenkel, 1991; Grossman and Kaestner, 1997; Lleras-Muney, 2005)
and higher educated smokers are more likely to quit smoking (Chaloupkia, 1991). Finally, age is
positively related to the number of cigarettes consumed per day (Giovino et al., 1994). As such,
our paper incorporates three important dimensions of demographics, namely, gender, race and ed-
ucation. This integrated framework thereby enables a thorough study of rich dynamic interactions
between consumption-saving, health investment and smoking, where individuals’lifecycle pro…les
depend critically on their demographics as well as genotypes. Under this setting, we can then eval-
uate various smoking cessation policies by aggregating individual-speci…c e¤ects in a systematic
manner.
   We then calibrate our model to …t key observations from the U.S. data. The set of targets
includes economics data such as income, various expenditure ratios, and life expectancy. It also
constitutes some medical experiment data such as gene-dependent smoking by Chen et al. (2012)
and di¤erential gains in life years from smoking cessation by Jha, et al. (2013). Our calibrated
model predicts well that life expectancy of smokers is 11-12 years shorter than nonsmokers and
that the high-risk H3-type smokers live slightly shorter than other types, consistent with medical
evidence. Our computed potential gain in life years for smokers quitting successfully at age 35 is
the largest for H3 smokers (9.0 years), compared to 7.6 and 8.2 years for H1 and H2 genotypes,
respectively. We also show that over their life course successful quitters have a slower rate of health
deterioration, with more moderate health deterioration for white males with college degree, due to
a stronger income e¤ect associated with the more luxurious health good.
   We then propose four separate measures of e¤ectiveness for three smoking cessation policies with
the same program costs, two with standard and one with personalized treatments. The …rst two
measures are the policy coverage rates given the same budget and the resulting quit rates. The third
is Consumption Equivalent of a covered smoker, which is the percentage increase in consumption


                                                  3
(at each point in time) that is needed, while …xing everything else unchanged, to reach a certain
level of lifetime utility. The last is Income Equivalent of a covered smoker, de…ned in the same way
but in terms of the percentage increase in labor income. These equivalent measures have taken
into account all private bene…ts and costs associated with participation in a program. We further
construct three uni…ed measures, including an expected Consumption Equivalent measure of a
smoker, an expected Income Equivalent measure and a cost/e¤ectiveness ratio based on expected
Income Equivalent of a smoker. We …nd that, under the same program costs, personalized treatment
provides coverages for more and maintains high e¤ectiveness. For each dollar of the program cost,
it generates 8:94 Income Equivalent in e¤ectiveness, 22              45% higher than the comparable …gures
under standard treatments. That is, personalized treatment is the most cost-e¤ective in smoking
cessation.
        We would like to note that our lifecycle setting captures the spirits of two separate strands of
literature.5 One strand is on health capital, building on the pivotal work by Grossman (1972a,b).
Another is on health and life expectancy, pioneered by Rosen (1988) and Ehrlich and Chuma (1990).
Our model is much richer not only because we endogenize consumption-saving, health investment,
smoking and life expectancy, but also because we permit multi-dimensional heterogeneities. Our
e¤ectiveness measures are more general than quality adjusted life years (QALYs) commonly used in
the literature of medicine and health (e.g., see the guidelines provided by Gold et al., 1996). Specif-
ically, our lifetime utility based e¤ectiveness measures account for time discounting, diminishing
marginal valuation and di¤erential utility weights. More importantly, our measures incorporate
heterogeneous individuals’dynamic responses that enable us to capture di¤erent responses across
di¤erent individuals at di¤erent ages over their life course. Our framework is ready to be applied
to studying other types of addictive behavior, such as alcohol and illicit drugs. It can also be easily
modi…ed for evaluating other types of precision medicine in treating various diseases.


2          The Model

To properly model smoking behavior and its health consequences over an individual’s life course,
we develop a lifecycle framework with endogenously determined life expectancy. In contrast with
    5
        The reader is referred to the handbook chapter by Chaloupka and Warner (2000) for a large body of empirical
literature on smoking behavior and the e¤ects of smoking policy (e.g., cigarette taxes and smoking ban), beyond
those relevant studies to our paper cited above.




                                                          4
many previous studies on endogenous life expectancy where health or life protection simply reduces
mortality (e.g., Rosen, 1988; Ehrlich, 2000; Ehrlich and Yin, 2005; Jones, 2016), we allow better
health to improve the quality of life and hence lifetime utility (in line with Ehrlich and Chuma, 1990;
Chakraborty, 2004; Murphy and Topel, 2006; Hall and Jones, 2007; Chen, 2010). This addition
is important because QALYs is a standard e¤ectiveness measure in cost-e¤ectiveness analysis in
medicine and health. Following the health capital literature pioneered by Grossman (1972a,b), we
allow health capital to evolve endogenously over time. While smoking can be enjoyable to an addict,
it has a detrimental consequence for health by accelerating health deterioration. Departing from the
literature, we consider heterogeneity in individuals’tastes for smoking. This is consistent with the
medical literature that has identi…ed genetic markers associated with smoking behavior (Tobacco
and Genetics Consortium, 2010; Chen et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2015a; Chen et al., 2015b). Such
a consideration is essential because it permits us to evaluate precision medicine with personalized
treatments based on an individual’s unique characteristics. Individuals are also heterogeneous in
work e¢ ciency and hence their labor income. Preference and income heterogeneities subsequently
a¤ect their di¤erential smoking behavior, health capital and life expectancy.


2.1        Model setup

Time is continuous. An individual’s life starts at t0 when she acts as a decision-maker (who may be
referred to as a young adult). Her life ends at T which is endogenous and will be discussed later.
       Throughout her life course [t0 ; T ], she values consumption c and health h and may also value
smoking s depending on her genotypes. The ‡ow utility accrued at time t 2 [t0 ; T ] from such
enjoyment is assumed to take a simple log linear form:

                                 u(c; s; h; t) = ln(c(t)) +    ln(s(t)) +     ln(h(t))                              (1)

where           0 and     > 0 measure her preferences for smoking and health relative to general con-
sumption. Importantly, individuals with di¤erent genetic markers will have di¤erent values of                          ,
which will be further elaborated when we conduct calibration analysis to …t the model with the
data. As to be seen below, we will model the evolution of both nonhuman wealth and health capital
as well as the wage-tenure pro…le. Thus, to avoid further complication, we elect not to include the
habits of addiction stock in the utility function.6
   6
       The reader is referred to Becker and Murphy (1988) for developing a habit-based rational addiction framework.
This literature generates valuable insights including better understanding of the short versus long run price elasticity


                                                           5
    Letting     be the subjective time discount rate, we can then write one’s lifetime utility as:
                              Z T
                         U=        e (t t0 ) [ln(c(t)) + ln(s(t)) + ln(h(t))]dt                    (2)
                                  t0

where we have plugged in the ‡ow utility function given in (1). Thus, health raises an individual’s
lifetime utility via two channels: higher quality of life (through            ln(h(t))) and longer life expectancy
(through T ).
    Two remarks are in order. First, in order for longevity to raise lifetime utility, it is necessary
to ensure the ‡ow utility to be positive. Given the log functional form, this is met when we choose
the scale of health and income properly so that their logged values are su¢ ciently greater than zero
(to be further elaborated in Section 3.1 below). This strategy in essence follows Murphy and Topel
(2006), by assuming consumption bundles to be above their “subsistence”levels (which are, in our
case, c = h = 1 and s = 1 for smokers with               > 0).7 Second, although consumption and health
has the same income elasticity under the simple log functional form, the positive health e¤ect on
life expectancy makes health a luxury good relative to consumption, which is consistent with the
literature on health and life (Hall and Jones, 2007; Jones, 2016).
    Consider now an individual with work e¢ ciency , facing a market wage in e¢ ciency unit
denoted by w (needless to say, all dollar measures are in real terms). In addition to her work
e¢ ciency, her ‡ow labor income at time t depends critically on her labor market experience as well
as her health status. While the former is standard in the labor economics literature, the latter
captures the labor productivity e¤ect of health emphasized by Grossman (1972b). Regarding these
as two additive components of human capital, we can now specify the labor income obtained by an
individual with work e¢ ciency          as:

                                                                    (t t0 )
                                       y(t) = w(t)[h(t) +       e             1 ]                             (3)

In this formulation, we conveniently align the measurement of human capital with health capital, so
  > 0 captures the relative importance of experience in labor income generation. Moreover, the pa-
of addictive consumption demand, albeiting potential bias due to endogenous response in smoking intensity, as
elaborated by Adda and Cornaglia, 2006. It is nonetheless beyond the scope of our paper.
   7
     One alternative is to follow Hall and Jones (2007) and Jones (2016) to add a constant u > 0 in ‡ow utility to
ensure positive values. Another is to add a constant to the log function such as:

                                  u = ln(1 + c(t)) +   ln(1 + s(t)) +   ln(1 + h(t))

The latter setup would, however, generate extra income e¤ects on smoking which is inconsistent with the empirical
evidence (Chaloupka and Warner, 2000).


                                                          6
rameter     > 0 measures the return to experience and       e   (t t0 )   1 captures the experience-driven
wage-tenure pro…le that is equal to zero at time t0 (when the individual is fully inexperienced).
Note that     takes di¤erent values for individuals with di¤erent gender, race and levels of education.
Thus, although we refer to an individual as “she”for convenience, we do allow for gender di¤erences
in earning as observed in the real world.
   In addition to labor income, an individual can also earn income from savings, which is in forms
of holding an asset a that provides a yield at the market (real) interest rate r. In each point
in time, her ‡ow (labor and interest) income is allocated to consumption, cigarette purchase and
health-related spending that will be referred to as health investment x. Given the price per unit
amount of smoking p, an individual’s asset accumulation over her life course is governed by,

                              a_ = r(t)a(t) + y(t)   c(t)   p(t)s(t)      x(t)                          (4)

where a_    da=dt and labor income is given by (3). That is, asset is accumulated when ‡ow income
(ra + y) exceeds ‡ow expenditure (c + ps + x).
   We next turn to the evolution of health capital where we highlight three important features.
First, health can be improved with more investment in health, but such improvement is subject
to diminishing returns. More speci…cally, given the current state of health h, health improvement
measured by h_     dh=dt rises less than proportionately with either the current health status (h) or
health investment per unit of health capital (x=h). Second, the health deterioration rate rises with
the amount of smoking (s) but falls with the current health status. Third, the smoking e¤ect on
the health deterioration rate is rising with age, as documented in medical studies such as Jha et al.
(2013). To ful…ll all these features, we propose the following health evolution process:

                                  h_ = [ x(t)     ( + (t)s(t))] h(t)                                    (5)

We now check the required properties. The bene…t of health investment is             xh =     (x=h) h   +   ,
where      > 0 measures the extent to which health investment bene…ts health. To have diminishing
returns in the bene…cial e¤ects of current health and health investment per unit of health capital
on future health evolution, it is required that      > 0,   > 0 and 0 <          + < 1. We then examine
the health deterioration rate, measured by [( + (t)s)h ] =h, where               > 0 is the natural health
deterioration rate. Thus, the health deterioration rate rises with smoking and falls with the current
health status (because     < 1), without additional assumptions. In order for the smoking e¤ect on
the health deterioration rate to rise with age, we further restrict that (t) is an increasing function of

                                                     7
t. In summary, under these parametric assumptions, the above functional form o¤ers a parsimonious
setting that governs the evolution of health capital satisfying all the required properties.
   Finally, the individual dies when her health reaches a threshold level h. That is, the terminal
date of one’s life T is reached when h         h. This setting is natural based on the medical literature,
where h may be viewed as the biological requirement for a human body to function. Because
the evolution of an individual’s health capital depends on her decisions, her life expectancy is
thereby endogenous depending particularly on smoking behavior and health investment. Thus,
our framework is in spirit consistent with health capital model of Grossman (1972a,b) and the
endogenous life expectancy model of Rosen (1988) in which the value of saving a current life is the
expected present value of consumer surplus at that age.
   The dynamic optimization problem can therefore be divided into two steps. In the …rst step, we
view the terminal date T as given. We then solve the lifecycle model in which an individual of type
( ; ) decides on consumption/saving, smoking, and health investment, all as functions of T , to
maximize her lifetime utility given by (2) subject to asset accumulation and health capital evolution
equations (4) and (5). In the second step, we substitute the smoking and health investment functions
obtained in the …rst step, denoted S(t; T ) and X(t; T ), into (5) to generate the path of health capital,
denoted H(t; T ). Then we pin down life expectancy by solving

                                                   H(T; T ) = h                                        (6)


2.2     Model characterization

To solve the dynamic optimization problem, we set up the current-value Hamiltonian for each given
value of life expectancy T :

                  H (c; s; x; t) = ln(c) + ln(s) + ln(h)
                                        n                                                   o
                                   + 1 ra + w[h +     e (t        t0 )
                                                                         1 ]   c   ps   x              (7)

                                    +   2 f[   x     ( + (t)s)] h(t) g

where   1   and   2   are the costate variables associated with asset accumulation and health capital
evolution equations (4) and (5). For the remainder of the paper, we will suppress time index t
whenever it does not cause any confusion.
   Applying Pontryagin Maximum Principle in optimal control theory, we can obtain three …rst-
order conditions with respect to c, s and x, and two Euler equations with respect to a and h.

                                                        8
Straightforward manipulation of these …ve equations to eliminate the two costate variables leads
to the following conditions for the dynamic optimization problem:

                                         s
                                           =                         1)
                                                                                                    (8)
                                         c   p + (t)=(           x


                                                 c_
                                                    =r                                              (9)
                                                 c

                                         x_              1            c
                               (1    )      =r      x        h          + w                        (10)
                                         x                           h
   Equation (8) indicates that smoking relative to consumption increases with the taste for smoking
( ), but decreases with the price of cigarettes (p) and its (relative) health cost ( (t)=(     x   1 )).

When medical treatment cannot e¤ectively mitigate the detrimental e¤ect of smoking on health
(i.e., when   is low), it is optimal for an addict to reduce or even quit smoking because her utility
enjoyment is outweighed by her health deterioration. Similarly, a rising health cost of smoking as
a result of higher medical spending (i.e., higher x) also discourages smoking.
   Equation (9) is standard in dynamic economic models. It governs the dynamic path of con-
sumption: consumption grows when the rate of return on saving exceeds the subject rate of time
discounting. Typically, consumption is expected to grow (that is, r > ). Equation (10) governs
the dynamic path of health investment. To gain insight from this complicated expression, we note
that biological limitation implies health capital deterioration when an individual is su¢ ciently old.
Thus, the consumption-health capital ratio is expected to increase at least for older individuals.
This implies that, from (10), health investment is likely to decrease eventually when approaching to
the end of lifetime, which is consistent with diminishing returns in health investment and biological
limitation of its e¤ect on health capital.
   Although we cannot solve analytically the entire dynamic paths of consumption, smoking, health
investment, health capital and assets, the three expressions above, (8)-(10), together with the two
evolution equations, (4) and (5), and the boundary condition (6) can be used to solve numerically
the …ve dynamic paths, fc(t); s(t); x(t); a(t); h(t)gTt=t0 , and the endogenous life expectancy, T . To
do so, however, we must …rst calibrate the model to …t the data to which we now turn.




                                                    9
3          Calibration and Numerical Solution

We are now prepared to calibrate the model to …t the data. Once this task is completed, we can
then use the quantitative model to evaluate various policies on smoking cessation.
        Our calibration exercises consist of three steps. In the …rst step, we calibrate all parameters for
a representative individual, who may be regarded as the average individual. In the second step,
we allow heterogeneity in preferences for smoking: for nonsmokers, we set                       = 0; for smokers, we
calibrate the three          ’s for smokers with three genotypes associated with smoking addiction. In
the third step, we allow heterogeneity in work e¢ ciency to calibrate ’s for individuals in di¤erent
demographic groups.
        We discretize the life span so that one year corresponds to one period of time, and assume life
starts at 18 years old (i.e., t0 = 18).8


3.1        Step 1: Calibration to …t the average

In the …rst step, we assume that individuals are homogeneous in all aspects so we have a single
value for ( ; ), which allows us to calibrate all the common parameters to …t the average of each
of the targeted data.
        There are eleven parameters, , , ,             , , , , , , , and h, and one functional form, (t),
to be determined. Given homogeneous work e¢ ciency, we conveniently normalize w to be one.
We preset the subjective time discounting rate as                 = 0:02, compromising the economics and the
health and medicine literature. Then the growth rate of consumption (g) is set to equal that of
output per capita in the US (1:8%), so the real interest rate becomes r = + g = 0:038. We assume
initial wealth to be a0 = 0, which is inconsequential for the cost-e¤ectiveness analysis conducted in
the paper.
        We choose the curvature of the health evolution function with respect the current health status
to be         = 0:05. Such su¢ ciently large diminishing return in health is to ensure a reasonable
health evolution path to generate an interior solution for life expectancy, an issue to address with
endogenous lifetime. We then normalize the threshold health level at death to be h = 1 and set
the initial stock of health at age 18 as h0 = 100. These provide natural boundaries of the health
stock within which the dynamic path of health can be computed to …t real world data. To align
    8
        One may easily allow t0 to be lower and adjust the experience accumulation formulation in (3) if teenager smoking
behavior is a major research focus.



                                                             10
health-based and experience-based human capital, we also set the scaling parameter for experience
as         = 100. The scale of normalization of h0 and                 not only ensures that the ‡ow utility for a
living person is positive for all demographic and genotypes, but also yields reasonable values of a
statistical life (VSL) of a smoker or a nonsmoker (to be elaborated in Section 4.1 below).
         In the labor economics literature, the wage-tenure pro…le estimation usually yields an experience
return at 3          5%. We thus take the average to set             = 0:04. Consider that a nonsmoker who never
invests in health over the entire life course (i.e., x = 0 for all t) would live for 50 years. This
yields a natural health deterioration rate at            = 2:602. To be consistent with medical evidence that
smoking cessation at di¤erent ages has di¤erent impact on life expectancy (Jha et al., 2013), we
specify (t) as a step function:
                                                    8
                                                    >
                                                    >       for t       30
                                                    >
                                                    <   0

                                            (t) =       1   for 31        t   40                                     (11)
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    :
                                                        2   for t       41

where the three ’s are yet to be determined.
         Thus, the main parameters that remain to be calibrated are related to preference, , , and to
the e¤ectiveness of health investment,              and , together with three ’s related to the age-dependent
consequences of smoking for health. These 7 parameters are calibrated based on 3 targeted ratios,
the average life expectancy, plus 3 age-dependent incremental life saving …gures as a result of
smoking cessation.
         The three targeted ratios are: (i) the consumption-to-output ratio ( yc ), (ii) the tobacco-expenditure-
to-output ratio ( ps                                                 x
                  y ), (iii) the health–investment-to-output ratio ( y ), based on the U.S. data aver-

aged across individuals and over time. Using data from Penn World Table 6.3 (1998-2007, US av-
                             c
erage), we compute           y   = 0:7. We measure health investment by medical expenditure. Using data
from Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) 1999-2011, we measure the health–investment-to-
                     x
output ratio         y   as an average household’s total medical expenditure to total labor income ratio.9
                 x
This gives       y   = 0:051. That is, an average individual (weighted average of addicts and nonaddicts)
invests about 5% of her income in health. Also using the same waves of PSID data, we compute the
     9
         The PSID data has contained information of medical expenditure since the year 1999, and the interval between
every two surveys is 2 years. Hence, our dataset includes 7 surveys from 1999 to 2011. Note that each survey includes
information for the year before the survey year. Notably, labor income excludes farm and unincorporated business
                                                                 x
income. Also, in computing the average, observations with        y
                                                                     ratio exceeding one or negative are excluded from the
sample.


                                                            11
                                             ps
tobacco-expenditure-to-output ratio          y    as an average household head’s total smoking expenditure
over total labor income.10 More speci…cally, smoking expenditure ps is computed by multiplying
price of per pack of cigarettes (normalize cigarette price in 2009 to be one and compute price in
other years correspondingly with CPI adjusted, which results in the average price during 1998-2010
                                                                                           ps
0:73 per pack), cigarettes per day from PSID, and 365 days. We get                         y    = 0:019. That is, an
average individual (weighted average of addicts and nonaddicts) spends about 2% of her income
on smoking.
       The average life expectancy of the US population is 78 years old, based on the World Bank
data (1998-2011). From Jha et al. (2013), the averaged increases in life expectancy for smokers
who quits at the age 30, 40, or 50 are 10, 9, and 6 years, respectively.
       The algorithm for calibrating these parameters are given as follows. We …rst choose a set of
values for the parameters (initial guesses), and then solve the model which results in a set of lifecycle
decisions and outcomes for a representative individual. Then we compute the model solutions of
the targets and compare them to the corresponding targeted values. If they are not close enough,
we revise the guesses based on insights from model characterization. We repeat doing this until the
model solutions and the target values are su¢ ciently close. From our result, while all the targeted
ratios and life expectancy are matched very well, the increases of life expectancy for a representative
smoker who quits at the age 30, 40, or 50 turn out to be 10, 8, and 6 years, which are close enough
to the targeted results of 10, 9, and 6 years.


3.2       Step 2: Heterogeneous preferences for smoking

In the second step, we allow for heterogeneity in preferences for smoking in order to capture di¤erent
genotypes associated with smoking addiction.
       In particular, we calibrate the three ’s for smokers with three genotypes, H1, H2, and H3, while
employing all other parameter values from the …rst step. We use cigarettes per day (CPD) for three
types of smokers and shares of each type from Chen et al. (2012), rescaling the amount of smoking
to …t the model units which becomes our targeted value of smoking (s) for each genotype. Again,
we conduct this task using the guessing-revising-converging algorithm. We obtain                            1   = 0:209,
 2     = 0:212, and     3   = 0:238, corresponding to H1, H2, and H3 types of smokers respectively. Of
course, once a smoker quits smoking successfully,                is set to be zero and their preference for smoking
  10                                                        ps
       Again, in computing the average, observations with   y
                                                                 ratio greater than one or negative are excluded from the
sample.


                                                            12
is regarded the same as nonsmokers. Table 1 summarizes all the calibrated parameter values under
 w = 1.

      We are now prepared for utilizing the calibrated model to compute lifecycle pro…le for the
three types of smokers and compare it with nonsmokers. Table 2 presents such comparison in key
                                                                         c
indicators including life expectancy T , the consumption ratio           y,   the smoking expenditure ratio
ps                                        x
y ,   and the medical expenditure ratio   y       for each of the four groups of population, as well as the
respective population weighted averages.


                                 Table 1. Parametrization of the model
                parameter                           value                            target
  subjective time discounting                 = 0:020               literature
  health stock boundaries                 h0 = 100; h = 1           normalized
  experience scaling factor                   = 100                 normalized
  experience return                           = 0:040               literature
  initial wealth                          a0 = 0                    preset
  health curvature                            = 0:05                preset
  natural health deterioration rate           = 2:602               computed
                                                                                            ps x
                                              0   =0                joint targets of yc ,   y , y,   T , plus
  health cost of smoking                      1   = 0:0065          incremental life saving for quitting

                                              2   = 0:015           smoke at age 30, 40, or 50
  preference for health quality               = 0:029               same as above
  health investment e¢ cacy                       = 0:359           same as above
  health investment curvature                 = 0:448               same as above
                            H1                1   = 0:209
  tastes for smoking for H2                   2   = 0:212           same as above, plus CPD
                            H3                3   = 0:238


      As can be seen, life expectancy of smokers is between 11 to 12 years shorter than nonsmokers,
consistent with medical evidence (11 years for women and 12 year for men, based on Jha et al.,
2013). Moreover, H3-type smokers live slightly shorter than other types, matching with medical
evidence that CHRNA5 is associated with increased mortality in large-scale population studies

                                                        13
(Kupiainen et al., 2016; Hallden, et al., 2015). Smokers spend a lower proportion of income on
normal consumption goods but about 10 percent of income on tobacco; they also incur a larger
medical expenditure relative to income.
   The medical expenditure ratio may look too low for nonsmokers compared smokers, which
deserves further discussion. We …rst note that life expectancy of nonsmokers is above 11 years
longer than smokers and that health investment is declining toward the end of life when diminishing
returns are kicking in. This lowers the average medical expenditure ratio of nonsmokers over their
longer life span. If we trim everyone’s life span to the be the same as the type with the shortest
                                         x
life (i.e., H3-type smokers), then the   y    ratios become very close for all types (0.073 for smokers
and 0.072 for nonsmokers). More importantly, so far we assume work e¢ ciency ( ) is the same for
individuals, while in the real world it is larger for nonsmokers than for smokers. When we allow
for heterogeneity of    for smokers and nonsmokers (i.e., 0.93 versus 1.03, computed from PSID)
                                                               x
and trim life span to be the same as H3 smokers, the           y   ratios are 0.071 and 0.074 for smokers and
nonsmokers, respectively. With this node, we now turn to step 3 to calibrate di¤erentiated ’s for
individuals in di¤erent groups. Due to di¤erent smoking behaviors and health evolution paths, this
issue is naturally resolved.


                                   Table 2. Lifecycle comparison

                                                          H1          H2      H3      N       mean
           share of population (%)                        6           10      8       76
           life expectancy T                              70          70      69      81      78.3
                               c
           consumption ratio   y                          0.66        0.65    0.65    0.71    0.70
                                         ps
           smoking expenditure ratio     y                0.10        0.10    0.11    0.00    0.02
                                                    x
           health investment expenditure ratio      y     0.070       0.070   0.073   0.045   0.051


3.3   Step 3: Heterogeneous work e¢ ciency

Later, we allow individuals’ work e¢ ciency to di¤er by gender, race and education. Normalizing
now the market wage in e¢ ciency unit as one (w = 1), we now calibrate di¤erent values of                   for
each group. By construction, the population weighted average of               must be one. Thus,      is indeed
a relative work e¢ ciency measure (relative to the mean).
   Speci…cally, let the gender indicator be M (=1 for male and 0 for female), the race indicator
be W (=1 for white and 0 for black), and the education indicator be C (=1 for college degree and

                                                     14
0 for no college degree). We then categorize all individuals into 8 (i.e., 2   2   2) groups. We
calibrate ’s of the eight cells of population by gender, race and education using PSID labor income
of individuals (household head) aged between 23 and 26, normalized to an average of one. We pick
this age range for three reasons. First, the vast majority of people have completed education and
started working by 23. Second, their health may have not been signi…cantly a¤ected by smoking
behavior by 26. Third, the experience may have not contributed much to their labor income.
   In Table 3, we report the population share of each group among smokers based on PSID data
and the calibrated value of    for each group.


                                      Table 3. Work e¢ ciency

                     M     W     C   population share (%)   work e¢ ciency
                     0     0     0               5                0.64
                     0     1     0               45               0.79
                     0     0     1               0                1.14
                     0     1     1               5                1.11
                     1     0     0               7                0.73
                     1     1     0               34               1.11
                     1     0     1               1                1.33
                     1     1     1               3                1.48


   As can be seen, college educated all have higher than the mean work e¢ ciency and are thus
expected to have higher labor income upon controlling the age. Black with no college degree, on
the contrary, have much lower work e¢ ciency and hence lower labor income within the same age
cohort. In addition, there is a gender gap that leads to higher labor income for males compared
to females. Such gaps are larger for white than for black. All these implied patterns for labor
income are consistent with the labor economics literature. As well documented in the literature,
better educated earn higher labor income, have better health knowledge, invest more in health
for longevity and are less likely to be smokers (Chaloupkia, 1991; Kenkel, 1991; Grossman and
Kaestner, 1997; Lleras-Muney, 2005). As a consequence, this dimension of heterogeneity can lead
to an outcome with nonsmokers having larger health investment relative to income.
   In addition, it is noted from medical evidence (Chen et al., 2012) that the share of three
genotypes does not vary signi…cantly across gender or education groups, but does vary much across


                                                      15
racial groups. In particular, whites have a much larger share of H3 type than blacks (35% versus
6%), and blacks have a much larger share of H1 type than whites (51% versus 21%), while the
share of H2 type is similar for whites and blacks. This heterogeneity in shares of genotypes will
cause di¤erences in policy e¤ects for di¤erent racial groups as will be analyzed later.


4      Policy Evaluations

With the theoretical model calibrated to …t the data, we have a running numerical model that
can be readily used for policy evaluation. In the interest of this study, we focus on evaluating
smoking-cessation policy contrasting personalized with standard medications for smoking-cessation
treatment. By doing so, we establish an integrated dynamic framework for a systematic cost-
e¤ectiveness analysis on precision medicine in this regard.


4.1     Method

We conduct the analysis by comparing the e¤ectiveness of the following three government policies
including two types of standard medication policies (S, S 0 ) and one personalized medication policy
(P ), all under the same budgetary cost. Thus, whichever policy yielding greater value of e¤ective-
ness is by construction more cost-e¤ective. The three smoking cessation policies are speci…ed as
follows.

    1. S: subsidize 10% of smokers randomly with a $600 voucher for both counseling and medication
      treatment, regardless of genotypes.

    2. S 0 : subsidize 10% of smokers randomly with two types of vouchers: a $150 voucher for
      counseling treatment only, given to 5% of smokers, and a $1050 voucher for both counseling
      and medication treatment, given to another 5% of smokers, regardless of genotypes.

    3. P : o¤er rebate to n% of smokers who have taken gene test to identify their genotypes
      associated with smoking addiction. The rebate consists of three parts. R1: $96 for gene test;
      R2: $72 for counseling; R3: $432 for medication. All subsidized smokers receive R1 and R2,
      but only those identi…ed as H2 and H3 genotypes receive R3. The percentage of smokers that
      are subsidized, n, is determined such that the total budget is identical to that under S and
      S0.



                                                 16
      Several important points regarding the design of the policies above are in order.
      First, the size of the subsidy in the benchmark case under policy S ($600 per person) is reason-
able for covering about half of counseling and medication treatment cost (see the detailed breakdown
below). The amount (in‡ation-adjusted) is comparable to the …nancial incentives ($500) provided
for smoking cessation in the randomized controlled trial conducted by Volpp et al. (2009) – their
study …nds that smokers receiving …nancial incentives are signi…cantly more likely to participate in
and complete a smoking-cessation program.
      Second, the size of the budget regarding 10% coverage of smokers in the benchmark case under
policy S is also reasonable.11 The current policy is for Medicaid to pay for all smokers. Since
Medicaid covers about 20% of the population, it is expected that more than 20% of smokers may
use this bene…t. Moreover, the amount of the subsidy is only about half of the actual treatment
cost incurred. Even by assuming that only a quarter of Medicaid eligible smokers take advantage of
this bene…t, the size of the budget under our experiment would not be higher than the budgetary
cost of the current policy through Medicaid coverage for smoking cessation.
      Third, the three policies are designed on a revenue-neutral base, meaning that the total budget
is equalized across all three policies. The shares of three genotypes among smokers are 0.25, 0.44,
and 0.31 for H1, H2, and H3 respectively (Chen et al., 2012; Bergen et al., 2013). This enables us
to compute n in the next subsection.
      Fourth, the value of each type of voucher or rebate in policy S 0 and P is based on the monetary
cost of the corresponding treatment or test. We estimate the cost to be $150 for counseling, $900
for medication, and $200 for a gene test. The counseling cost ($150) and the total cost of counseling
and medication ($1,050) are the base for the vouchers in policy S 0 . The total cost of the three
is $1,250. Hence, in policy P , the value of each type of rebate is proportional to the cost of the
corresponding treatment or test.
      Fifth, the motivation behind the policy design is as follows. Policy S is a proxy of the stan-
dard policy that recommends all smokers to receive both counseling and medication. Policy S 0
is a proxy of the real world policy by which some smokers receives counseling while others also
receive medication. Neither of the two standard policies takes smokers’genotypes into account. By
contrast, policy P is personalized based on genotypes. Smokers receive subsidy only if they have
taken a gene test, and only those with genotypes responsive to medication would receive subsidy
for medication treatment.
 11
      We could use other numbers without changing the main results of policy comparison.



                                                        17
   In our experiment, we carry out the policies on smokers aged 35 since medical research shows
that smokers within age 30-40 gain larger health bene…t from cessation than other age groups. We
solve the model with each policy for each type of smokers with di¤erent genotypes and di¤erent
work e¢ ciency in the dimensions of gender (male versus. female), race (white versus. black),
and education (college degree versus. no college degree). In addition, when modeling the cost
of treatment or gene test, we also take into account the time cost (i.e., time needed for traveling,
waiting, and receiving treatment) besides the monetary cost, and convert it into labor income using
hourly wage of each group of population (again, using PSID data). Based on medical practice, we
estimate that it takes about 9 hours to receive counseling, 7.5 hours for medication, and 2 hours
for gene test.
   Finally, we employ four measures for policy comparison:

   1. Share of smokers that can be subsidized;

   2. Quit rates of subsidized smokers;

   3. Consumption Equivalent (CE) of subsidized smokers;

   4. Income Equivalent (IE) of subsidized smokers.

   While Measure 2 is standard, Measure 1 is an “extensive margin”that has often been overlooked
in previous studies. The omission of this extensive margin e¤ect would bias the cost-e¤ectiveness
analysis signi…cantly, particularly because of the nature of personalized medical treatment. Mea-
sures 3 and 4 require further explanations.
   Consumption Equivalent, or CE, is de…ned as the percentage increase in consumption (at each
point in time) that is needed, while …xing everything else unchanged, to reach a certain level of
lifetime utility if a policy covers the individual. Mathematically, CE is determined by,
                         Z T
                             e (t t0 ) [ln(c(1 + CE)) + ln (s) + ln (h)]dt = U                 (12)
                        t0

where U is the lifetime utility when the individual is covered by a particular policy. Denote by U0
the untreated lifetime utility in the absence of policy intervention:
                                 Z T
                           U0         e (t t0 ) [ln (c) + ln (s) + ln (h)]dt                   (13)
                                  t0

Hence, we derive Consumption Equivalent as:
                                         "                         #
                                                     U    U0
                                   CE = exp              (T t0 )
                                                                       1                       (14)
                                                1    e

                                                    18
Note that U is expected utility taking into account the probabilities that smoking cessation may
either succeed or fail under a policy. These probabilities vary across individuals, depending on
genotypes, education, and the type of treatment.12
       An alternative measure to CE is Income Equivalent, or IE, which is de…ned as the percentage
increase in income (at each point in time) that is needed to satisfy the consumption increase as
de…ned in CE. Mathematically, IE is determined by,
               Z T                                       Z                               T
                     r(t t0 )                                                                    r(t t0 )
                   e          [c (1 + CE) + x + ps] dt =                                     e              y (1 + IE) dt          (15)
                        t0                                                           t0

Applying (14) and manipulating, we obtain:
                                RT                            RT                                  "                       #
                                       e   r(t t0 ) cdt              e    r(t t0 ) cdt
                                 t                             t                                            U    U0
                  IE = CE       R T0                      =   R T0                       fexp                   (T t0 )
                                                                                                                              1g   (16)
                                       e   r(t t0 ) ydt              e    r(t t0 ) ydt                1     e
                                 t0                            t0

       Intuitively, CE and IE represent the bene…t of a policy to a smoker in terms of lifetime utility,
measured as an equivalence of consumption or income increase. Since life expectancy varies across
groups of smokers, CE and IE are life-expectancy-weighted to be comparable across individuals.
       The measure of IE is particularly useful for constructing a dollar measure of e¤ectiveness as
well as the value of a statistical life, VSL. By normalizing the value of death as zero (which can be
simply obtained by setting c = s = h = 1 for smokers and c = h = 1 for nonsmokers, all at their
subsistence levels), one may compute VSL as the dollar value of willingeness to pay for a living
status on average. This is done by …rst computing IE for bringing lifetime utility from zero to
the calibrated value in the model of an adult. We can then multiply IE by average income of an
indivual to obtain a sollar measure. We …nally convert permanent ‡ow income at age 45 (average
age of a licensed driver in the U.S. as we plan to compare our VSL with empirical estimates by
Ashenfelter and Greenstone, 2004) to capitalized dollar value based on the real interest rate of 3:8%
and the life expectancy of smokers and nonsmokers, respectively.
       Speci…cally, the IE’s for bringing lifetime utility of a smoker of type H1, H2 and H3 from zero to
the calibrated benchmark value amount to a permanent ‡ow income increase from 100% to 539.8%,
541.1% and 578.0%, respectively. Assume that an average smoker of any genotype has the same
  12
       For H1 smokers, the quit rate is 58.6% for those with college degree, and 43.1% for non-college ones, regardless
of the type of treatment. For H2 smokers, these two rates are 43.1% (college) and 30.8% (non-college) when receiving
counseling only, and 61.3% (college) and 43.8% (non-college) when receiving counseling plus medication. For H3
smokers, these are 29.0% (college) and 20.7% (non-college) when receiving counseling only, and 61.3% (college) and
43.8% (non-college) when receiving both treatment (data from Chen et al., 2012).



                                                                         19
work e¢ ciency          = 0:93. In this case, a smoker’s average income is 251 e¢ ciency wage units or
US$40,969 at 2009 constant dollars and the respective life expectancies become 69, 68 and 68 years
for the three genotypes. As a result, VSL’s for type H1, H2 and H3 can be computed as 2.143, 2.129
and 2.160 million US dollars. Given the population weights for the three genotypes (25%, 43% and
32% within smokers), the (weighted) average VSL of a smoker becomes 2.14 million US dollars. In
the case of nonsmokers, the IE for bringing lifetime utility from zero to the calibrated benchmark
value equals a permanent ‡ow income increase from 100% to 435.1%. While work e¢ ciency is 1.03
and average income is US$61,304 (at 2009 constant dollars), the life expectancy is 81. Accordingly,
the VSL of a nonsmoker is computed as 3.23 million US dollars.
       Given the population weights (6% smokers of H1 type, 10.3% smokers of H2 type, 7.7% smokers
of H3 type and 76% nonsmokers), the (weighted) average VSL in our model is equal to 2.97 million
US dollars. In the empirical literature, Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004) estimate an average US
driver’s VSL at 2.06 million dollars (CPI adjusted to 2009 constant dollars), whereas Costa and
Kahn (2003) obtain an average prime age (18-30) US male’s VSL as 6.97 million dollars (also CPI
adjusted to 2009 constant dollars). Our average VSL …gure thus falls in between of their estimates,
which is viewed as empirically plausible.13
       Notably, both CE and IE are measures of e¤ectiveness. They are more general than the
typical measure by QALYs in the literature of medicine and health. In contrast with QALYs, our
lifetime utility based e¤ectiveness measures account for time discounting and diminishing marginal
valuation. Moreover, our measures consider di¤erential utility weights that are calibrated to …t
the data. Further, our measures incorporate heterogeneous individuals’dynamic responses. This
is important because such responses varies across di¤erent individuals at di¤erent ages over their
life course, as illustrated in the next subsection to which we now turn.


4.2        Findings

In this subsection, we begin by computing potential gains in life years for heterogeneous groups of
smokers if cessation at 35 years old becomes successful and by contrasting the lifecycle pro…les in
smoking, health investment, health capital and labor income between a quitter and a nonquitter.
We then conduct policy e¤ectiveness analysis and report results from policy comparison using the
four measures described in the previous subsection. All the averaged …gures reported are based on
  13
       We could adjust one of the scaling parameters, h0 or , to match a particular estimate of VSL if it is so targeted.
This is however not the focus of the paper.


                                                            20
population weighted measures of the most disaggregated groups (demographics and biomarkers).


4.2.1   Gains in life years

Table 4 reports the potential gain in life years (LY) for smokers with the three genotypes and their
average if cessation (at 35 years old) is successful.


                           Table 4. Gains in life years for three genotypes

                                                      gain in LY
                                           mean            8.30
                                           H1              7.61
                                           H2              8.17
                                           H3              9.04

The results suggest that, across the three genotypes, the gain in LY is the largest for H3 smokers
(9.04 years), followed by H2 (8.17 years) and then H1 (7.61 years). This result matches medical
studies which …nd that the gain in life years would be higher for H3 smokers. This is because that
(i) the risk in mortality is higher for H3 as a result of smoking, and (ii) H3 smokers are less able to
quit, more likely to smoke longer or inhale more deeply, and more likely to have longer duration of
smoking.
   Table 5 shows life year gain for each of the 8 demographic groups (gender, race and education).



                      Table 5. Gain in life years for eight demographic groups

                                       M    W     C        gain in LY
                                       0    0     0           5.00
                                       0    1     0           6.35
                                       0    0     1          10.92
                                       0    1     1          10.35
                                       1    0     0           5.57
                                       1    1     0          10.79
                                       1    0     1          13.06
                                       1    1     1          16.00


                                                      21
Thus, across demographic groups, groups with larger work e¢ ciency        gain more from lengthening
life expectancy by quitting smoking. This gain varies from 5 years for black, non-college, female
smokers to 16 years for white, college, male smokers.


4.2.2     Lifecycle pro…les: quitters versus nonquitters

We now contrast the lifecycle pro…les between a quitter and a nonquitter. In particular, we consider
the quitter as to successfully stop smoking at age 35. For illustrative purposes, we focus on two
demographic groups:

  1. white females with no college degree: this is the largest group of smokers (45%), whose work
        e¢ ciency is far below one (0.79) and potential gain in LY from quitting is low (6.35 years);

  2. white males with college degree: this constitutes a small group (3%) of smokers, but has the
        highest work e¢ ciency (1.48) and the largest potential gain in LY from quitting (16 years),
        so informative for comparison purposes.

For both groups, we choose H2 genotype, which constitutes the largest fraction of smokers in both
demographic groups.
   In Figure 1, we plot the lifecycle pro…les of the smoking expenditure ratio (top panels), the health
investment expenditure ratio (middle panels) and health capital (bottom panels). Let look at the
case of white females with no college degree (left panels). In our calibrated model, all nonquitters’
smoking rises with age, consistent with evidence in the literature (Giovino et al., 1994; Chaloupka
and Warner, 2000), though the smoking expenditure ratio declines with age. The zigzag pattern of
the smoking expenditure ratio is due to the simple step function form to capture the rising e¤ect
of smoking on health (refer to the (t) function given by (11) and the calibrated values reported in
Table 1). While the white males with college degree have a similar lifecycle pro…le (right panels),
their smoking expenditure ratios are lower after age 30 when the detrimental e¤ect of smoking on
health becomes larger to overcome the gender factor (males smoke more than females) and when
their quitting attempts are relatively more resistant (this last point is not re‡ected in the …gure,
but can be shown with quit rates, which is 59% for white males with college degree versus 43% for
white female with no college degree).
   We turn next to the lifecycle pro…les of the health investment expenditure ratio. While for
all groups the health investment expenditure ratios decline over the lifecycle, that of nonquitters


                                                   22
declines at a slower rate, suggesting a higher demand for investment in health by nonquitters.
Moreover, throughout the life course, such ratios are larger to white males with college degree,
compared to white females with no college degree. This is essentially due to the positive income
e¤ect: recall that the positive health e¤ect on life expectancy under our utility function setting
makes health a luxury good relative to consumption.
   We at last examine the lifecycle pro…les of health capital. Despite health investment, health
naturally deteriorates since age 18. Not surprisingly, successful quitters at age 35 have a slower
rate of health deterioration, whereas health deterioration is more moderate for white males with
college degree due to their stronger incentives to invest in health as elaborated above.


4.2.3   Policy E¤ectiveness

We now report our main …ndings obtained by comparing the four key measures under the three
proposed policies.

Share of smokers that can be subsidized

   Revenue-neutral policy comparison implies that 12.20% of smokers can be subsidized under
policy P . This means policy P may cover 22 percent more smokers for treatment than S or S 0
(Table 6).


              Table 6. Share of smokers that can be subsidized under three policies

                                                      S    S0   P
                               % smokers covered      10   10   12.20


Due to personalized medications, we identify a large extensive margin e¤ect to cover more addicts
with di¤erential treatments based on genotypes.

Quit rates

   Table 7 reports the quit rates of subsidized smokers under the three policies.




                                                 23
                                Table 7. Quit rates under three policies (%)

                                                  S            S0      P
                                         mean     45.17        38.48   45.17
                                         H1       44.50        44.50   44.50
                                         H2       45.39        38.66   45.39
                                         H3       45.40        33.42   45.40


Thus, quit rates under S and P are very close since everyone of the H2 or H3 type is treated
with both counseling and medication. Quit rates under S 0 is lower, as some of the H2 or H3 types
only receive counseling which is less e¤ective than a combination with medication. Moreover, H1
smokers must have the same quit rates under all policies, because medication does not play any
additional role on their cessation outcome. By contrast, H2 and H3 bene…t less from policy S 0 .

Consumption Equivalent (CE) and Income Equivalent (IE)

      Table 8 reports Consumption Equivalent (CE) and Income Equivalent (IE) for subsidized
smokers. In the table, N means results under no policy intervention (hence no treatment) but with
smokers’own attempt of cessation.14


                               Table 8. CE and IE of subsidized smokers (%)

                CE      N       S        S0      P             IE      N       S       S0      P
                mean    1.40    13.95    11.70   13.94         mean    1.08    10.74   9.03    10.74
                H1      1.32    12.90    12.96   12.94         H1      1.02    10.02   10.06   10.05
                H2      1.36    13.61    11.49   13.59         H2      1.05    10.55   8.90    10.53
                H3      1.53    15.25    11.01   15.23         H3      1.16    11.60   8.37    11.58


On average, CE (IE) is about 14% (11%) under policy S or P , but about 2 percentage points
less under S 0 . The results suggest that the e¤ectiveness of the former two policies is equivalent to
increasing consumption by about 14%, or income by bout 11%, per year, to a subsidized smoker.
Yet, policy S 0 is not as e¤ective, which is again mainly due to the worse-o¤ of H2 and H3 types
under S 0 as some of them do not receive medication.
 14
      Data shows success rate without treatment is about 5% for smokers who attempt to quit.




                                                          24
       Table 9 shows results for each demographic group by gender, race, and education, where the
last six columns reports CE’s and IE’s under the three policies proposed.15


                      Table 9. Policy comparison by gender, race, and education (%)

                M     W    C    %    S(CE)      S 0 (CE)      P (CE)   S(IE)     S 0 (IE)   P (IE)
                0     0    0    5        6.36       5.94        6.37      4.97      4.64       4.97
                0     1    0    45       8.52       7.11        8.51      6.58      5.49       6.57
                0     0    1    0      27.43       25.00       27.44    21.18      19.31      21.19
                0     1    1    5      24.23       19.99       24.22    18.63      15.39      18.63
                1     0    0    7        6.82       6.33        6.84      5.32      4.94       5.33
                1     1    0    34     17.95       14.97       17.94    13.81      11.53      13.80
                1     0    1    1      32.61       29.78       32.61    25.18      23.01      25.19
                1     1    1    3      42.03       34.47       42.03    32.24      26.46      32.23


Notice that the bene…t of a policy (or cessation) increases with , the work e¢ ciency. As a con-
sequence, CE under P , for example, varies from 6.36% for black, non-college, female smokers, to
42.03% for white, college, male smokers. The main reason is that a larger                raises the opportunity
cost of smoking, as better health makes people with higher work e¢ ciency earn more, then consume
more, invest more on health, and live longer (see Table 8). Moreover, demographic groups with a
relatively larger share of H2 and H3 genotypes (e.g., the white groups) bene…t relatively more from
P than from S 0 .


4.2.4       Summary

To summarize the results of policy comparison, policy S and P have similar e¤ects in terms of the
quit rate and CE or IE for subsidized smokers, but P is able to cover 22% more smokers than
S, since it saves budget by not subsidizing H1-type smokers for medication while not reducing the
e¤ectiveness of treatment. Policy S 0 is the least e¤ective among the three, as it not only covers
fewer smokers, but also results in a lower quit rate, and lower CE or IE (see rows 2-5 of Table 10).
       We are now prepared to provide a uni…ed measure of e¤ectiveness. View the 10% or 12.20%
subsidy rate as a lottery draw for subsidized treatment with probability                = 0:1 or 0:122. Then,
  15
       Again, the proportions of three genotypes within each demographic group have been considered when computing
the results.


                                                         25
with probability 1    , a smoker would not be subsidized, whose decision remains unchanged and
by construction their Consumption or Income Equivalent must be zero. One can therefore compute
the expected CE of a smoker as:        CE + (1        ) 0=      CE. Similarly, the expected IE of a
smoker 1s:    IE. We further construct a dollar measure of e¤ectiveness, multiplying IE by average
income of smokers, which is US$40,969 at 2009 constant dollars (or, under             = 1, 264 e¢ ciency
wage units). Since average subsidy per smoker is $600 0:1 = $60, the cost/e¤ective (C/E) ratio is
simply 60=(    IE). We report these three uni…ed measures in the last three rows of Table 10.


               Table 10. Summary of policy comparison (% except the C/E ratio)

                                                       S         S0          P
                     % subsidized                          10     10          12.20
                     quit rate                          45.17    38.48       45.17
                     CE of a subsidized smoker          13.95     11.70       13.94
                     IE of a subsidized smoker          10.74         9.03    10.74
                     expected CE of a smoker            1.395     1.170       1.700
                     expected IE of a smoker            1.074     0.903       1.310
                     cost/e¤ectiveness ratio (C/E)     1/7.34    1/6.16      1/8.94


    The results suggest that the expected gains from personalized treatment under P are 22
45% higher than standard treatments under S and S 0 . Therefore, under the same program costs
(subsidy), personalized treatment provides coverages for more, and maintain high e¤ectiveness. For
each dollar of subsidy, it generates 7:34 and 6:16 dollars Income Equivalent in e¤ectiveness under
standard treatments S and S 0 , but 8:94 dollars under personalized treatment P , 22% and 45%
higher than under the two standard treatments. Hence, we conclude that personalized medication
treatment is the most cost-e¤ective.


5     Conclusions

To address the knowledge gap concerning cost-e¤ectiveness of personalized medicine treatment
in smoking cessation, we have developed a lifecycle model with smoking, health investment, sav-
ings and life expectancy all being determined endogenously. We have calibrated the model to …t
key economics and medical observations and explored how cost-e¤ective personalized treatment is


                                                 26
compared to non-personalized treatments. We have shown that, under the same program costs,
personalized treatment provides coverages for more and maintain high e¤ectiveness. For each dol-
lar of treatment subsidy, personalized treatment generates 8:94 Income Equivalent in e¤ectiveness,
22    45% higher than those under standard treatments. We have therefore concluded that person-
alized treatment is the most cost-e¤ective in smoking cessation.
     To this end, we would like to acknowledge the limitation of our study. While we value health
and quality of life, it is modeled as a gradual process. Should smoking result in lung cancer, the
quality of life may be lowered sharply and medical cost raised suddenly. Thus, the actual private
cost of smoking should be higher than that computed from the model. Moreover, we do not model
social cost of smoking by modeling the negative externality such as second-hand smoking. We may
thus underestimate the social bene…t of cessation. Furthermore, smoking cessation is modeled as
an instantaneous stop. Although by allowing for high dimensions of heterogeneity of demographic
and genotype groups we well captured the heterogeneous process of smoking cessation, the resulting
pain from quitting to an addict may lower her utility gain when quitting takes time. This may lead
to underestimation of the private cost of cessation. On balance, based on both the economics and
the medicine and health literature, it is expected that the …rst two e¤ects outweigh the last. Thus,
one may view our e¤ectiveness …gure as a conservative measure.




                                                27
References
 [1] Adda, J. and F. Cornaglia, 2006. Taxes, cigarette consumption and smoking intensity. Ameri-
     can Economic Review, 96(4), 1013-1028.

 [2] Amos, C.I., Wu, X., Broderick, P., Gorlov, I.P., Gu, J., Eisen, T., Dong, Q., Zhang, Q., Gu, X.,
     Vijayakrishnan, J. and Sullivan, K., 2008. Genome-wide association scan of tag SNPs identi…es
     a susceptibility locus for lung cancer at 15q25. 1. Nature Genetics, 40(5), pp.616-622.

 [3] Ashenfelter, O., M. Greenstone, 2004. Using mandated speed limits to measure the value of a
     statistical life. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1), pp.S226-S267.

 [4] Barendregt, J.J., Bonneux, L. and van der Maas, P.J., 1997. The health care costs of smoking.
     New England Journal of Medicine, 337(15), pp.1052-1057.

 [5] Becker, G.S. and Murphy, K.M., 1988. A theory of rational addiction. Journal of Political
     Economy, 96(4), pp.675-700.

 [6] Bergen, A.W., Javitz, H.S., Krasnow, R., Nishita, D., Michel, M., Conti, D.V., Liu, J., Lee,
     W., Edlund, C.K., Hall, S. and Kwok, P.Y., 2013. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor variation
     and response to smoking cessation therapies. Pharmacogenetics and Genomics, 23(2), pp.94.

 [7] Bloom, D.E., Canning, D. and Graham, B., 2003. Longevity and life-cycle savings. Scandina-
     vian Journal of Economics 105(3), pp.319–338.

 [8] Bough, K.J., Amur, S., Lao, G., Hemby, S.E., Tannu, N.S., Kampman, K.M., Schmitz, J.M.,
     Martinez, D., Merchant, K.M., Green, C. and Sharma, J., 2014. Biomarkers for the develop-
     ment of new medications for cocaine dependence. Neuropsychopharmacology, 39(1), pp.202-
     219.

 [9] Chakraborty, S., 2004. Endogenous lifetime and economic growth. Journal of Economic Theory,
     116, 119–137.

[10] Chaloupka, F.J., 1990. Men, women, and addiction: the case of cigarette smoking (No. w3267).
     National Bureau of Economic Research.

[11] Chaloupka, F.J., 1991. Rational addictive behavior and cigarette smoking. Journal of Political
     Economy, 99(4), pp.722-742.

[12] Chaloupka, F.J. and Grossman, M., 1996. Price, tobacco control policies and youth smoking
     (No. w5740). National Bureau of Economic Research.

[13] Chaloupka, F.J. and Warner, K.E., 2000. The economics of smoking. Handbook of Health
     Economics, 1, pp.1539-1627.

[14] Chen, H.J., 2010. Life Expectancy, Fertility, and Educational Investment. Journal of Popula-
     tion Economics 23(1), pp. 37–56.

[15] Chen, L.S., Baker, T.B., Piper, M.E., Breslau, N., Cannon, D.S., Doheny, K.F., Gogarten,
     S.M., Johnson, E.O., Saccone, N.L., Wang, J.C. and Weiss, R.B., 2012. Interplay of genetic
     risk factors (CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4) and cessation treatments in smoking cessation
     success. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(7), pp.735-742.



                                                 28
[16] Chen LS, Bierut LJ., 2013. Genomics and personalized medicine: and smoking cessation treat-
     ment. Journal of Food Drug Analysis, 21(4), pp.S87-S90.

[17] Chen, L.S., Hung, R.J., Baker, T., Horton, A., Culverhouse, R., Saccone, N., Cheng, I., Deng,
     B., Han, Y., Hansen, H.M. and Horsman, J., Kim, C., Lutz, S., Rosenberger, A., Aben, K.K.,
     Andrew, A.S., Breslau, N., Chang, S.C., Die¤enbach, A.K., Dienemann, H., Frederiksen, B.,
     Han, J., Hatsukami, D.K., Johnson, E.O., Pande, M., Wrensch, M.R., McLaughlin, J., Skaug,
     V., van der Heijden, H.F., Wamp‡er, J., Wenzla¤, A., Woll, P., Zienolddiny, S., Bickeb A.,
     Heinrich, J., Hokanson, J.E., Hunter, D.J., Kiemeney, L.A., Lazarus, P., Le Marchand, L.,
     Liu, G., Mayordomo, J., Risch, A., Schwartz, A.G., Teare, D., Wu, X., Wiencke, J.K., Yang,
     P., Zhang, Z.F., Spitz, M.R., Kraft, P., Amos, C.I., Bierut, L.J., 2015a. CHRNA5 risk variant
     predicts delayed smoking cessation and earlier lung cancer diagnosis— a meta-analysis. Journal
     of the National Cancer Institute, 107(5), p.djv100.

[18] Chen, L.S., Baker, T.B., Jorenby, D., Piper, M., Saccone, N., Johnson, E., Breslau, N., Hat-
     sukami, D., Carney, R.M. and Bierut, L.J., 2015b. Genetic variation (CHRNA5), medication
     (combination nicotine replacement therapy vs. varenicline), and smoking cessation. Drug and
     Alcohol Dependence, 154, pp.278-282.

[19] Chen, L.S., Horton, A. and Bierut, L., 2016. Pathways to precision medicine in smoking
     cessation treatments. Neuroscience Letters.

[20] Costa, D.L. and Kahn, M.E., 2004. Changes in the value of life, 1940-1980. J. Risk and
     Uncertainty 29(2), pp.159-180.

[21] Ehrlich, I., 2000. Uncertain lifetime, life protection, and the value of life saving. Journal of
     Health Economics, 20(3), pp.341-367.

[22] Ehrlich, I. and Chuma, H., 1990. A Model of the Demand for Longevity and the Value of Life
     Extension. Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), pp.761-782.

[23] Ehrlich, I., Yin, Y., 2005. Explaining diversities in age-speci…c life expectancies and values of
     life saving: a numerical analysis. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 31(2), pp.129-162.

[24] Epstein, R.S., 2008. What’s needed for personalized therapy in smoking cessation. Clinical
     Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 84(3), pp.309-310.

[25] Furberg, H., Ostro¤, J., Lerman, C. and Sullivan, P.F., 2010. The public health utility of
     genome-wide association study results for smoking behavior. Genome Medicine, 2(4), p.26.

[26] Giovino, G.A., Schooley, M.W., Zhu, B.P., Chrismon, J.H., Tomar, S., Peddicord, J.P., Merritt,
     R.K., Husten, C.G. and Eriksen, M., 1994. Surveillance for selected tobacco-use behaviors—
     United States, 1900-1994. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 43, pp.1-43.

[27] Gold, A.B. and Lerman, C., 2012. Pharmacogenetics of smoking cessation: role of nicotine
     target and metabolism genes. Human Genetics, 131(6), pp.857-876.

[28] Gold, M. R., J. E. Siegel, L. B. Russell, M. C. Weinstein, eds., 1996. Cost-e¤ectiveness in
     health and medicine. Report of the Panel on Cost-E¤ectiveness in Health and Medicine. New
     York: Oxford University Press.

[29] Green, E.D., Guyer, M.S. and Institute, N.H.G.R., 2011. Charting a course for genomic medi-
     cine from base pairs to bedside. Nature, 470(7333), pp.204-213.

                                                 29
[30] Grossman, M., 1972a. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.
     Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, New York.
[31] Grossman, M., 1972b. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
     Political Economy, 80(2), pp.223-255.
[32] Grossman, M. and Kaestner, R., 1997. E¤ects of Education on Health. in J.R. Berhman and N.
     Stacey (eds.) The Social Bene…ts of Education, 12, pp.69. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
     Press.
[33] Hall, R.E. and Jones, C.I., 2007. The value of life and the rise in health spending. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 122(1), pp.39-72.
[34] Halld B., Engstr Gene variance in the nicotinic receptor cluster (CHRNA5-CHRNA3-
     CHRNB4) predicts death from cardiopulmonary disease and cancer in smokers. Journal of
     Internal Medicine.
[35] Jha, P., Ramasundarahettige, C., Landsman, V., Rostron, B., Thun, M., Anderson, R.N.,
     McAfee, T. and Peto, R., 2013. 21st-century hazards of smoking and bene…ts of cessation in
     the United States. New England Journal of Medicine, 368(4), pp.341-350.
[36] Jones C., 2016. Life and Growth. Journal of Political Economy, 124(2), pp.539-578.
[37] Kenkel, D.S., 1991. Health behavior, health knowledge, and schooling. Journal of Political
     Economy, 99(2), pp.287-305.
[38] Knopik, V.S., Maccani, M.A., Francazio, S. and McGeary, J.E., 2012. The epigenetics of
     maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy and e¤ects on child development. Development
     and Psychopathology, 24(04), pp.1377-1390.
[39] Kortmann, G.L., Dobler, C.J., Bizarro, L. and Bau, C.H., 2010. Pharmacogenetics of smoking
     cessation therapy. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics,
     153(1), pp.17-28.
[40] Kupiainen, H., Kuokkanen, M., Kontto, J., Virtamo, J., Salomaa, V., Lindqvist, A., Kilpel
     2016. CHRNA5/CHRNA3 locus associates with Increased mortality among smokers. COPD.
     Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 13(4), pp.464-470.
[41] Liu, J.Z., Tozzi, F., Waterworth, D.M., Pillai, S.G., Muglia, P., Middleton, L., Berrettini, W.,
     Knou¤, C.W., Yuan, X., Waeber, G. and Vollenweider, P., 2010. Meta-analysis and imputation
     re…nes the association of 15q25 with smoking quantity. Nature Genetics, 42(5), pp.436-440.
[42] Lleras-Muney, A., 2005. The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United
     States. Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), pp.189-221.
[43] Max, W., Rice, D.P., Sung, H.Y., Zhang, X. and Miller, L., 2004. The economic burden of
     smoking in California. Tobacco Control, 13(3), pp.264-267.
[44] McClure, J.B., Swan, G.E., John, J.S., Fauver, R., Javitz, H.S., Bergen, A.W., Nishita, D.,
     Niaura, R., Munaf and David, S.P., 2013. Pharmacogenetic smoking cessation intervention in a
     health care setting: a pilot feasibility study. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 15(2), pp.518-526.
[45] Miller, V.P., Ernst, C. and Collin, F., 1999. Smoking-attributable medical care costs in the
     USA. Social Science & Medicine, 48(3), pp.375-391

                                                 30
[46] Murphy, K.M. and Topel, R.H., 2006. The value of health and longevity. Journal of Political
     Economy, 114(5), pp.871-904.

[47] Pickett, M.S., Schober, S.E., Brody, D.J., Curtin, L.R., Giovino, G.A., 2006. Smoke-free laws
     and secondhand smoke exposure in US non-smoking adults, 1999–2002. Tobacco Control, 15(4),
     pp. 302-307.

[48] Pillai, S.G., Ge, D., Zhu, G., Kong, X., Shianna, K.V., Need, A.C., Feng, S., Hersh, C.P.,
     Bakke, P., Gulsvik, A. and Ruppert, A., 2009. A genome-wide association study in chronic
     obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): identi…cation of two major susceptibility loci. PLoS
     Genet, 5(3), p.e1000421.

[49] Rosen, S., 1988. The value of changes in life expectancy. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1(3),
     pp.285-304.

[50] Saccone, N.L., Culverhouse, R.C., Schwantes-An, T.H., Cannon, D.S., Chen, X., Cichon, S.,
     Giegling, I., Han, S., Han, Y., Keskitalo-Vuokko, K. and Kong, X., 2010. Multiple independent
     loci at chromosome 15q25. 1 a¤ect smoking quantity: a meta-analysis and comparison with
     lung cancer and COPD. PLoS Genet, 6(8), p.e1001053.

[51] Sturgess, J.E., George, T.P., Kennedy, J.L., Heinz, A. and M and drug addiction treatments.
     Addiction Biology, 16(3), pp.357-376.

[52] Tanner, J.A., Chenoweth, M.J. and Tyndale, R.F., 2015. Pharmacogenetics of nicotine and
     associated smoking behaviors. In The Neurobiology and Genetics of Nicotine and Tobacco (pp.
     37-86). Springer International Publishing.

[53] Thorgeirsson, T.E., Gudbjartsson, D.F., Surakka, I., Vink, J.M., Amin, N., Geller, F., Sulem,
     P., Rafnar, T., Esko, T., Walter, S. and Gieger, C., 2010. Sequence variants at CHRNB3-
     CHRNA6 and CYP2A6 a¤ect smoking behavior. Nature Genetics, 42(5), pp.448-453.

[54] Thorgeirsson, T.E., Geller, F., Sulem, P., Rafnar, T., Wiste, A., Magnusson, K.P., Manolescu,
     A., Thorleifsson, G., Stefansson, H., Ingason, A. and Stacey, S.N., 2008. A variant associ-
     ated with nicotine dependence, lung cancer and peripheral arterial disease. Nature, 452(7187),
     pp.638-642.

[55] Tobacco and Genetics Consortium, 2010. Genome-wide meta-analyses identify multiple loci
     associated with smoking behavior. Nature Genetics, 42(5), pp.441-447.

[56] van Ours, J.C., 2004. A pint a day raises a man’s pay; but smoking blows that gain away.
     Journal of Health Economics, 23(5), pp.863-886

[57] Volpp, K.G., Troxel, A.B., Pauly, M.V., Glick, H.A., Puig, A., Asch, D.A., Galvin, R., Zhu,
     J., Wan, F., DeGuzman, J. and Corbett, E., 2009. A randomized, controlled trial of …nancial
     incentives for smoking cessation. New England Journal of Medicine, 360(7), pp.699-709.

[58] Whiteford, H.A. and Baxter, A.J., 2013. The Global Burden of Disease 2010 Study: what does
     it tell us about mental disorders in Latin America?. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 35(2),
     pp.111-112.

[59] World Health Organization, 2011. Economics of Tobacco Toolkit: Assessment of the economic
     costs of smoking.



                                                 31
Figure 1. Lifecycle profile of smoking, health investment, and health capital
