                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOW SEGREGATED IS URBAN CONSUMPTION?

                                       Donald R. Davis
                                      Jonathan I. Dingel
                                         Joan Monras
                                       Eduardo Morales

                                     Working Paper 23822
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23822


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017


We thank Jesse Shapiro, four anonymous referees, Treb Allen, David Atkin, Pierre-Philippe
Combes, Victor Couture, Thomas Covert, Alon Eizenberg, Ingrid Gould Ellen, Mogens Fosgerau,
Marçal Garolera, Robin Gomila, Joshua Gottlieb, Jessie Handbury, Art O'Sullivan, Albert Saiz,
and many seminar audiences for helpful comments. We thank Bowen Bao, Luis Costa, Amrit K.
Daniel, David Henriquez, Yan Hu, Charlene Lee, Rachel Piontek, Anil Sindhwani, Ludwig
Suarez, Shirley Yarin, and, especially, Kevin Dano, Ben Eckersley, Hadi Elzayn, and Benjamin
Lee for research assistance. Thanks to the New York Police Department, and especially Gabriel
Paez, for sharing geocoded crime data. Dingel thanks the Kathryn and Grant Swick Faculty
Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for supporting this work.
Monras thanks the Banque de France Sciences Po partnership. Morales thanks the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and the Cowles Foundation at Yale University for their hospitality and
support. Part of this work is supported by a public grant overseen by the French National
Research Agency (ANR) as part of the “Investissements d’Avenir” program LIEPP (ANR-11-
LABX-0091, ANR-11-IDEX-0005-02). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Donald R. Davis, Jonathan I. Dingel, Joan Monras, and Eduardo Morales. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Segregated is Urban Consumption?
Donald R. Davis, Jonathan I. Dingel, Joan Monras, and Eduardo Morales
NBER Working Paper No. 23822
September 2017
JEL No. D12,J15,L83,R2

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide measures of ethnic and racial segregation in urban consumption. Using Yelp reviews,
we estimate how spatial and social frictions influence restaurant visits within New York City.
Transit time plays a first-order role in consumption choices, so consumption segregation partly
reflects residential segregation. Social frictions also have a large impact on restaurant choices:
individuals are less likely to visit venues in neighborhoods demographically different from their
own. While spatial and social frictions jointly produce significant levels of consumption
segregation, we find that restaurant consumption in New York City is only about half as
segregated as residences. Consumption segregation owes more to social than spatial frictions.


Donald R. Davis                                 Joan Monras
Department of Economics                         CEMFI
Columbia University                             Calle Casado del Alisal, 5
1004 International Affairs Building             28014 Madrid
420 West 118th St.                              jm3364@gmail.com
New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                        Eduardo Morales
drd28@columbia.edu                              Department of Economics
                                                Princeton University
Jonathan I. Dingel                              310 Fisher Hall
Booth School of Business                        Princeton, NJ 08544
University of Chicago                           and NBER
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                      ecmorales@princeton.edu
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jdingel@chicagobooth.edu
1       Introduction
For half a century, the United States has prohibited ethnic and racial discrimination in
housing, jobs, and education. Even so, segregation in each of these domains remains a
stubborn feature of modern America (Hellerstein and Neumark, 2008; Boustan, 2011). Many
studies have documented these facts and examined their consequences for socioeconomic
outcomes (Massey and Denton, 1993; Cutler and Glaeser, 1997; Chetty et al., 2014).
     Discrimination in consumption venues has also been prohibited for decades, yet racial
and ethnic segregation in this domain has been studied much less. A major achievement
of the civil rights movement was the Civil Rights Act of 1964, prohibiting discrimination
based on race or ethnicity in public accommodations.1 Jim Crow laws had segregated places
where people meet socially in order to maintain segregation of intimate contact (Myrdal,
1944, p.588). In contemporary America, these shared spaces have the potential to form
what Anderson (2011) calls “a cosmopolitan canopy,” a place where a diversity of people
may interact such that “a cognitive and cultural basis for trust is established that often leads
to the emergence of more civil behavior.”2 Such social capital has potential consequences for
many economic outcomes (Guiso et al., 2009; Smith, 2010). Gone are the days of whites-only
lunch counters. Yet we do not know the degree to which consumption venues are integrated
and serve as places where people of different backgrounds encounter each other in everyday
life (O’Flaherty, 2015, p.236-237).
     We cannot say a priori whether segregation along demographic lines is greater in con-
sumption or residences. If spatial frictions (i.e., the costs of traversing the city) were infinite,
then residential and consumption segregation would necessarily be identical. The fact that
individuals may move around the city for consumption purposes could mitigate the effect of
the spatial separation of residences if diverse consumers choose common destinations. Con-
versely, mobility may allow them to segregate even more if their choices diverge. Divergent
choices could result from social frictions, such as aversion to consuming in areas with differ-
ent population demographics or racial segregation of social networks that influence choices
(e.g., family or friends). Consumers from different backgrounds may also choose different
venues due to differences in tastes. The interactions of spatial frictions, social frictions, and
heterogeneous tastes make the degree of consumption segregation an empirical question.
     In this paper, we estimate a measure of consumption segregation along racial and ethnic
lines for the residents of New York City and quantify the contributions of spatial and social
frictions to it. We do so by estimating a discrete-choice model of restaurant visits using
information on more than 18,000 consumption decisions by individuals living in New York
City who use Yelp.com, a website where users review local businesses.3 We use our estimated
    1
     Public accommodations include hotels, restaurants, and entertainment venues.
    2
     There is a large social psychology literature on the mechanisms that may reduce intergroup prejudice.
Specifically, the literature on the “contact hypothesis” focuses on the potential for intergroup contact to
reduce such prejudice (Allport, 1954). Study results in this literature have generally been consistent with
the hypothesis that intergroup contact reduces intergroup prejudice (Pettigrew and Tropp, 2006), including
some laboratory and field experiments (Paluck and Green, 2009).
   3
     Estimating a model of consumption choices is necessary for both of our purposes. As discussed in
Gentzkow et al. (2017), empirical settings in which individuals choose among many alternatives, such as
ours, pose a small-sample-bias problem for estimating model-free measures of segregation. Furthermore,
decomposing consumption segregation into spatial and social frictions requires separately identifying the


                                                    1
parameters to predict the consumption decisions of all New York City residents. We find that
consumption choices are much less segregated than residential locations. Dissimilarity indices
contrasting the consumption destinations of consumers of different demographic groups are
about half the value of dissimilarity indices for residential locations. Both spatial and social
frictions have quantitatively large influences on the geography of consumption, with social
frictions contributing relatively more to consumption segregation along ethnic and racial
lines.
    Inferring spatial and social frictions from consumption behavior requires controlling for
other determinants of consumers’ choices. We exploit several advantages of our dataset,
described in Section 2, to identify these frictions. First, we locate Yelp users’ residences and
workplaces, allowing us to measure spatial frictions that account for the fact that consump-
tion may originate at home, work, or the commute between them and that both automobile
and public transit may be used. Second, we combine data from Yelp and the United States
Census Bureau to characterize user demographics, restaurant characteristics, and neighbor-
hood demographics. This allows us to distinguish demographic differences in tastes from
social frictions, and to measure the contributions of both individual-level homophily and
demographic differences across neighborhoods to social frictions.
    However, our dataset is not without limitations. First, Yelp users are not representative
of the general population. In terms of observable characteristics, users in our estimation
sample are more likely to be Asian and female. They live in neighborhoods with higher
incomes and more residents between the ages of 21 and 39. To address possible biases in
our measures of consumption segregation for the whole population of New York City arising
from these compositional differences, we allow our estimates of preference parameters to vary
with these observable individual characteristics. This approach addresses selection on these
observable characteristics but it cannot alleviate other differences between Yelp users and
the general population that we may not observe. Our results for the whole population of
New York City residents thus necessarily predict the level of consumption segregation that
prevails if everyone behaves as the observationally equivalent users in our estimation sample.
Second, we have limited ability to distinguish between Hispanic and white users in our
sample, so we cannot separately identify these two groups’ preference parameters. However,
we exploit tract-level information on demographics to capture social frictions between whites
and Hispanics. Third, we observe every review written by Yelp users, not every restaurant
visit. Identifying consumer preferences therefore involves assumptions on review-writing
behavior, which we discuss in Section 3.
    We model consumers’ behavior using a conditional-logit specification in which a con-
sumer’s valuation of a restaurant may depend upon spatial frictions, social frictions, and a
large set of observable characteristics of the consumer and the restaurant. All preference
parameters are allowed to vary flexibly by race. Our estimation procedure makes use of the
McFadden (1978) choice-set construction technique to address the computational burden
arising from consumers choosing among the thousands of restaurants in New York City.
    We present our parameter estimates in Section 4. Our quantification of consumers’
aversion to incurring longer travel times reveals a first-order role for spatial frictions in
determining the geography of consumption. Depending on the origin of the trip and the
relevance of each for consumers’ choices.


                                               2
mode of transport used, halving the minutes of travel time to a venue implies that a user
would be two to nearly four times more likely to visit the venue from that origin by that
mode. These spatial frictions will cause consumption patterns to partly inherit residential
patterns of segregation.4
     Consumption segregation also reflects the influence of demographic-related social fric-
tions. These frictions make consumers’ decisions depend upon the contrast between the
residential demographics of the restaurant’s location and either the residential demographics
of the user’s home location or the user’s own racial or ethnic identity. All else equal, a user
is more likely to visit a venue in a census tract that is more demographically similar to her
home tract. Individuals are also more likely to visit restaurants in tracts with a larger share
of residents of their own racial group. While consumption may be integrated de jure, these
social frictions make consumption less integrated de facto.
     Importantly, our estimates of both spatial and social frictions are obtained after control-
ling for race-specific tastes for observable features of restaurants and areas of the city. For
example, we incorporate cuisine-category fixed effects. Thus, for example, our finding that
Asian consumers are more likely to visit restaurants (of any type) located in neighborhoods
with more Asian residents is conditional on the fact that Asian consumers are more likely to
visit restaurants serving Asian cuisines. Similarly, we allow consumers’ valuations of restau-
rant prices and ratings to depend on the income level of their home census tract and control
for income differences when estimating social frictions associated with racial demographic
differences. In robustness checks, we introduce restaurant fixed effects that vary by race and
allow for correlation in consumer-specific preferences across restaurants of similar charac-
teristics in nested-logit specifications. These specifications yield similar estimates of spatial
and social frictions.
     Our estimated model fits the data well. Race-specific preference parameters are key to
capturing the level of consumption segregation that we observe in the estimation sample: a
specification that assumes that many preference parameters are common across all consumers
cannot replicate the in-sample isolation of consumers of different races. The specifications
that introduce race-specific restaurant fixed effects yield only very modest improvements in
fit. This is consistent with the fact that there is little segregation of Yelp reviewers between
pairs of restaurants that are observationally equivalent.
     Using our estimated model of the restaurant-visit decision, we compute measures of con-
sumption segregation for the entire residential population of New York City in Section 5.
Specifically, we characterize the ethnic and racial segregation of the predicted consumption
choices using dissimilarity indices. A dissimilarity index describes the fraction of the popu-
lation belonging to a group – Asian consumers, for example – that would have to alter their
consumption choices in order to match the distribution of predicted restaurant choices made
by the remainder of the population. Despite the magnitude of the estimated spatial and
social frictions, consumption dissimilarity is notably lower than residential dissimilarity for
all ethnic and racial groups.
     To quantify the contribution of spatial frictions, social frictions, and demographic dif-
ferences in tastes to consumption segregation, we re-compute the dissimilarity indices using
   4
     This is reminiscent of the spatial mismatch hypothesis, due to Kain (1968), which posits that spatial
frictions make residential segregation a source of workplace segregation.



                                                    3
the consumption decisions predicted by our estimated model when the coefficients capturing
the corresponding friction are set to zero. Social frictions make a larger contribution to
consumption segregation than spatial frictions. Eliminating spatial frictions entirely would
reduce consumption dissimilarity indices by 10% to 20%, depending on the race or ethnicity.
While eliminating spatial frictions could have freed individuals to further segregate their con-
sumption, the predicted decrease implies that different races’ shared valuations of choices are
stronger than the divergent forces of social frictions and taste heterogeneity. In the absence
of social frictions, consumption would be considerably more integrated, with dissimilarity
indices at roughly two-thirds their current levels. In the absence of both spatial and so-
cial frictions, differences in preferences and income levels between ethnic and racial groups
would predict consumption segregation that is still substantial but quite modest relative to
residential segregation.
    We also use our estimated model to examine the impact on consumption segregation of
counterfactual changes in transportation policy and in the preference parameters determin-
ing the degree of social frictions. Consistent with the modest role of spatial frictions overall,
major changes in transportation infrastructure have only small effects on consumption dis-
similarity. Reductions in social frictions would integrate consumption.
    Finally, we use our estimates to measure the welfare consequences of neighborhood change
for incumbent residents in Section 6. Gentrification is associated with changes in both
restaurants’ and residents’ characteristics that affect the value of consumption. We compute
the change in welfare that the residents of a census tract in the middle of Harlem would
experience if the surrounding census tracts were to exhibit the residential and restaurants
characteristics of high-income, majority-white census tracts of the Upper East Side. We find
a significant reduction in the value of their consumption opportunities. This is attributable
to the increase in social frictions associated with the change in racial demographics. The
change in restaurants’ characteristics would have very modest effects on their welfare.
    Our findings relate to a recent literature on the geography of urban consumption. Stud-
ies have documented cross-city variation in the tradable goods available for consumption
(Handbury, 2013; Handbury and Weinstein, 2015), and geographic variation in the supply of
non-tradables has been posited to shape the relative attractiveness of cities (Glaeser et al.,
2001; Schiff, 2015). Waldfogel (2007) documents that restaurant entry in different cuisine
categories is correlated with local demographic composition. This dimension of economic life
has grown increasingly important in recent decades.5 Prior studies of the geography of con-
sumption within the city include Katz (2007), Houde (2012), Couture (2015), and Eizenberg
et al. (2017). Relative to this prior work, we build a unique dataset that combines infor-
mation on individuals’ home and work locations, their demographics, and characteristics of
the restaurants they patronize, and we use it to separately identify the effect of spatial and
social frictions on consumer decisions.
    We study urban consumption using online user-generated content, which is increasingly
exploited by economists. Among others, Anderson and Magruder (2012) and Luca (2016a)
examine Yelp’s effects on restaurant outcomes. Edelman and Luca (2014) infer racial iden-
    5
      US households’ share of food spending devoted to food prepared away from home grew from less than
26% in 1970 to more than 43% in 2012 (USDA 2014). Analogously, while the number of daily commuting
trips has stayed relatively constant for decades, trips for social/recreational purposes have steadily grown
(Commuting in America III, 2006).


                                                     4
tities from profile photos to study discrimination on Airbnb.com. Caetano and Maheshri
(2015) document consumption segregation by gender using Foursquare data. Luca (2016b)
surveys this growing body of research on user-generated content and social media.
    We contribute to the large literature on social and economic fragmentation related to
demographic differences by measuring consumption segregation in restaurants. The prior
literature has largely focused on residential segregation, though there are studies document-
ing the segregation of workplaces (Hellerstein and Neumark, 2008), students’ friendship net-
works (Echenique and Fryer, 2007), and media consumption (George and Waldfogel, 2003;
Oberholzer-Gee and Waldfogel, 2009). We study racial segregation of consumption in a set-
ting in which consumers travel to consume and come face-to-face with each other. Everyday
encounters between people of different backgrounds in shared public spaces may be a basis
for building understanding and tolerance (Anderson, 2011), though consumption venues are
also sometimes sites of racial and ethnic discrimination (Labaton, 1994; Lee, 2000; Ayres,
2001; Antecol and Cobb-Clark, 2008; Schreer et al., 2009). We provide the first quantification
of the segregation of these consumption choices.


2       Data
We combine data from Yelp and other sources to estimate our model of the restaurant-visit
decision and compute measures of consumption segregation. Section 2.1 describes the Yelp
data and Section 2.2 describes the other sources of data we use. Section 2.3 presents evidence
suggestive of the influence of spatial and social frictions on consumers’ restaurant choices.

2.1     Yelp data
Yelp.com is a website where users review local businesses, primarily restaurants and retail
stores (Yelp, 2013). It describes a venue in terms of its address, average rating, user re-
views, and a wide variety of other characteristics. Yelp’s coverage of restaurants is close to
comprehensive (see Appendix B.1). The website is relevant for the general population: dis-
continuities in Yelp ratings have substantive effects on restaurants’ revenues (Luca, 2016a)
and reservation availability (Anderson and Magruder, 2012). In addition to assigning a
rating of one to five stars, users write a review describing their personal experience with
the business. Crucial for our purposes is that users sometimes disclose information in their
reviews about their residential and work locations.6
    We use data on Yelp users who reviewed a New York City (henceforth, NYC) restaurant
venue between 2005 and 2011. As described in detail in Appendix B.2, we identify users’
residential and work locations from the text of their reviews. Specifically, we first search the
text of a large number of reviews for 26 key phrases related to location, such as “close to
me,” “block away,” and “my apartment.” Then we read the reviews containing these phrases
to infer whether the user’s home or work is proximate to the reviewed business. Finally, we
estimate the residential and work locations of a user as the average of the latitude-longitude
coordinates of the sets of venues identified as being close to this user’s home and work
    6
    Another example of using the information disclosed in reviews is detecting outbreaks of food poisoning
unreported to NYC health authorities (Harrison et al., 2014).


                                                    5
locations, respectively. Restricting our sample to users whose reviews do not reveal a change
in residence or workplace within NYC and whose home and work locations are in census
tracts with demographic and income information, we obtain an estimation sample of 18,015
reviews written by 440 distinct users.7
    Yelp users typically post a profile photo, which we use to infer a user’s apparent gender
and race.8 Mayer and Puller (2008) compare measures of ethnicity and race inferred from
photos with administrative data and finds a high degree of accuracy in partitioning subjects
into three racial groups: Asian; black; and white or Hispanic. Consequently, when inferring
each user’s race from her profile picture, we limit ourselves to classifying individuals into
these three groups.
    Table 1 reports summary statistics for the 440 users included in our estimation sample
and the broader NYC population. Sixty-one percent of estimation-sample users are female,
and only 5% of users are of unidentified gender. We could not infer race for 26% of users.
Asian users constitute 24% of the estimation sample, while white or Hispanic users are 42%
of the sample. Asians are thus overrepresented in our sample, as Asian residents constitute
only about 12% of the population of NYC. Although only 10% of the users with an inferred
race were identified as black, these users wrote more than one thousand reviews.
    Figure 1 depicts the home and work locations of the users in our estimation sample.
Consistent with patterns in the broader population of NYC, these users’ workplaces are con-
centrated in Manhattan below Fifty-Ninth Street, while their residences are more dispersed.
The average user in our estimation sample lives in a census tract with median household in-
come near $75,600, which is typical of Manhattan but higher than NYC as a whole ($56,300).
The users in our estimation sample tend to live in census tracts with a share of the popula-
tion between the ages of 21 and 39 (42%) that is higher than that of both Manhattan (37%)
and NYC as a whole (30%). These patterns are consistent with statements that Yelp’s global
user base is younger and higher-income than the population as a whole (Yelp, 2013).
    Asian and black users in our estimation sample are less residentially segregated than
Asian and black residents of NYC as a whole. Table 1 P   reports “isolation indices” as defined
in the canonical survey of Massey and Denton (1988), k (popgk /popg ) · (popgk /popk ), where
popg is the population of group g, popk is the population of tract k, and popgk is the pop-
ulation of group g in tract k. These characterize the average group g (e.g., Asian) share of
tract residents experienced by members of group g. White/Hispanic users in our estimation
sample live in census tracts with a white/Hispanic share of residents that is typical of that
experienced by white/Hispanic residents of NYC. By contrast, Asian and black users in our
estimation sample live in census tracts that have lower Asian and black shares, respectively,
than is typical. The isolation indices for Asian and black users in our estimation sample
are about three-quarters their values for Manhattan residents and half their values for NYC
   7
      We could use a considerably larger sample if we only required information on the user’s home location.
Estimates of models that do not require information on individuals’ workplaces are quantitatively similar
irrespective of whether we use the restricted sample in which both home and work locations are known or
the larger sample of individuals for whom we only have information on home locations.
    8
      While users may choose “male” or “female” for their gender on their Yelp profile, this information is not
publicly displayed. Thus, we classify users based on their gender presentation in their profile photo. Users
with profile photos for which we could not classify the gender (e.g., cartoon graphics, photos of animals)
have both male and female dummy variables equal to zero.



                                                      6
              Table 1: Estimation sample and NYC summary statistics
                                          Estimation sample Manhattan                   NYC
                                              Yelp users      tracts                    tracts
 User appearance / Tract demographics
 Female                                                  .61                .525         .524
 Male                                                    .34                .475         .476
 Asian                                                   .24                .117         .125
 Black                                                   .08                .142         .245
 White or Hispanic                                       .42                .716         .600
   Hispanic                                                                 .232         .265
   White                                                                    .484         .335
 User race indeterminate                                 .26
 Home tract characteristics
 Median household income (thousands)                    75.6                76.3         56.3
 Age 21-39 residents share                               .42                .374         .302
 Asian isolation index                                  .197                .273         .325
 Black isolation index                                   .28                .383         .569
 White/Hispanic isolation index                         .778                .786          .73

 Observations                                            440                 279        2110
Notes: This table summarizes characteristics of the 440 Yelp users in our estimation sample and
all census tracts in Manhattan and New York City. User demographics are inferred from Yelp
profile photos. Tract demographics from 2010 Census of Population and tract incomes from 2007-
2011 American Community Survey. Isolation indices as defined in Massey and Denton (1988).




                                               7
                    Figure 1: Locations of Yelp users in estimation sample




       Notes: This figure depicts the distribution of home and work locations of the 440 users in
       our estimation sample.


residents as a whole.
    Figure A.1 displays all the restaurants reviewed by users in our estimation sample. These
venues are concentrated in Manhattan below Fifty-Ninth Street, but our estimation sample
contains venues in many parts of NYC. Table A.1 summarizes the distribution of reviews in
terms of venues’ prices, ratings, cuisine types, and boroughs for both our estimation sample
and Yelp in its entirety. The users in our estimation sample exhibit review frequencies similar
to those of the broader Yelp population.9

2.2     NYC transit, demographic, and crime data
To measure spatial frictions, we use car and public-transit times between the centroids of
census tracts from Google Maps. In addition to direct travel from home or work, we compute
the additional transit time a user would incur by incorporating a visit to a venue as part of
her commute. Denote the transit time from location x to location y by time(x, y). For user
i living in hi and working in wi , the travel time associated with visiting venue j in tract kj
from her commuting path pi is computed as
                      1
                        max {time(hi , kj ) + time(wi , kj ) − time(hi , wi ), 0} ,
              time(pi, j) =
                      2
where the maximum operator imposes the triangle inequality on transit times.
   9
    Within-user geographic dispersion in restaurants reviewed, as measured by the average distance between
any two reviewed restaurants, and within-user demographic variation, as measured by the average Euclidean
demographic distance (defined below) between any two reviewed restaurants’ surrounding residents, are also
very similar for users in our estimation sample and Yelp users as a whole. Users in our sample thus do not
seem to be particularly “adventurous” relative to the typical Yelp user.

                                                    8
                Figure 2: New York City population by race or ethnicity, 2010




       Notes: This figure depicts the residential NYC population in terms of four demo-
       graphic categories that cover 97% of the population. Each dot represents 200 people.
       Tract-level population data from the 2010 Census of Population.


    To measure social frictions associated with racial and ethnic demographics, we use data
from the 2010 Census of Population that describe each census tract’s residential population
in terms of five groups: Asian, black, Hispanic, white, and other.10 These population counts
are depicted in Figure 2.11     Using these data, we measure ethnic and racial differences
between two tracts as the Euclidean distance between the vectors containing the two tracts’
five residential population shares. Specifically, defining sharestract as the five-element vec-
tor containing these population shares, the “Euclidean demographic distance” (henceforth,
EDD) between origin and destination tracts is
                                                                √
                            ksharesorigin − sharesdestination k/ 2,

where k · k indicates the L2 norm. This measure ranges from zero to one. Figure 3 illustrates
the EDD for two origin tracts and many destination tracts. The Morningside Heights origin
in the left panel has a diverse population that is similar to most NYC tracts, and thus its
EDD to most destinations is low. The Manhattan Chinatown origin in the right panel is
   10
      To be precise, we use the population counts of non-Hispanic Asians, non-Hispanic blacks, all Hispan-
ics, and non-Hispanic whites to respectively define the groups we call “Asian,” “black,” “Hispanic,” and
“white.” The “other” group includes Native Americans, Hawaiians, other races, and mixed-race categories;
it constitutes about 3% of the NYC population.
   11
      This map was inspired by a New York Times project, “Mapping America: Every City, Every Block.”


                                                    9
                Figure 3: Euclidean demographic distances from two census tracts




       Notes: These maps depict Euclidean demographic distances from an origin tract to other
       NYC tracts. In the left panel, the origin tract is in Morningside Heights; in the right
       panel, Manhattan’s Chinatown. Demographic data from 2010 Census of Population.


overwhelmingly Asian and thus quite demographically distant from most tracts, with the
exception of the Flushing Chinatown in Queens.
    To allow social frictions to depend not only on the demographic composition of the tract
in which the restaurant is located but also on the surrounding demographic composition, we
calculate the Echenique and Fryer (2007) spectral segregation index (henceforth, SSI) for
the modal residential race or ethnicity in each census tract. This index measures the degree
to which a census tract borders census tracts of the same residential demographic plurality,
and the further degree to which those tracts themselves border tracts of the same plurality,
ad infinitum. For example, in Figure 2, the black census tracts at the center of the cluster
of blue dots in Queens, on the right edge of the map, will have higher SSI values than those
at the edge of the cluster.
    We also allow income and crime levels in a restaurant’s tract to influence consumer
choices. The data on median household incomes come from the 2007-2011 American Com-
munity Survey 5-Year Estimate. To measure crime rates by location, we compute tract-level
robbery statistics for 2007-2011 using confidential, geocoded incident-level reports provided
to us by the New York Police Department.12 We use robberies as our crime measure because
these are likely the most common and relevant threat to individuals visiting a restaurant.
All tract-level characteristics are summarized in Tables 1 and A.2.
 12
      Fewer than 3% of the Yelp reviews in our estimation sample were posted outside of 2007-2011.




                                                    10
                     Figure 4: Two users’ locations and restaurant reviews




  Notes: These two maps display two users’ home and work locations and the Yelp restaurant venues they
  reviewed. Red dots denote Yelp venues reviewed by this user. The “H” denotes the average coordinates
  of those venues identified as home locations in the text of this user’s reviews. The “W” denotes the
  similarly defined work location.


2.3     Observed behavior and frictions
We present here some evidence suggesting the relevance of spatial and social frictions for
restaurant choices.
    Individual users’ reviews suggest that both proximity and venue characteristics influence
user behavior. Figure 4 maps home, work, and restaurant-review locations for two individuals
in our sample. The user in the left panel lives and works in midtown Manhattan. The other
user works in midtown Manhattan and resides in a southeastern Manhattan development
called Stuyvesant Town. Both users primarily review venues that are near their home or
work locations. At the same time, both users visit more downtown venues than uptown
venues, which may reflect differences in the quantity or quality of venues in these areas.
    The choices made by all users in our estimation sample suggest the importance of spatial
and social frictions. Figure 5 plots, for all users in our estimation sample, the density of three
covariates for the set of venues reviewed by these users and for a random sample of venues
that they did not review. The left panel depicts transit times from home, the center panel
transit times from work, and the right panel the EDD between the home census tract and
the venue’s tract. The plots show that, unconditionally, Yelp users are more likely to review
venues that are closer to their residential and workplace locations and located in tracts with
demographics more similar to those of their home tract.13
    While these density plots are consistent with the idea that spatial and social frictions
  13
     The fact that both reviewed and unreviewed venues have shorter travel times from work than from home
reflects the fact that most venues and workplaces are in Manhattan.

                                                   11
           .03
                             Figure 5: Travel times, demographic differences, and consumer choice




                                                                                    .04




                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                    .03




                                                                                                                                                             1.5
           .02
 Density




                                                                                 Density




                                                                                                                                                          Density
                                                                                  .02




                                                                                                                                                           1
           .01




                                                                                    .01




                                                                                                                                                             .5
           0




                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                             0
                 0    20             40             60             80      100             0   20             40             60               80    100             0   .2          .4           .6           .8   1
                      Minutes of travel time from home by public transit                       Minutes of travel time from work by public transit                            Euclidean demographic distance

                                 Reviewed                Unreviewed                                       Reviewed                Unreviewed                                    Reviewed             Unreviewed




           Notes: These plots are kernel densities for three distributions of user-venue pairs: those venues chosen
           by users in our estimation sample and a random sample of venues not chosen by these users. The
           left panel plots the densities as functions of travel time from home by public transit; the center panel
           shows travel time from work by public transit; the right panel shows Euclidean demographic distances.
           Epanechnikov kernels with bandwidths of 3, 3 and 0.1, respectively.


influence consumers’ decisions, they are only suggestive. Each plot neglects the influence of
other frictions and restaurant characteristics on consumers’ decisions. For example, given the
city’s significant residential segregation, transit times between census tracts are positively
correlated with measures of demographic differences. Therefore, from Figure 5 alone, it is not
possible to identify the relative influence of spatial and demographic distance on consumers’
decisions.


3                    Empirical approach
To measure the relative importance of tastes and spatial and social frictions in determining
the restaurant choices of consumers of different races or ethnicities, we introduce a dis-
crete choice model of restaurant visits. Section 3.1 describes the assumptions we impose
on consumers’ preferences. Since we observe restaurant reviews, not all restaurant visits,
assumptions on the review-writing behavior of Yelp users are necessary for identification of
their preferences. Section 3.2 introduces these assumptions. Section 3.3 describes the steps
we follow to exploit the data introduced in Section 2 to estimate our model. In Section 3.4,
we introduce several extensions that relax the key identifying assumptions in our baseline
model.

3.1                  Demand specification
Individuals decide whether to visit any venue and, if they do, which venue to visit. We index
individuals by i, venues by j, and by t the occasions in which i needs to decide on whether
to visit a venue. In our empirical application, we assume that the set J of potential venues
that a consumer may visit is the set of all NYC restaurants listed on Yelp and located in
a census tract for which information on residents’ median income is available.14 We denote
     14
    Specifically, we restrict the set of restaurants to only those with price and rating information listed on
Yelp in June 2011, when we collected our data. Appendix B.1 shows that Yelp’s coverage of venues is nearly
comprehensive. Section 2.2 shows that data on median income is available for nearly all census tracts.


                                                                                                                 12
the outside option of not visiting any venue by j = 0.
    When visiting a venue, individuals must choose whether to visit it from home, work, or
by deviating from their commuting path, and whether to travel via public transit or car.
We index pairs of origin locations and transportation modes by l and assume that a trip
to a venue may be of one of six types: from home via car (l = hc), from home via public
transit (l = hp), from work via car (l = wc), from work via public transit (l = wp), from the
commuting path via car (l = pc), or from the commuting path via public transit (l = pp).
We denote the set of these six potential origin-mode pairs as L ≡ {hc, hp, wc, wp, pc, pp}.
    We allow preferences for restaurants, trip origin locations and transportation modes to
differ across racial or ethnic groups. We index groups by g, which may take three values:
white or Hispanic (g = w), Asian (g = a), and black (g = b). We denote the set of these
three potential groups as G ≡{w, a, b}.
    For an individual i belonging to the racial or ethnic group g(i), we assume that her utility
of visiting restaurant j in period t from origin-mode l is
                              1      1      2
                     Uijlt = γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                         1
                                                              Zj1 + βg(i)
                                                                     2
                                                                          Zij2 + νijlt ,      (1)
          1
where Xijl  measures the spatial frictions that i incurs when visiting j from l, the vector Xij2
measures the social frictions that may affect the appeal that restaurant j has to individual i,
and Zj1 and Zij2 control for other observed venue and individual-venue-specific characteristics,
respectively. The variable νijlt is a scalar unobserved by the econometrician. We allow all
preference parameters (γ 1 , γ 2 , β 1 , β 2 ) to vary across demographic groups g and, since the
coefficient γ 1 is l-specific, we additionally allow the marginal disutility of a trip to flexibly
depend on both its origin and the mode of transit.
    Although our dataset describes users’ home and work locations, it does not indicate the
origin-mode l of each trip. We address this data limitation by assuming that consumers
jointly optimize the restaurant they patronize and the origin-mode from which they do
so, choosing thus the jl combination that maximizes their utility. Accordingly, defining a
dummy variable dijlt that equals one if individual i travels to venue j from origin-mode l at
period t, we assume that

                            dijlt = 1{Uijlt ≥ Uij 0 l0 t ; ∀ j 0 ∈ J, l0 ∈ L},                (2)

where 1{A} is an indicator function that equals one if A is true. We  P also define a variable
dijt that is one if individual i chooses venue j at period t, dijt = l∈L dijlt , irrespective of
the origin-mode of the trip.
    In our benchmark specification, we assume that the vector of unobserved utilities for
individual i at period t, νit = {νijlt ; ∀ j ∈ J, l ∈ L}, is independent across individuals and
time periods and has a jointPtypeP   I extreme value distribution: its cumulative distribution
function is F (νit ) = exp(− j∈J l∈L exp(−νijlt )). This distribution yields a conditional-
logit discrete-choice model of restaurant visits.

3.2    Review-writing behavior
Let d∗ijt be a dummy variable that equals one if individual i writes a review of restaurant j at
time t. The fact that we observe reviews rather than restaurant visits (i.e., we observe d∗ijt but

                                                     13
not dijt ) implies that estimating the preference parameters in equation (1) requires making
assumptions on the review-writing behavior of Yelp users. We impose three assumptions.
First, users do not review restaurants they have not visited. Second, they write at most one
review per restaurant (independently of how many times they visit a restaurant). Third,
conditional on having visited a restaurant and not having previously reviewed it, they write
a review with a probability p∗it that is independent of the restaurant’s characteristics and the
origin-mode of the trip.

3.3      Estimation procedure
We estimate the preference parameters in equation (1) using a maximum likelihood estima-
tor. To derive the relevant likelihood function, we implement the following five steps.

Step 1: derive restaurant visit probability. According to the assumptions in Section 3.1, the
probability that individual i visits venue j from origin-mode l at period t is
                                                              .X X
                P (dijlt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β)) = exp(Vijl )  (  exp(Vij 0 l0 )),       (3)
                                                                           j 0 ∈J l0 ∈L

where Xi , Zi , γ, and β are vectors that collect their respective terms and15
                                       1      1      2
                               Vijl ≡ γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                                  1
                                                                       Zj1 + βg(i)
                                                                              2
                                                                                   Zij2 .                             (4)
The probability that individual i visits venue j at period t is then,
                                                    X
              P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β)) = P (  dijlt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))
                                                              l∈L
                                                          X
                                                      =         P (dijlt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))
                                                          l∈L
                                                          X                .X X
                                                      =         exp(Vijl )   (  exp(Vij 0 l0 )).                      (5)
                                                          l∈L                j 0 ∈J l0 ∈L

The first equality applies the definition of dijt , the second one takes into account that the
mode-origin of a trip is unique (i.e. the joint probability that individual i visits restaurant j
at period t from two different origins l and l0 is zero), and the third equality uses equation (3).

Step 2: derive restaurant review probability. As shown in Appendix C.1, equation (5) and
the review-writing model described in Section 3.2 imply that the probability of observing a
review of venue j written by individual i at period t is
   P (d∗ijt = 1|Xi , Zi , Jit , Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) = p∗it 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 }P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β)),    (6)
where Jit0 denotes the set of restaurants not previously reviewed by i; i.e. Jit0 ≡ {j ∈ J :
d∗ijt0 = 0 for all t0 < t and j 6= 0}.16 As shown in Appendix C.1, combining equations (5)
  15                        1    2
      Formally, Xi ≡ {(Xijl   , Xij ); ∀j ∈ J, l ∈ L}, Zi ≡ {(Zj1 , Zij
                                                                     2                     1
                                                                        ); ∀j ∈ J}, γ ≡ {(γgl , γg2 ); ∀g ∈ G, l ∈ L}, and
β ≡ {(βg1 , βg2 ); ∀g ∈ G}.
   16
      As reflected in equation (6), if individuals were to review every restaurant they visit for the first time,
 ∗
pit = 1, the probability of observing a review would equal either the probability in equation (5) (for any
venue j that user i has not previously visited) or zero (for any previously visited venue).

                                                           14
and (6), we can derive the probability that individual i reviews restaurant j at period t
conditional on i reviewing any restaurant at that period:
                                                          1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 } l∈L exp(Vijl )
                                                                              P
               ∗         ∗                 0
           P (dijt = 1|dit = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit ; (γ, β)) =      P       P                      , (7)
                                                                     0
                                                                 j∈Jit   l∈L exp(Vij 0 l )

where d∗it = Jj=1 d∗ijt is a dummy variable that equals one if i writes a review at t.
             P


Step 3: reduce choice set. The cardinality of the choice set Jit0 makes it computationally
burdensome to construct the denominator of the probability in equation (7). As Jit0 equals
the set of all restaurants in NYC, J, minus those reviewed by individual i prior to period t,
the large dimensionality of J implies that the set Jit0 will also be very large.
    To address this dimensionality issue, we adapt the choice-set-reduction procedure from
McFadden (1978) to our empirical setting. For every individual i and period t in which we
observe a review written by i, we define a set Sit that is a subset of Jit0 . We construct Sit by
including the restaurant j for which d∗ijt = 1 plus a random subset of all other alternatives
in Jit0 , selecting them from Jit0 with equal probability. As all elements of Sit other than the
actual choice of i at t are selected randomly, the set Sit itself is random. We denote by
π(Sit |d∗ijt = 1, Jit0 ) the probability of assigning the subset Sit to an individual i who reviewed
venue j at t. Our sampling scheme implies that
                                                          
                                         ∗         0        κit if j ∈ Sit ,
                                 π(Sit |dijt = 1, Jit ) =                                         (8)
                                                             0 otherwise,
where κit ∈ (0, 1) is a constant determined by our choice of the number of venues in Sit and
the number of venues in Jit0 .
   As we show in Appendix C.1, given equations (7) and (8), we can write the probability
that i reviews restaurant j at period t conditional on a randomly drawn set Sit and that i
writes a review at t as
                                                            1{j ∈ Sit } l∈L exp(Vijl )
                                                                         P
                  ∗        ∗
              P (dijt = 1|dit = 1, Xi , Zi , Sit ; (γ, β)) = P          P                  . (9)
                                                               j 0 ∈Sit  l∈L exp(Vij 0 l )

It is important to remark that, to be able to randomly draw a set Sit from the set of
non-reviewed restaurants Jit0 , one needs to observe all reviews previously written by user i.
Building the probability in equation (9) will thus be infeasible in empirical applications in
which, contrary to our case, researchers do not observe the complete history of reviews of
the individuals in the sample. Only because we observe this complete history is it true that
         0
the set Ji1 corresponding to the first observed review of user i is identical to the set of all
NYC restaurants, J.

Step 4: derive individual i-specific likelihood function. Using jit to denote the restaurant
reviewed by individual i at period t, the joint probability of observing an individual i writing
the Ti reviews {ji1 , ji2 , . . . , jiTi } conditional on observing a review written by i in each of the
periods {1, . . . , Ti } and on randomly drawing the sets {Si1 , Si2 , . . . , SiTi } is
                                           Ti
                                              1{j ∈ Sit } l∈L exp(Vijl )
                                                            P
                                          Y
                                               P           P                   .                    (10)
                                          t=1     j 0 ∈Sit   l∈L exp(Vij 0 l )



                                                  15
This joint probability is simply the product of the corresponding marginal probabilities in
equation (9). Intuitively, all the dynamic effects of a review written by individual i at period
t are reflected in the subsequent choice sets {Jis0 , ∀s > t}, and the effect of each of these
choice sets is subsumed in the randomly selected subset {Sis , ∀s > t}. The mathematical
derivation of the probability in equation (10) is in Appendix C.1.

Step 5: derive log-likelihood function. Given equation (10) and assuming that we observe a
random sample i = 1, . . . , N of individuals from the population of interest, we can write the
log-likelihood function as
                      N X Ti X                         P                       !
                                                         l∈L exp(Vijl )
                                  1{dijt = 1} ln P
                    X
                                     ∗
                                                           P                     ,         (11)
                     i=1 t=1 j∈S  it
                                                     0
                                                    j ∈Sit   l∈L exp(Vij 0 l )


where Vijl is the function of the parameter vector of interest (γ, β) defined in equation (4).

    All the estimates presented in Section 4 are computed as the values of (γ, β) that max-
imize the function in equation (11). As proved in McFadden (1978), these maximands are
consistent estimators of the preference parameters defined in equation (1).17 Specifically,
the fact that we maximize a likelihood function that conditions on the randomly chosen sets
{Sit ; ∀i, t} does not affect the consistency of our estimator. However, the variance of this
estimator decreases as we increase the cardinality of each set Sit . While our benchmark
estimates use sets {Sit ; ∀i, t} with 20 restaurants each, Table A.3 shows that our conclusions
are robust to using sets that include 50 or 100 restaurants.18

3.4     Discussion
The baseline model described in sections 3.1 and 3.2 embeds several key identifying assump-
tions. In this section, we discuss why we impose these assumptions, what they imply in our
empirical context, and how we relax them in several extensions to this baseline model.

Absence of race-specific preferences for restaurants’ unobserved characteristics.
Except for the vector of idiosyncratic errors νit , the utility function in equation (1) assumes
that consumers’ preferences exclusively depend on observed restaurant characteristics (see
Section 4 for a complete description of the covariates (Xi , Zi ) entering our demand model).
However, individuals from different racial groups may have heterogeneous preferences for
restaurants on the basis of characteristics that we do not observe. For example, group-g
consumers may prefer a specific venue because this venue is frequently patronized by other
customers belonging to the same group g. To explore the robustness of our baseline results
to the presence of unobserved venue characteristics that determine consumers’ preferences,
we generalize the utility function in equation (1) to allow for race- and restaurant-specific
  17
     Appendix C.2 presents simulation results that illustrate the asymptotic properties of our estimator.
Section 4.4 illustrates its finite-sample properties.
  18
     Using smaller simulated choice sets is computationally advantageous. For example, doubling their size
roughly doubles the computation time while yielding only modestly smaller standard errors (see Table A.3).


                                                   16
unobserved effects:

                                                                                  αg(i)j 0 1{j 0 = j} + νijlt ,
                                                                         X
                    1      1      2
           Uijlt = γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                               1
                                                    Zj1 + βg(i)
                                                           2
                                                                Zij2 +                                            (12)
                                                                         j 0 ∈J


where αgj captures the group-g specific component of the utility of visiting restaurant j that
is determined by unobserved characteristics.19

Independence of irrelevant alternatives. Our baseline model assumes that all unob-
served determinants of the utility to individual i of patronizing venue j at period t from
origin-mode l, as captured in the scalar νijlt , are independent across venues, possible origins
of the trip and modes of transport. To illustrate the robustness of our baseline estimates,
we relax this independence assumption in multiple directions.
    First, in Appendix C.3, we introduce an alternative model in which we assume that νijlt
does not vary with the origin-mode l; i.e. νijlt = νijl0 t for any pair (l, l0 ). An implication
of this alternative model is that, conditional on visiting a restaurant j, every individual i
                                                                                            1    1
travels to it using the origin and mode of transport that maximizes the term γg(i)l             Xijl . As
                                                 1
discussed in Section 4.1, the covariate Xijl in our baseline model equals the (log) number of
minutes that it takes individual i to reach venue j from the origin-model l; thus, assuming
                          1        1                             0
that νijlt = νijl0 t and γg(i)l = γg(i)l 0 < 0 for any pair (l, l ) is equivalent to assuming that users

minimize travel time to each venue.
    Second, in Section 4.5.2, we present estimates of nested-logit models that allow for cor-
relation in the unobserved terms νijlt across restaurants j and origin-modes l. Specifically,
we allow the terms νijlt to be correlated across restaurants that share a number of character-
istics. Following Train et al. (1987), Appendix C.4 describes how we adapt the estimation
procedure in Section 3.3 to these nested-logit demand models.

Absence of within-group unobserved parameter heterogeneity. One additional
limitation of the conditional-logit model described in Section 3.1 is that it does not al-
low for within-group-g unobserved heterogeneity in the parameters capturing preferences for
observable restaurant characteristics. The standard approach to do so is to assume that
individual-specific preferences follow a known distribution in the population of interest. In
our setting, estimating such a model is infeasible: unobserved heterogeneity in the vector
(γ, β) makes the choice-set construction procedure in McFadden (1978) inapplicable and,
  19
       Incorporating the set of fixed effects {αgj ; ∀g ∈ {a, b, w}, j ∈ J} significantly increases the dimensionality
of the parameter vector we estimate. To explore computational costs, we have estimated this specification in
two
P ways. First, 0 a procedure similar to that in Section 3.3 but with two adjustments: (a) we add the term
   j 0 ∈J αg(i)j 0 1{j = j} to the expression for Vijl in equation (4); (b) for each individual i and period t, we
form the set Sit by drawing only from those restaurants visited by at least one sample user that belongs to
the same group g as individual i. Importantly, as Train (2009, 3.7) discusses, while the procedure to sample
restaurants described in (b) implies that our estimates of the restaurant fixed effects are biased, it does not
affect the consistency of our estimates of the spatial and social frictions. Second, the Poisson approximation
to the conditional-logit model described in Taddy (2015) and implemented in Gentzkow et al. (2017). In
our setting, this approximation is exact if all individuals in the sample have equal expected utility from
each restaurant trip. The results from these two estimation procedures are described in Section 4.5.1 and
Appendix D.3, respectively.


                                                         17
therefore, requires estimating a likelihood function that, for each individual i and period t
                                                     0
in our sample, depends on the actual choice set Jit . This is computationally infeasible in a
city with thousands of restaurants like NYC.20
    While we do not allow for within-group g unobserved heterogeneity in preferences, the
utility function in equation (1) does allow preferences to vary within groups with the observed
characteristics of the home and work census tracts of each individual. Namely, Xij2 and Zij2
contain interactions of individual i and restaurant j characteristics. For example, we allow
users living in tracts of different income levels to value restaurants’s prices and ratings
differently.21

Non-representative sample. As described in Section 2, our estimation sample, while
representative of the population of Yelp users, is not representative of the population of
NYC at large. However, as long as the demand assumptions described in Section 3.1 hold,
the lack of representativeness of our sample does not affect the consistency of our maximum
likelihood estimator as an estimate of the preference parameters of NYC residents. The lack
of representativeness of our sample may, however, affect the external validity of our estimates
if the preference parameters (γ, β) are heterogeneous across individuals within each group
g. One should bear in mind this limitation when interpreting the measures of consumption
segregation and the counterfactuals presented in Section 5.

Exogeneity of home and work locations. Section 3.1 implicitly assumes that individ-
uals’ home and work locations are exogenously given. In practice, individuals choose where
to live and work, and these locations may be determined as a function of restaurant char-
acteristics. However, the endogenous location of home and work will not bias our estimates
of the preference parameters (γ, β) if the distribution of the vector of unobserved charac-
teristics affecting individuals’ restaurant choices, νit , is independent of the characteristics
determining the optimal selection of home and work location. Note that this is compatible
with the vector of observed characteristics (Xi , Zi ) affecting users’ endogenous home and
work locations.22

Restaurant and origin independence of review-writing probabilities. As described
in Section 3.2, our baseline model assumes that the probability that an individual writes a
review about a visited restaurant does not depend on the restaurant itself nor on the origin of
the trip. This allows the review-writing decision to depend upon the consumption experience
  20
     Fox (2007) introduces a semiparametric estimation approach that similarly exploits the absence of un-
observed heterogeneity in preference parameters to estimate discrete-choice models with large choice sets.
  21
     Katz (2007) and Pakes (2010) show that there is a moment inequality approach that allows one to handle
both large choice sets and unobserved heterogeneity in preferences for observed choice characteristics. We
discuss in Appendix C.5 the relative advantages and disadvantages of this moment inequality approach for
our particular application.
  22
     In fact, if individuals’ home and work locations are determined as a function of the expected utility of
restaurant consumption, then our estimates are less likely to be biased the larger the set of characteristics
that we explicitly control for through the vector (Xi , Zi ). Intuitively, the fewer the variables that are
accounted for by the unobserved term νit , the more likely it is that this composite is independent of the
characteristics determining each individual’s choice of home and work location. A detailed discussion of this
point is contained in Appendix C.6.

                                                     18
in a number of ways. First, our assumption allows arbitrary variation in the propensity to
write a review across users and time. It can therefore account for the fact that users are
more likely to contribute to an online platform when they are nearing a reputational reward,
such as Yelp’s “elite” status (Luca, 2016b). Second, our model is consistent with individuals
being more likely to write reviews about dining experiences that surprised them, either
negatively or positively. Surprises are, by definition, independent of the variables that are
in the information set of consumers when deciding which restaurant venue to patronize and,
therefore, independent of the consumers’ restaurant choice.
    In robustness checks, we address three possible violations of our assumption that the
review-writing probability is independent of the patronage choice. First, one could claim
that users are more likely to review restaurants with few prior reviews or that are not chain
establishments well known by most consumers. As we show in Appendix C.7, one may control
for characteristics that affect the review-writing probabilities of Yelp users by introducing
them explicitly as covariates in our conditional-logit model. In Sections 4.5.3, we report
estimates in which we control for a restaurant’s total number of reviews and whether it
belongs to a chain with more than eight NYC locations.
    Second, it is possible that users are more likely to review restaurants that they want to
signal they have patronized. The specifications in which we introduce race-specific restaurant
fixed effects allow us to control for the possibility that, for example, individuals want to signal
that they have visited a restaurant that is idiosyncratically popular with members of group
g. We discuss these estimates in Section 4.5.1.
    Finally, users may be more or less likely to review restaurants that they visited from a
particular origin, such as a business lunch near their workplace. To address this possibility, we
introduce race-mode-origin-specific fixed effects in specifications reported in Section 4.5.3.23

Identification via the extensive margin. We identify preference parameters using only
information on the set of restaurants an individual reviews. Since Yelp users very rarely
review a venue a second time, information on their visit frequency is unavailable. And since
individuals only review some of the venues they visit, our information on visited venues is
incomplete. However, if we employ the estimation procedure described in Section 3.3, neither
of these features is an obstacle to consistently estimating individuals’ preference parameters
in our setting.
    First, we are able to identify preference parameters without information on the intensive
margin. Whenever we observe a restaurant review, this is the result of a consumer’s choice
to visit this venue rather than other venues, both those previously reviewed and unreviewed.
Comparisons with other previously unreviewed venues are informative about consumers’
preferences, while comparisons with previously reviewed venues would be misleading, since
we cannot observe a review if a user visits an already-reviewed venue. Thus, there is a
sample-selection process that must be addressed. Equations (7) and (10) show that, in
the case of the conditional-logit model, accounting for such sample selection is equivalent
to modifying the relevant choice set used to construct the conditional-logit probabilities.
For each user i and period t, excluding previously reviewed restaurants from the set from
  23
     This set of fixed effects also accounts for the possibility that users prefer certain origins or modes of
transport for unobserved reasons.


                                                     19
which we draw the subset of restaurants Sit is thus sufficient to correctly identify preference
parameters in our setting.
    Second, we can identify the parameters of interest even though the information on the
extensive margin of restaurants visited by each individual is imperfect. The key feature of our
model that allows us to overcome this data limitation is the assumption that the probability
that an individual i at period t reviews any restaurant visited and not previously reviewed
is invariant across restaurants. This implies that two restaurants’ relative probability of
being reviewed is equal to their relative probability of being visited: restaurant reviews are
informative about restaurant visits and can thus be used to identify preference parameters.

Lack of serial correlation in unobserved preferences. Our baseline model assumes
that users’ unobserved restaurant preferences (captured in the vector νit ) are independent
over time. As discussed in detail in Appendix C.8, if, contrary to our assumption, the
preference shocks νit are serially correlated, the fact that we identify users’ preferences from
their reviews and that users do not review a restaurant twice will generate a selection bias
in our estimates of consumers’ preference parameters. Specifically, positive serial correlation
would cause attenuation bias: upward bias in the estimates of coefficients on characteristics
that consumers dislike (e.g., spatial and social frictions) and downward bias in the estimates
of coefficients on characteristics that appeal to consumers (e.g., restaurants’ rating). We
illustrate the possible size of this bias through a simulation in Appendix C.8. To reduce this
selection bias, we report estimates that use only the first half and first fifth of each user’s
reviews in Section 4.5.3.


4     Estimation results
This section reports the results of estimating discrete-choice models of the form described in
Section 3 using the data introduced in Section 2. The models differ in the set of spatial and
                                                                                   1
social frictions we incorporate. In Section 4.1, we introduce the elements of Xijl    to capture
                                       2
spatial frictions, while omitting Xij . In Section 4.2, we additionally introduce the elements
of Xij2 to capture social frictions. In all cases, we include a set of venue and user-venue
characteristics that may influence consumer demand. These correspond to the vectors Zj1
and Zij2 in equation (1).
    We measure spatial frictions as the impact that the time a consumer has to travel to
visit a restaurant has on the probability of visiting this restaurant. As discussed in Section
3.1, we assume that a user making a trip to a Yelp venue may start that trip from her home
location, work location, or during her commute. Similarly, she may travel via mass transit
                                1
or automobile. The variable Xijl   is the log of the number of minutes it would take individual
i to travel to restaurant j using the transportation mode and origin pair indexed by l.
                                 1
The disutility of travel time, γg(i)l , may vary with l because the direct pecuniary cost of an
additional minute of travel time differs across modes of transportation (positive for taxis, zero
for the subway). These coefficients may also vary due to heterogeneity across transportation
modes or origin locations in non-pecuniary costs (e.g., cleanliness or convenience).
    We measure social frictions as the effect of racial demographic differences on the prob-
ability of a consumer visiting an otherwise identical restaurant. The vector Xij2 contains

                                               20
the Euclidean demographic distance and spectral segregation index measures introduced in
Section 2, as well as their interaction. We also include the residential population share
of each racial and ethnic group in the restaurant’s tract (white share is the omitted cat-
egory). Heterogeneity across Yelp users of different races in the estimated coefficients on
these population shares would reveal social frictions.
    The venue characteristics in Zj1 are the restaurant’s price (captured by dummy variables
corresponding to Yelp’s four price categories) and Yelp rating, the log median household
income of the tract in which the venue is located, 28 area dummies, and nine cuisine dum-
mies.24 The user-venue characteristics in Zij2 are the restaurant’s price and Yelp rating
interacted with the user’s home census tract’s median household income, as well as the per-
cent difference and absolute percent difference in median incomes between the home and
venue tracts.
    As discussed in sections 3.4, as we control for restaurant characteristics and area dummies
in all specifications, our estimates of spatial frictions are not biased due to our sample of Yelp
users living and working near generally attractive dining options. Similarly, incorporating
both the income level of the restaurant’s tract and the difference in incomes between the
user’s home tract and the restaurant’s tract as controls implies that our estimates of social
frictions cannot be attributed to tracts’ racial demographics covarying with income levels.
    All the specifications presented in the main text are estimated using a fixed set of ran-
domly generated choice sets, {Sit , ∀i, t}, so that variation in the estimates across columns
and tables is exclusively due to variation in the included covariates.25

4.1     Spatial frictions
We first estimate a specification in which home is the only origin and then sequentially
introduce the work and commuting origins.
    Table 2 presents estimates for nine models. In the first three columns, we find large,
negative coefficients on travel times from home, with Asian users exhibiting somewhat more
modest responses to spatial frictions.26 Users are much less likely to visit venues that are far
from their home via public transit or automobile.27 The fact that the coefficients on travel
time via automobile tend to be more negative than those on travel time via public transit is
  24
      We aggregate NYC community districts to partition the city into 28 areas and aggregate Yelp cuisine
types into 9 categories; see Appendix B.3.
   25
      We have also re-estimated these specifications using different randomly sampled choice sets and in both
cases we have obtained very similar estimates; see Table A.3.
   26
      We find little heterogeneity in the coefficients on spatial frictions along other demographic dimensions.
Unreported specifications in which spatial frictions vary with income or age yield economically small and
statistically insignificant coefficients. Unreported specifications with gender-specific coefficients on spatial
frictions, social frictions, and tastes yield very similar results.
   27
      A potential concern could be selection bias related to the fact that we locate users based on reviews
of Yelp venues located near their homes and workplaces. This is unlikely to have a large effect on our
estimates. First, we locate users based on any Yelp review, not necessarily of restaurants. Thus, users in
our estimation sample have not necessarily reviewed a restaurant near their home or work. Dropping the
5% of restaurant reviews used to locate users alters the coefficients of interest little. Second, estimating the
travel-time coefficients separately for subsamples of users that differ in the number of Yelp reviews revealing
their locational information yields similar estimates across these subsamples.



                                                      21
                                                           Table 2: Travel time
                                                             (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)         (6)        (7)      (8)         (9)
                                                            Asian      black    white/Hisp    Asian    black    white/Hisp    Asian    black    white/Hisp
Log travel time from home by public transit                 -1.01a     -1.40a      -1.32a     -1.04a   -1.19a     -1.24a      -1.07a   -.996a     -1.15a
                                                            (.042)     (.061)      (.023)     (.046)   (.067)     (.030)      (.101)   (.119)     (.058)
Log travel time from home by car                            -1.17a     -2.06a      -1.84a     -1.17a   -1.50a     -1.50a      -1.19a   -1.24a     -1.38a
                                                            (.043)     (.161)      (.048)     (.041)   (.092)     (.033)      (.086)   (.141)     (.059)
Log travel time from work by public transit                                                   -1.38a   -1.99a     -1.88a      -1.27a   -2.16      -1.92a
                                                                                              (.085)   (.450)     (.106)      (.145)   (2.43)     (.298)
Log travel time from work by car                                                              -1.65a   -2.00a     -2.01a      -1.69a   -2.02a     -2.01a
                                                                                              (.078)   (.168)     (.062)      (.188)   (.584)     (.181)
Log travel time from commute by public transit                                                                                -.955a   -.997a     -1.11a
                                                                                                                              (.063)   (.098)     (.042)
Log travel time from commute by car                                                                                           -1.08a   -1.43a     -1.46a
                                                                                                                              (.060)   (.171)     (.056)
Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                      .287a      .696a       .319a      .327a    .639a      .313a       .309a    .645a      .317a
                                                            (.086)     (.196)      (.083)     (.087)   (.198)     (.084)      (.087)   (.194)     (.082)
Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                      .148       -.216       -.074      .176     -.318      -.100       .175     -.283      -.075
                                                            (.115)     (.345)      (.119)     (.116)   (.341)     (.121)      (.115)   (.334)     (.120)
                                                                                          c                               b
Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                      .122       .095        -.386      .142     -.343      -.452       .086     -.313      -.398c
                                                            (.184)     (1.21)      (.217)     (.186)   (1.11)     (.222)      (.185)   (1.18)     (.219)
Yelp rating of restaurant                                   .511a      .050        .316a      .588a    .021       .335a       .583a    .036       .335a
                                                            (.063)     (.138)      (.059)     (.064)   (.139)     (.060)      (.064)   (.137)     (.059)
African cuisine category                                    .268       -.099       .297       .294     -.090       .343       .271     -.046       .319
                                                            (.296)     (.548)      (.261)     (.297)   (.547)     (.262)      (.297)   (.548)     (.259)
                                                                   a       a              a       a        a             a        a        a
American cuisine category                                   .426       .533        .614       .420     .539       .624        .421     .542       .596a
                                                            (.054)     (.119)      (.051)     (.055)   (.119)     (.051)      (.054)   (.118)     (.050)
Asian cuisine category                                      .944a      .157        .320a      .948a    .172       .328a       .931a    .201       .308a
                                                            (.054)     (.133)      (.055)     (.054)   (.134)     (.055)      (.054)   (.132)     (.054)
European cuisine category                                   .201a      -.383b      .236a      .200a    -.360b     .250a       .204a    -.339b     .247a
                                                            (.059)     (.155)      (.056)     (.060)   (.155)     (.057)      (.059)   (.153)     (.056)
Indian cuisine category                                     .373a      -.386       .017       .375a    -.527c     -.006       .374a    -.422      -.018
                                                            (.091)     (.300)      (.098)     (.092)   (.306)     (.099)      (.091)   (.299)     (.097)
Latin American cuisine category                             .496a      .993a       .694a      .493a    1.02a      .711a       .491a    1.03a      .699a
                                                            (.070)     (.136)      (.062)     (.070)   (.136)     (.062)      (.070)   (.134)     (.061)
Middle Eastern cuisine category                             .242b      .120        .212b      .245b    .092       .218b       .264a    .066       .204b
                                                            (.101)     (.250)      (.096)     (.101)   (.252)     (.096)      (.100)   (.250)     (.094)
Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                           .394a      -.005       .625a      .372a    -.014      .635a       .365a    -.041      .596a
                                                            (.137)     (.410)      (.116)     (.139)   (.409)     (.117)      (.138)   (.408)     (.116)
                                                                   a                      a       a                      a        a
2-dollar bin × home tract median income                     .042       -.005       .047       .039     .003       .051        .041     -.002      .049a
                                                            (.011)     (.032)      (.010)     (.011)   (.032)     (.010)      (.011)   (.032)     (.009)
3-dollar bin × home tract median income                     .087a      .105c       .087a      .086a    .120b      .096a       .086a    .109b      .089a
                                                            (.014)     (.055)      (.013)     (.014)   (.053)     (.013)      (.014)   (.052)     (.013)
4-dollar bin × home tract median income                     .080a      -.180       .103a      .082a    -.090      .115a       .088a    -.119      .105a
                                                            (.021)     (.231)      (.022)     (.022)   (.208)     (.023)      (.022)   (.224)     (.022)
Yelp rating × home tract median income                      .019b      .005        .020a      .010     .009       .018a       .010     .007       .017a
                                                            (.008)     (.023)      (.007)     (.008)   (.023)     (.007)      (.008)   (.023)     (.007)
Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )    -.000      .681a       -.035      -.141a   .485a      -.308a      -.218a   .469a      -.350a
                                                            (.047)     (.117)      (.047)     (.046)   (.117)     (.046)      (.045)   (.114)     (.046)
Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )             -.381      .843        .575b      -.226    1.29       .676b       -.233    1.04       .791a
                                                            (.283)     (.826)      (.286)     (.291)   (.847)     (.298)      (.292)   (.826)     (.293)
Log median household income in kj                           .336       -.693       -.395      .141     -1.03      -.552b      .119     -.869      -.694a
                                                            (.250)     (.731)      (.251)     (.257)   (.753)     (.263)      (.258)   (.733)     (.259)

Number of origin-mode points                                  2         2           2           4       4           4          6         6          6
Number of trips                                             6447       1079        6936       6447     1079       6936        6447     1079       6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’ decisions to visit a Yelp
venue. Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%).
Unreported controls are 28 area dummies.




                                                                              22
consistent with the fact that NYC public-transit fares are invariant to distance, while taxi
fares are not.
    In the next three columns, we introduce the work origin. This is potentially important for
measuring consumption segregation.28 In principle, the opportunity to consume starting from
work could disconnect consumption segregation from residential segregation. In practice, our
estimates imply that users start many trips from home. The coefficients on travel times from
home are similar to their values in the first three columns.29 The coefficients on travel times
from work are roughly 30% to 40% larger than those on travel times from home, consistent
with the opportunity cost of travel time from work being greater than that from home.
    In the final three columns of Table 2, we account for the possibility that users travel to
venues from their commuting path. The home and work coefficients are largely unchanged,
and the commuting path travel times exhibit significant negative coefficients.30
    Table 2 yields a very clear finding: spatial frictions play a first-order role in individuals’
consumption choices within the city. Consumers are less likely to visit venues that, in
terms of mass-transit and automobile travel time, are more distant from their home and
work locations, as well as the commuting path between these. Consider two hypothetical
restaurants, identical in their characteristics except for the number of minutes away from the
user’s optimal origin of the trip. The first restaurant is 15 minutes from the user’s workplace
by car; the second restaurant is 30 minutes away. The estimated coefficients in the last three
columns of Table 2 imply that the user would be about four times as likely to visit the more
proximate venue from work by car (e.g., for a black user, 22.02 ≈ 4.06). Similarly, if the two
restaurants were 15 and 30 minutes from the commuting path by public transit, the user
would be about twice as likely to visit the more proximate venue from his or her commute
by public transit.31
    Finally, note that users’ choices also depend upon restaurants’ characteristics in pre-
dictable ways. Restaurants with higher ratings and lower prices are generally more attrac-
tive. However, restaurants in the $$ price category are attractive relative to $ restaurants,
indicating that prices also reflect quality.32 Users residing in census tracts with higher in-
comes exhibit more willingness to pay higher prices. Asian users’ most preferred cuisine
category is Asian cuisine, while white/Hispanic users’ most preferred categories are Latin
  28
      Further, including the workplace origin is important for our subsequent identification of social frictions.
Compare Tables 3 and A.4.
   29
      Since our coefficients’ scale is determined by the standard deviation of the logit error νijlt , comparisons of
the levels of coefficients across columns implicitly assume that this standard deviation is constant. Conversely,
ratios of estimates of the same specification are invariant to this normalization. The coefficients on travel
times from home relative to the coefficients on restaurant characteristics (e.g., Yelp rating and cuisine
categories) are similar across columns. Thus, if we were to normalize our estimates by the coefficient on any
of these restaurant characteristics instead, we would also conclude that introducing the work origin does not
significantly alter the estimates of the coefficients on travel time from home.
   30
      The coefficients on spatial frictions are less precisely estimated for black users, due to the smaller number
of observations. Upon controlling for social frictions in Table 3, all spatial-friction coefficients are statistically
significant.
   31
      Besides the impact that spatial frictions have for consumption segregation, our quantification of these
frictions is an important input for models of consumption within the city (e.g., Allen et al. 2015). Similar
to the finding that commuting flows are consistent with gravity (Monte et al., 2015), our estimates suggest
gravity for consumption.
   32
      Restaurants in the $ category are often fast-food venues.


                                                         23
American and vegetarian/vegan.

4.2     Social frictions
Understanding the role that social frictions play in determining consumption choices is key
to our effort to measure consumption segregation. In this section, we use both tract-level
and individual-level demographic information in order to distinguish between two potential
phenomena. First, users of all demographics may be more likely to choose restaurants
located in neighborhoods populated by races and ethnicities similar to those characteristic
of the tract in which they reside, a role for environmental similarity. Second, individuals may
be more likely to choose restaurants in places populated by individuals similar to themselves,
homophily. An example of the first would be if a white individual living in Harlem, a heavily
black and Hispanic neighborhood, is more likely to visit black and Hispanic neighborhoods
than a white individual living elsewhere. An example of the second would be if a white
individual living in Harlem is more likely to visit a restaurant in a white neighborhood than
other residents of her home tract. Table 3 estimates these social frictions by introducing the
vector of racial and ethnic demographic covariates, Xij2 .
    The negative coefficients on the Euclidean demographic distance (EDD) measure reveal
a role for environmental similarity. Users are less likely to visit venues located in census
tracts with demographics different from those of their home census tract. Since we control
for transit times between tracts, this result cannot be attributed to the joint impact of resi-
dential segregation and disutility of travel. Similarly, our controls include income differences
between tracts, so this result cannot be attributed to spatial differences in incomes predicting
consumers’ choices. Thus, the coefficient on EDD likely captures mechanisms linked to racial
and ethnic differences. Users may have preferences regarding the residential demographics
of the neighborhoods in which they consume. Alternatively, users may be more likely to
visit restaurants located near the residences of friends and family members, with these re-
lationships being more likely across members of the same race or ethnicity. Regardless of
the mechanisms underlying the negative coefficient on EDD, these social frictions result in
individuals of different races and ethnicities making different consumption choices.
    The estimated coefficient on EDD implies an economically significant role for this social
friction. Consider a user who contemplates visiting two venues that are identical except
for their EDD from the home census tract, which differ by one standard deviation. Our
estimates imply that an Asian user would be 25% more likely to visit the venue in the more
demographically similar census tract.33 A black user would be 51% more likely to visit the
more similar tract. We can also express the economic significance of demographic differences
as a trade-off between demographic distance and transit time. To hold constant an Asian
user’s utility of visiting a venue from home via public transit, a venue one standard deviation
more demographically distant would have to be about 21% closer in terms of travel time.34
  33
     Comparing two venues j and j 0 that are identical in every covariate except Xij
                                                                                  2
                                                                                     , P (dij = 1|Vi )/P (dij 0 =
              2      2     2
1|Vi ) = exp(γg(i) (Xij − Xij 0 )). Table A.2 shows that the standard deviation of EDD across all pairs of
census tracts in NYC is 0.226, so the coefficient of -1 in column one of Table 3 implies that a venue
that has EDD 0.226 lower than an otherwise identical venue will be visited with 25% higher probability
(exp(−1.00 × (−0.226)) ≈ 1.25).
  34                                           2                                      1        2       2    1
     To hold Uijlt constant, a change of ∆Xij    would be offset by the change ∆Xijl     = −γg(i) ∆Xij   /γg(i)l .


                                                       24
                             Table 3: Social frictions
                                                             (1)      (2)         (3)
                                                            Asian    black    white/Hisp
 Log travel time from home by public transit                -1.06a   -.938a     -1.13a
                                                            (.107)   (.127)     (.059)
 Log travel time from home by car                           -1.17a   -1.19a     -1.36a
                                                            (.091)   (.158)     (.060)
 Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.24a   -1.85c     -1.87a
                                                            (.149)   (1.11)     (.287)
 Log travel time from work by car                           -1.60a   -1.79a     -1.95a
                                                            (.176)   (.459)     (.171)
 Log travel time from commute by public transit             -.943a   -.930a     -1.10a
                                                            (.067)   (.105)     (.044)
 Log travel time from commute by car                        -1.04a   -1.32a     -1.43a
                                                            (.061)   (.177)     (.058)
 Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -1.00a   -1.84a     -1.19a
                                                            (.121)   (.280)     (.130)
 Spectral segregation index of kj                           .150a    .075       .045c
                                                            (.051)   (.093)     (.027)
 EDD × SSI                                                  -.149    -.171      -.068
                                                            (.117)   (.239)     (.083)
 Share of tract population that is Asian                    1.03a    .011       .363a
                                                            (.120)   (.345)     (.138)
 Share of tract population that is black                    .220     1.08a       .140
                                                            (.319)   (.399)     (.265)
 Share of tract population that is Hispanic                 -.251    .467       .415b
                                                            (.235)   (.381)     (.188)
 Share of tract population that is other                    .059     3.56        .484
                                                            (2.07)   (3.43)     (1.99)
 Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                     .375a    .771a      .355a
                                                            (.087)   (.197)     (.083)
 Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                     .287b    -.090      -.026
                                                            (.116)   (.341)     (.120)
 Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                     .220     -.074      -.347
                                                            (.188)   (1.22)     (.221)
                                                                a
 Yelp rating of restaurant                                  .579     .053       .344a
                                                            (.064)   (.138)     (.059)
 African cuisine category                                   .280     -.198       .298
                                                            (.299)   (.553)     (.261)
 American cuisine category                                  .432a    .523a      .591a
                                                            (.054)   (.119)     (.050)
 Asian cuisine category                                     .886a    .255c      .307a
                                                            (.054)   (.134)     (.054)
 European cuisine category                                  .195a    -.326b     .235a
                                                            (.059)   (.154)     (.056)
 Indian cuisine category                                    .370a    -.451      -.039
                                                            (.091)   (.301)     (.097)
 Latin American cuisine category                            .517a    1.01a      .690a
                                                            (.070)   (.136)     (.062)
 Middle Eastern cuisine category                            .280a    .104       .203b
                                                            (.101)   (.251)     (.094)
 Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                          .392a    .001       .587a
                                                            (.138)   (.409)     (.116)
 2-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .034a    -.022      .042a
                                                            (.011)   (.032)     (.009)
 3-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .075a    .077       .081a
                                                            (.014)   (.053)     (.013)
 4-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .074a    -.167      .095a
                                                            (.022)   (.234)     (.023)
 Yelp rating × home tract median income                     .011     .008       .016b
                                                            (.008)   (.023)     (.007)
 Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )   -.062    .850a      -.100c
                                                            (.050)   (.126)     (.053)
 Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            .114     .619       .719b
                                                            (.305)   (.853)     (.300)
 Log median household income in kj                          -.109    -.360      -.625b
                                                            (.267)   (.744)     (.262)
 Average annual robberies per resident in kj                -3.41a   2.43b      -3.74a
                                                            (.676)   (1.20)     (.771)

 Number of origin-mode points                          6       6         6
 Number of trips                                      6447   1079      6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’
decisions to visit a Yelp venue. Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical sig-
nificance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%). “EDD” is Euclidean demographic
distance; “SSI” is spectral segregation index. Unreported controls are 28 area
dummies.                               25
For a black user, it would have to be 44% closer.
    The consequences of demographic differences vary across users of different races due to
differences in population sizes. Users of all races are more likely to visit restaurants that
have lower values of the EDD covariate, and black users have the most negative coefficient
on EDD. Yet the mean value of EDD for venues visited by black users (.34) is in fact greater
than the mean value of EDD for venues not visited by white users (.29). This finding is
consistent with the idea in Anderson (2015, p.10) that “white people typically avoid black
space, but black people are required to navigate the white space as a condition of their
existence.”
    Do demographic differences between census tracts matter more when the venue is located
deep within a segregated area? To assess this, we use a spectral segregation index (SSI) that
describes a tract’s demographic isolation in terms of its racial or ethnic plurality. In Table 3,
the coefficients on both SSI and the interaction of EDD and SSI are modest in magnitude.
When EDD is close to one, their sum is close to zero. Thus, a restaurant in a tract near
the edge of a racially or ethnically distinct area is about as likely to be visited as a tract
with the same demographic differences located deep inside that area. Individuals’ choices
are therefore mostly predicted by the demographic composition of the area immediately
surrounding the restaurant.
    Users also exhibit homophily at the individual level. Users are more likely to visit venues
located in tracts with a larger residential population of the same race as the user. Asian users
are more likely to visit a restaurant in a tract with more Asian residents relative to all other
residential racial and ethnic categories (white residents are the omitted category). Similarly,
black users are more likely to visit a restaurant in a tract with more black residents. In the
case of white or Hispanic users, homophily is less evident, perhaps due to the fact that we
do not distinguish between whites and Hispanics when classifying users’ profile photos. In
column three, there is a positive coefficient on Hispanic population share, but there is also
a positive coefficient on Asian residents relative to white residents.
    These social frictions are distinct from the roles of income and crime. Since we incorporate
both the income level of the restaurant’s tract and the difference in incomes between the
user’s home tract and the restaurant’s tract as controls, the demographic-differences results
cannot be attributed to tracts’ demographics covarying with income levels. We also control
for users’ responses to robberies per resident in the destination tract.35
    Relative to Table 2, the coefficients on spatial frictions and cuisine categories in Table 3
are slightly attenuated toward zero. Residential segregation means that spatial frictions and
social frictions are positively correlated, so spatial frictions will be overestimated if social
frictions are omitted. Similarly, if restaurants in tracts with more Asian residents are more
likely to serve Asian cuisine that appeals to Asian users, then the cuisine coefficients will
be overestimated if social frictions are omitted. Comparing Tables 2 and 3 suggests that
                        1
Since the coefficient γg(i)hp  estimated in column one of Table 3 is −1.06, the change required to offset a
one-standard-deviation increase in EDD is −1.00 × 0.226/1.06 ≈ −0.21.
  35
     Fear of crime is still a possible explanation for the estimated responses to demographic differences to
the extent that fears are not highly correlated with actual crime rates (Quillian and Pager, 2001). Crime
rates, fear of crime, and residential segregation are interrelated phenomena (O’Flaherty and Sethi, 2015).
Unreported specifications interacting users’ home tracts’ median incomes with actual robbery rates do not
change our parameters of interest.


                                                    26
this occurs, but in the vast majority of cases the estimated coefficients differ by less than a
standard error.36
    This section has documented patterns in consumer behavior that tend to segregate con-
sumption. We find roles for both environmental similarity and individual homophily. Re-
gardless of the particular mechanisms underlying how demographic differences shape con-
sumption in the city, our quantification indicates that these social frictions play an important
role in shaping consumer behavior. These elements will contribute to our estimates of urban
consumption segregation in Section 5.

4.3     Model fit
In this section, we discuss how well our estimated model fits the data.

4.3.1     In-sample isolation
We first compare our model’s prediction of consumption segregation to that observed in the
estimation sample. Following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011), we compute isolation indices
using “leave-out” means to address finite-sample  bias.
                                                   P Denote the number of visits to venue
j by members of racial group g by vgj = i:g(i)=g t d∗ijt , the number of visits to all venues
                                          P
                             P
by those members by vg = j P    vgj , the P
                                          number of visits to venue j by users who are not
members of group g by v¬g,j = i:g(i)6=g t d∗ijt , and the number of visits to venue j by all
                P
users by vj = g vgj . The Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) “leave-out isolation index” that
measures the extent to which members of group g disproportionately visit venues whose
other visitors are also members of group g is
                             X vgj  vgj − 1  X v¬gj  v¬gj 
                       Ŝg =       ·          −            ·          .
                             j
                               vg      vj − 1      j
                                                       v¬g    vj − 1

    To generate a model-predicted value of Ŝg that is comparable to that in the data, we
simulate model-predicted visits to restaurants for the set of observations in the estimation
sample. Our estimated model predicts that each user will visit a venue with a probability
given by equation (5). One draw for each observation from this probability distribution
generates one simulated value of Ŝg . We simulate the model 500 times to obtain a distribution
of Ŝg values. The value observed in the estimation sample and the 90% confidence interval
for simulated values are presented in Table 4.
    The actual data exhibit values of Ŝg within the 90% simulated confidence intervals. Thus,
our estimated model matches observed consumption segregation well. Appendix D shows
that allowing preference parameters to vary across races is key to matching the observed
  36
     Recall that all our coefficients are normalized relative to the standard deviation of the logit error νijlt ,
which need not be identical across specifications. The change in the coefficients on spatial frictions and
cuisine categories across models should be compared to the change in a coefficient that is plausibly not
biased by the omission of social frictions, such as the Yelp rating of the restaurant. Comparing Tables 2
and 3, the coefficient on Yelp rating is slightly attenuated for Asian users and actually larger for black and
white/Hispanic users. Thus, the attenuation of coefficients on spatial frictions and cuisine categories in Table
3 is not solely attributable to a change in the standard deviation of νijlt across models.


                                                       27
                                 Table 4: Model fit: Isolation indices
                                                   Estimation sample        Model predictions
          Asian isolation index                      .087                       [.056, .089]
          Black isolation index                      .087                       [.043, .089]
          White/Hispanic isolation index             .045                       [.025, .057]
          Notes: The reported leave-out isolation indices are the value       for the estimation
          sample and the 90% confidence interval for model-predicted outcomes for generated
          samples of the same size. Isolation indices as defined in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011).


consumption segregation: more restrictive specifications that pool preference parameters
across races underpredict the isolation indices observed in the data.

4.3.2    Schelling-style segregation
Since we cannot observe the complete racial and ethnic composition of the patrons of every
restaurant in NYC, our baseline specification assumes that consumer preferences do not
depend on this restaurant characteristic.37 Thus, our baseline model predicts that two
restaurants with the same observable characteristics (tract, cuisine, price, and rating) will
exhibit the same racial composition of patrons. This limits the scope for social frictions
by ruling out Schelling-style outcomes in which high degrees of segregation arise due to
preferences for same-race co-patrons.
    To examine the plausibility of this assumption, we collect information on the racial
composition of all Yelp reviewers for 119 pairs of restaurants that are identical in terms of
their cuisine category, price category, Yelp rating, and census tract.38 Define the “race gap”
within a pair of restaurants p to be the Euclidean distance
                                                            √
                                gapp ≡ ksharej − sharej 0 k/ 2,

with sharej being a three-element vector of the fraction of users reviewing restaurant j who
are Asian, black, and Hispanic/white.39 We compare the observed distribution of gapp for the
119 pairs of observationally equivalent restaurants to the one that would arise if, consistent
with our model, individuals were randomly assigned to one of the two restaurants within
each pair.
    Figure 6 depicts the distribution of gapp for both the data and the random draws. The
mean of the race gap for the observed data is 0.189. The mean for the random distribution
is 0.172. The p-value for the one-sided test of equal means is 0.06. More broadly, the two
distributions seem sufficiently similar that the omission of the demographic composition of
patrons from the observable covariates we use to predict restaurant visits seems unlikely to
radically alter our results.
  37
     When we introduce race-specific restaurant fixed effects, we implicitly allow the racial composition of a
restaurant’s patrons to enter each racial group’s valuation of that restaurant.
  38
     See Appendix D for details. For reasons of feasibility, we photo-coded users who reviewed restaurants
that belonged to a tract-cuisine-price-rating pair and had between 10 and 40 reviews.
  39
      We drop users whose race is not determined based on their photos from these computations.


                                                     28
        Figure 6: Racial gap between pairs of observationally equivalent restaurants




                         4
                         3
                      Density
                       2 1
                         0




                                0      .2         .4               .6                .8
                                                 Race gap

                                    Observed      Null hypothesis (uniform distribution)




   If consumption were segregated within sets of restaurants that our model treats as obser-
vationally equivalent, one might worry that our model would underpredict the true degree of
consumption segregation. Our examination suggests that this is not the case. Conditional on
the observable covariates that we employ to predict consumption segregation, Yelp reviews
do not exhibit much further racial segregation.

4.4    Parametric bootstrap
To examine the finite-sample behavior of our estimator, we perform a parametric bootstrap.
Using the estimated model reported in Table 3, we simulate 500 samples of the same size
as our estimation sample. We then estimate our model on each of these generated sam-
ples, obtaining a distribution of our estimator under the estimated data-generating process.
Appendix D.5 reports the results in detail.
     Generally, the parametric bootstrap shows that the estimator performs well. For the
covariates describing social frictions and restaurant characteristics, the bootstrapped distri-
butions are close to normal, their means are close to the point estimates we computed on the
original sample, and their standard deviations are very similar to our estimated (asymptot-
ically valid) standard errors. For the spatial-friction covariates, the bootstrapped samples
occasionally produce estimates that are extreme outliers. This seems due to the fact that we
identify
       P these six spatial-friction parameters exclusively from restaurant-reviewing outcomes
  ∗
dij = l dijl , without actually observing the origin-mode-level outcomes d∗ijl , and that tran-
            ∗

sit times from the same origin are highly collinear.40 When we assume that the error term
νijlt and the disutility of travel do not vary across origin-modes l – implying that there is
a single spatial-friction parameter to estimate and that consumers visit each restaurant via
the origin-mode pair with the minimum travel time (see Appendix C.3) – the standard error
  40
    For example, the correlation between travel time from work by car and from work by public transit
exceeds 0.9 for all three racial groups.



                                                 29
we compute for our estimator of the disutility caused by this spatial friction is very similar
to the bootstrapped one.

4.5     Robustness checks
4.5.1    Restaurant fixed effects
It is feasible to introduce race-specific restaurant fixed effects into our model. However, as
we cannot identify these fixed effects for restaurants that are not visited by users in the
estimation sample, this generalized model cannot be used to compute city-wide measures
of consumption segregation and counterfactuals.41 We therefore employ the specification
with race-specific restaurant fixed effects only to examine the robustness of the coefficients
on observable user-restaurant covariates reported in Table 3 and to assess the relative fit of
these specifications.
    The results suggest that our baseline specification in Table 3 is sufficient to capture
the relevant variation in consumers’ choices. Table 5 reports the result of estimating the
specification with restaurant fixed effects. The estimated coefficients on our measures of
spatial and social frictions are similar to those reported in Table 3. Table 6 reports the
result of a likelihood-ratio test comparing the fit of the restaurant-fixed-effects specification
to the specifications in Table 6 that use only observable characteristics. For Asian and black
users, we do not reject the hypothesis that the observables specification fits the data as well
as the fixed-effects specification. For white/Hispanic users, the fixed-effects specification is
superior in terms of fit, but the estimated coefficients are largely consistent with those in
Table 3.

4.5.2    Nested-logit specification
We relax the independence-of-irrelevant-alternatives property of the conditional-logit model
of Section 3.1 by specifying a nested-logit structure. Appendix C.4 derives this estimator in
detail. We define nests by two schemes: (a) restaurants of the same cuisine category, Yelp
rating, and area, and (b) restaurants of the same cuisine category, price category, and census
tract. For this exercise, we define 39 cuisine categories (more disaggregated than the nine
categories shown in Tables 2 and 3, and employ the 28 areas, four price categories, and nine
Yelp ratings (from 1 star to 5 stars) described in Section 2. These two schemes group the
10,945 restaurants into 3,064 and 7,622 nests, respectively. Table D.3 reports the estimates.
The estimated coefficients on spatial frictions, social frictions, and restaurant characteristics
are all similar to the values reported in Table 3. The within-nest-correlation parameter λ is
generally near one, consistent with the conditional-logit assumption we imposed in Section
3.1. Table D.3 reports the p-values for likelihood ratio tests of the null hypothesis that the
true model is a conditional logit versus the alternative hypothesis that the true model is
  41
     To extrapolate beyond the restaurants reviewed by users in the estimation sample, one must employ
observable characteristics. Therefore, to compute the magnitudes reported in sections 5 and 6, a fixed-
effects specification offers little advantage relative to one employing observed characteristics. Furthermore,
estimating models with restaurant fixed effects is computationally costly: estimation takes days rather than
minutes. This is true in our setting whether we estimate our fixed effects directly or assume the approximation
in Taddy (2015). We report the results of the Taddy (2015) estimation procedure in Appendix D.3.


                                                      30
                                   Table 5: Restaurant fixed effects
                                                                         (1)       (2)          (3)
                                                                        Asian     black     white/Hisp

             Log travel time from home by public transit                -1.08a    -1.01a      -1.23a
                                                                        (0.109)   (0.143)     (0.062)
             Log travel time from home by car                           -1.18a    -1.23a      -1.48a
                                                                        (0.091)   (0.161)     (0.063)
             Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.29a    -1.64a      -1.81a
                                                                        (0.152)   (0.562)     (0.207)
             Log travel time from work by car                           -1.73a    -1.78a      -2.07a
                                                                        (0.200)   (0.394)     (0.170)
             Log travel time from commute by public transit             -1.00a    -1.00a      -1.15a
                                                                        (0.074)   (0.113)     (0.041)
             Log travel time from commute by car                        -1.12a    -1.34a      -1.57a
                                                                        (0.068)   (0.170)     (0.062)
             Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -0.78a    -2.38a      -1.28a
                                                                        (0.132)   (0.321)     (0.145)
             EDD × spectral segregation index                           -0.39b    -0.28        0.01
                                                                        (0.177)   (0.355)     (0.083)
             2-dollar bin × home tract median income                    0.04a     -0.01       0.04a
                                                                        (0.011)   (0.034)     (0.010)
             3-dollar bin × home tract median income                    0.06a      0.07       0.08a
                                                                        (0.014)   (0.056)     (0.013)
             4-dollar bin × home tract median income                    0.06b     -0.16       0.09a
                                                                        (0.022)   (0.208)     (0.023)
             Yelp rating × home tract median income                     0.02c      0.02       0.02a
                                                                        (0.010)   (0.026)     (0.009)
             Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            -0.17a    1.36a       -0.14b
                                                                        (0.057)   (0.178)     (0.060)
             Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )    0.02      0.00        0.45
                                                                        (0.360)   (1.025)     (0.377)

             Number of trips                                            6447    1079        6936
             Number of fixed effects                                    2867     892        3497
            Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’
            decisions to visit a Yelp venue. Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance
            denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%). The unreported covariates are restaurant fixed
            effects.


                        Table 6: Observables versus restaurant fixed effects
                                      Log likelihood values
 Sample                        Observables Restaurant fixed effects               χ2 test statistic      p-value
 Asian users                    -55339.28                -50243.65                    10191.26            1.00
 Black users                     -9198.20                 -7152.89                     4090.62            1.00
 White/Hispanic users           -59213.50                -53507.34                    11412.32a           0.00
Notes: The observables specifications include 60 covariates, while the fixed-effect specifications include 14
covariates plus the 10,945 restaurant fixed effects. Thus, the χ2 test has 10,899 degrees of freedom. Statistical
significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%).


                                                       31
the corresponding nested-logit model. While the tests formally reject the hypothesis that
λ = 1 for three of the six specifications, these nested-logit specifications yield very similar
coefficients on observable covariates, and deliver very similar predictions of the in-sample
isolation measures (see Table D.1). Since estimating these nested-logit models comes at
considerably greater computational cost, we employ the conditional-logit specification when
computing consumption segregation and counterfactual outcomes.

4.5.3    Additional observable characteristics and sample restrictions
In Appendix A, we implement several robustness checks by restricting the set of observations
or introducing additional covariates.
     To address concerns that the error term νijlt may exhibit serial correlation (discussed
in Section 3.4), Table A.7 restricts the sample to either the first half or the first fifth of
reviews written by each user. These restrictions increase the standard errors and cause one
coefficient to be unidentified in the resulting small sample of black users. However, they do
not systematically increase the absolute values of coefficients, suggesting that there is not
substantial attenuation bias caused by serial correlation in the unobserved preference shocks
νijlt . For a more detailed discussion, see Appendix C.8.
     To address concerns that users may be more or less likely to review restaurants visited
from a particular origin (see Section 3.4), Table A.8 introduces origin-mode-specific inter-
cepts. This yields broadly similar coefficients on log travel times, though the accompanying
standard errors are considerably larger. The coefficients on social frictions are modestly
attenuated.
     To address concerns that the decision to write a review may depend on certain restau-
rant characteristics (see Section 3.4), Table A.9 controls for two additional covariates: the
restaurant’s number of Yelp reviews and whether it belongs to a restaurant chain. While
users in our estimation sample are more likely to review more-reviewed restaurants and less
likely to review establishments belonging to a restaurant chain with more than eight NYC
locations, the coefficients of interest change little.
     To address concerns that early adopters of Yelp may be less sensitive to spatial and so-
cial frictions, Table A.6 restricts the sample to users who joined Yelp later. The estimated
coefficients are broadly similar to those in Table 3, without any systematic increase or de-
crease. In an unreported specification, we find that our results change little when controlling
for tract-level differences in private vehicle ownership rates. Finally, Table A.5 shows that
controlling for 39 cuisine categories (rather than 9) slightly attenuates our point estimates
of homophily and makes the environmental similarity coefficients slightly more negative.
     In summary, the results in Table 3 are broadly unchanged by restricting the estimation
sample or introducing additional covariates.


5       Consumption segregation
In this section, we use data on the demographic composition of all census tracts in NYC
and the estimates presented in Table 3 to compute NYC-wide measures of segregation in
consumption for Asian, black, Hispanic, and white consumers. In Section 5.1, we define the


                                              32
measure of segregation we use. Section 5.2 presents our estimates of consumption segregation
and examines the contributions of spatial and social frictions to them. In Section 5.3, we
illustrate the mechanisms underlying the city-wide results by focusing on the consumption
patterns observed in particular neighborhoods within the city. Finally, in Section 5.4 we
examine a number of counterfactual experiments.

5.1     Dissimilarity indices
To measure consumption segregation, we use the “dissimilarity index” commonly employed
in the literature on residential segregation. For each group g, we compute
                                   1X
            Dissimilarity(g) =           | Pr(dij = 1|g (i) = g) − Pr(dij = 1|g (i) 6= g)|,              (13)
                                   2 j∈J

where g is Asian, black, Hispanic, white, or other.42 This index sums, across all restaurants,
the absolute difference between the probability that a randomly selected individual belonging
to group g visits a restaurant and the probability that a randomly selected individual who
does not belong to group g visits the same restaurant. The higher the value of this index, the
larger the differences in consumption choices. Think of the probability Pr(dij = 1|g (i) = g)
as the fraction of individuals of group g that would visit restaurant j if they were all going out
to dine; the dissimilarity index in equation (13) indicates the share of individuals in group
g that would need to alter their consumption choices in order to match the distribution of
predicted restaurant choices made by the remainder of the population. This measure can
also be computed to compare the consumption choices of any two groups, g1 and g2 .43 This
dissimilarity index is invariant to the size of the groups being compared.
    If we were to observe all visits to restaurants for a sufficiently large representative sample
of NYC residents, we could estimate Pr(dij = 1|g (i) = g) directly by its sample analogue.
To our knowledge, such a large and representative dataset does not exist.44 We therefore
apply the parameters estimated in Section 4 to the broader population of NYC in order to
consistently estimate the probability Pr(dij = 1|g (i) = g) for all restaurants j and races
  42
     As discussed in Section 3, we estimate parameters for three racial groups indexed by g. However, we
compute dissimilarity indices for five racial groups indexed by g. We compute Pr(dij = 1|g (i) = g) for
Hispanic, white, and other using g-specific data on residential locations and the estimated white/Hispanic
(g = w) preference parameters.
  43
     The
      P bilateral dissimilarity between any two groups g1 and g2 is computed as: Dissimilarity(g1 , g2 ) =
(1/2) j∈J |P (dij = 1|g (i) = g1 ) − P (dij = 1|g (i) = g2 )|.
  44
     As explained by Gentzkow et al. (2017), computing consistent measures of segregation that do not depend
on estimates of a behavioral model requires using a sample that is large relative to the dimensionality of the
choice set faced by individuals. In our context, this sample would have to be large relative to the number of
restaurants in NYC. The advantage of the behavioral model introduced in Section 4 is that it expresses the
probabilities Pr(dij = 1|g (i) = g) as a function of a relatively small number of estimated parameters.




                                                     33
g.45 Appendix E details how we construct consistent estimates of these probabilities.46 A
further advantage of relying on the demand model described in Section 3 as the basis for
computing our measures of consumption segregation is that it can also be used to quan-
tify the contributions of spatial and social frictions to our overall measure of consumption
dissimilarity.

5.2     City-wide consumption segregation
Table 7 reports residential and consumption dissimilarity indices for each demographic group.
The upper panel reports overall dissimilarity indices for each group; the lower panel reports
dissimilarity indices across specific pairs of groups. We compute residential dissimilarity at
the level of census tracts and consumption dissimilarity at the level of restaurant venues.47
    Column one provides the dissimilarity index for residential segregation while column two
provides the analogous index for consumption segregation. Comparing these columns, all
groups are significantly more integrated in their consumption than in their residences. Across
demographic groups, black and Asian users exhibit the highest values of consumption dis-
similarity, but this is in part due to the fact that we assign white and Hispanic consumers
the same preference parameters due to our inability to differentiate between white and His-
panic Yelp users in their photos. To the extent that white and Hispanic consumers differ
in their preferences, we will underestimate consumption segregation for these two groups.
In the lower panel, the largest pairwise dissimilarities are found between Asian and black
consumers. Black and white consumers’ choices are also dissimilar, while Hispanic-white and
black-Hispanic consumption choices are more integrated.48
    The fact that all groups are significantly more integrated in their consumption than
in their residences is not a necessary consequence of the model assumptions imposed in
Section 3. While the willingness of residents to travel outside of their home census tract
  45
      Intuitively, equation (5) expresses the probability that i visits j as a function of the observed charac-
teristics of i and j, reducing the number of parameters to estimate from the number of restaurants times
the number of demographic groups to the dimensionality of the vector ({γl1 ; ∀l}, γ 2 , β 1 , β 2 ). Furthermore,
estimating Pr (dij = 1|g (i) = g) for all restaurants j and racial groups g using estimates of behavioral param-
eters allows us to obtain consistent estimates of the dissimilarity index in equation (13) even if our sample
is not a random sample from the population of interest, as long as it is random conditional on the observed
characteristics of individuals and restaurants.
   46
      Given the estimates presented in Section 4 and the data described in Section 2, the only additional
information required to compute Pr(dij = 1|g (i) = g) for all NYC residents is the joint distribution of
home and work locations across census tracts for each demographic group. We obtain this information from
tract-level commuting flows.
   47
      The choice of spatial unit is non-trivial when computing dissimilarity indices, as Echenique and Fryer
(2007) stress. Restaurants are a natural spatial unit within which interactions may occur, while tract-level
results may be sensitive to how the Census Bureau chose to partition the city. To facilitate comparison of
measures of residential and consumption segregation, Table A.12 reports consumption dissimilarity indices
computed at the level of census tracts. The resulting indices are broadly similar to those computed at the
level of restaurant venues.
   48
      Despite their common preference parameters, white and Hispanic consumers still exhibit pairwise dis-
similarity due to observable differences in residential locations that generate differences in the social-friction
covariates employing tract-level racial and ethnic demographics (e.g., EDD) and other covariates employing
tract-level characteristics (e.g. the interaction of price dummies and median household income in the user’s
home tract).


                                                       34
                         Table 7: Residential and consumption segregation
                              Residential               Consumption dissimilarity
                             dissimilarity Estimated No spatial No social Neither friction
                                  (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
 Dissimilarity index
 Asian                              .521             .315           .290           .244              .232
 Hispanic                           .486             .143           .114           .106              .088
 black                              .653             .352           .322           .273              .260
 white                              .636             .191           .153           .112              .093
 Pairwise    dissimilarity
 Asian         Hispanic             .584             .288           .273           .220              .217
 Asian         black                .796             .494           .448           .387              .357
 Asian         white                .519             .279           .255           .212              .203
 Hispanic      white                .658             .161           .115           .096              .037
 black         Hispanic             .558             .328           .297           .262              .250
 black         white                .822             .354           .324           .262              .255
 Notes: This table reports dissimilarity indices. The upper panel reports the index for each demographic
 group’s residential/consumption locations compared to members of all other demographic groups. The
 lower panel reports the index for residential/consumption locations between each pair of demographic
 groups. The demographic group “other” is included in computations but not reported. Column 1 reports
 indices based on tracts’ residential populations. The remaining columns report venue-level dissimilarity
 indices based on the coefficient estimates in Table 3. Column 2 uses the estimated coefficients. Column
 3 sets the coefficients on travel-time covariates to zero. Column 4 sets the coefficients on demographic-
 difference covariates to zero. Column 5 sets the coefficients on travel-time and demographic-difference
 covariates to zero.


to consume may tend to reduce consumption segregation relative to residential segregation,
demographic differences in cuisine tastes or demographically-linked social frictions could
cause consumption segregation to exceed residential segregation. Our numbers show that
social frictions and heterogeneity in tastes do not overturn the integrating effect of consumers’
mobility.
    Across ethnic and racial groups, residential dissimilarity is much greater than consump-
tion dissimilarity. The ratio of residential dissimilarity to consumption dissimilarity is 3.4
for Hispanics, 3.4 for whites, 1.9 for blacks, and 1.7 for Asians. NYC’s levels of residential
dissimilarity are similar to the nationwide average level of dissimilarity for black residents
in 2010, while the levels of dissimilarity in consumption implied by our estimates are com-
parable to the levels of black residential dissimilarity observed in America’s most integrated
metropolitan areas (Glaeser and Vigdor, 2012).49 The 20 to 45 percentage-point difference
  49
    Glaeser and Vigdor (2012) do not report dissimilarity indices for Asians, Hispanics, or whites. A conven-
tional interpretation of residential dissimilarity indices is that indices below 0.3 are “low,” those between 0.3
and 0.6 indicate “moderate” segregation, and dissimilarity in excess of 0.6 is “high” (Massey and Denton,
1993, p. 20). We thus use these as benchmarks for gauging the magnitude of consumption dissimilarity.
There is no implication that rankings of cities by residential dissimilarity indices will have the same ranking
by consumption dissimilarity.


                                                       35
between consumption segregation and residential segregation of NYC residents is one to two
times the largest declines in black residential dissimilarity observed from 1970 to 2010 across
US metropolitan areas (Glaeser and Vigdor, 2012). At the median historical rate of decline,
residential segregation would have to continue its decline for nearly a century to reach levels
comparable to our estimated levels of consumption segregation.
     In order to measure the contributions of spatial and social frictions to consumption seg-
regation, we again use the estimates in Table 3 and recompute the dissimilarity indices that
arise from setting some of the estimated coefficients to zero. This calculation holds both the
set of restaurants and their characteristics fixed and, thus, should not be interpreted as cap-
turing the total effect of eliminating spatial or social frictions (which would likely generate
supply responses). In computing the dissimilarity indices reported in column three of Table
7, the coefficients on travel-time covariates are set to zero, eliminating the role of spatial
frictions.50 In column four, the coefficients on the demographic-differences covariates are set
to zero, eliminating the role of social frictions.51 In column five, both these sets of coefficients
are set to zero, so that consumers in different groups exhibit different predicted consumption
behavior only due to: differences in their residential income levels and income-linked valu-
ations of venues’ prices and ratings; race-specific valuations of restaurants’ cuisines, prices,
and ratings; race-specific responses to robberies per resident; and race-specific area fixed
effects.52
    Comparing columns two and three, the elimination of spatial frictions has a mild inte-
grating effect, causing consumption dissimilarity to fall by an average of three percentage
points. That is, users from different demographic groups value restaurant destinations suf-
ficiently similarly that eliminating spatial frictions would, all else equal, make their choices
modestly more integrated. Due to spatial frictions, consumption segregation at least partly
inherits the pattern of residential segregation. Comparing columns two and four, eliminat-
ing the roles of environmental dissimilarity and homophily (i.e., social frictions), reduces
consumption dissimilarity by an average of 6.6 percentage points, or more than twice the
effect of eliminating spatial frictions. If consumer behavior did not respond to differences
between the residential demographics of the restaurant tract and both the consumer’s in-
dividual identity and home tract demographics, predicted consumption behavior would be
much more integrated.53 Eliminating both spatial and social frictions would reduce con-
sumption dissimilarity by about one third on average.
    The relative contributions of spatial and social frictions are strikingly consistent across
demographic groups. For each group, social frictions make a notably greater contribution
to the observed level of consumption dissimilarity than spatial frictions.54 Moreover, the
  50
     This is a ceteris paribus exercise. In reality, spatial frictions and social frictions may not be entirely
independent. For example, if social frictions reflect segregated friendship networks and users visiting restau-
rants near their friends’ residences, then the elimination of spatial frictions would eliminate this component
of social frictions.
  51
     Specifically, we set the coefficients on all the “EDD”, “SSI”, and “share” covariates reported in Table 3
to zero.
  52
     For example, Asian users are, all else equal, more likely to visit Asian and Indian restaurants, and users
residing in higher-income tracts are more likely to visit restaurants with higher prices.
  53
     This decomposition holds residential segregation fixed. However, one could expect that residential
segregation would be different in the absence of social frictions.
  54
     The relative importance of spatial and social frictions for consumption dissimilarity depends on both


                                                      36
relative overall levels of estimated consumption dissimilarity appear to reflect dissimilarity
attributable to demographic differences in tastes. In the absence of both spatial and social
frictions, black consumers would exhibit the greatest consumption dissimilarity, and Hispanic
consumers the least, just as they do in the estimated levels in column two.
    The pairwise dissimilarity indices reported in the lower panel of Table 7 reflect the rich
set of covariates incorporated in our behavioral model. For example, while Asian-black and
black-white residential dissimilarity indices are similar, consumption dissimilarity is notably
greater between Asian and black consumers than between black and white consumers. This
partly reflects the magnitude of the Asian-black interactions in Table 3. Column five of
Table 7 reveals that it also reflects divergent choices due to differences in income levels and
tastes.
    These results are robust to a number of the alternative estimating assumptions discussed
in Section 4.5.3. In particular, we obtain similar results when restricting the estimation
sample to users who joined Yelp later (Table A.13) and introducing origin-mode-specific
intercepts (Table A.14). In addition, constraining all trips to start at home yields broadly
similar results (Table A.15).

5.3     Illustrative examples
We illustrate the mechanisms behind the results in Table 7 in two parts of the city. First,
we examine three neighborhoods in Manhattan: the Upper East Side, Central Harlem, and
East (Spanish) Harlem (respectively Manhattan community districts 8, 10, and 11). The
fact that each of these neighborhoods is residentially segregated, with a distinct demographic
majority, makes the general process at work easy to visualize in Figure 7.55
    Panel A in Figure 7 captures residential segregation. Each dot represents 5% of the tract
population. The Upper East Side of Manhattan stretches from Fifty-Ninth Street to Ninety-
Sixth Street, Central Park to the East River. While NYC is only 33% white, the Upper
East Side is 81% white. If we restrict attention to the fourteen census tracts between Third
Avenue and Central Park, the median tract is 92% white. Among nearly 61,000 residents of
these tracts, only 726 were black. In short, this is a highly segregated area of the city.
    Central Harlem comprises Fifth Avenue to Eighth Avenue, Central Park North (110th
Street) to the Harlem River. This is the storied center of urban black America. While its
black population share has fallen from its 1990 level of 88%, it remains 63% black. The
next largest group is Hispanics at 22%, with modest levels of whites (10%) and Asians (2%).
While Central Harlem’s residential population is becoming more diverse, panel A of Figure
7 makes it evident that it remains a highly segregated area.
    East (Spanish) Harlem stretches from Ninety-Sixth Street to the Harlem River, and Fifth
Avenue to the East River. The Hispanic fraction of the population has remained roughly
the estimated parameters and the values of the covariates capturing these frictions across all NYC residents.
In terms of the correlation between spatial frictions and demographic differences, NYC is not an outlier.
For Census places with population greater than 100,000, the distribution of the correlation of Euclidean
demographic distance and physical distance across census tracts in the same place has mean 0.27 and
standard deviation 0.18. For NYC, this correlation is 0.14.
  55
     Table A.16 reports shares of residents and predicted consumers by race for the three community districts
depicted in these maps.


                                                     37
   Figure 7: Residential and consumption segregation in three Manhattan communities




   A: Residential       B: Estimated         C: No spatial         D: No social      E: Neither friction
  Notes: These maps depict community districts 8 (Upper East Side), 10 (Central Harlem), and 11
  (East Harlem) in Manhattan. The five maps correspond to the five scenarios reported in Table 7. Each
  dot represents five percent of the tract’s residential population or predicted restaurant visitors. Asian
  residents or consumers are represented by red dots, black by blue, Hispanic by orange, and white by
  green. In different tracts, dots represent a different number of people, so the maps depict variation in
  shares, not levels.


constant in the last twenty years at about 50%. There is a large, even if declining, black
population in East Harlem, at roughly 30 percent, located most densely where East Harlem
abuts Central Harlem to the west and in the more northerly areas of the district. Asians
and whites are present in small but growing numbers.
    Panel B of Figure 7 shows the degree of consumption segregation within these areas.
Each dot represents five percent of the visits to that tract. Two features jump out from
this panel. The first is that predicted consumption in panel B is strikingly less segregated
than residences in panel A. This is consistent with a comparison of columns one and two
of Table 7. The boundaries between black and Hispanic consumers are porous, consistent
with the black-Hispanic interactions in Table 3 and the pairwise dissimilarity index in Table
7. Asian consumers are more prevalent in the Upper East Side, for example, than Central
Harlem, reflecting both a shorter distance to Asian residential population centers and smaller
social frictions between Asians and whites than between Asians and the two other groups.
The second feature is that, nonetheless, there remains a very high level of segregation.


                                                     38
As summarized in Table A.16, black consumers dominate consumption in Central Harlem;
Hispanics in East Harlem; and whites in the Upper East Side. Segregation of consumption
is much less than residences but still strong.
    The following three panels in Figure 7 follow the last three columns of Table 7 by il-
lustrating the degree of consumption segregation for the respective cases in which spatial,
social, or both types of frictions are set to zero when constructing predicted consumption
patterns. The third panel is based on our estimates in which we wholly eliminate spatial
frictions, effectively making every restaurant in the city instantly available to any resident
of the city. Comparing panel C to B, there is a diminution of the degree of consumption
segregation. Yet the change seems modest, consistent with a comparison of columns two and
three of Table 7.
    When we move to panel D of Figure 7, we allow spatial frictions to again be at their
estimated level but now set social frictions to zero. Visually, comparing panels B and D in
Figure 7, we see a large decline in the degree of consumption segregation in each of these
neighborhoods. It is important to recognize that this did not need to be true. Residential
segregation plus spatial frictions to consumption could have been enough to maintain very
high levels of consumption segregation; as we have observed, they just happen not to do so.
Social frictions matter a great deal for consumption integration, consistent with column four
of Table 7.
    Finally, we consider the elimination of both spatial and social frictions by setting both
sets of coefficients to zero. The fifth column of Table 7 tells us that there is some further
modest decline in the degree of consumption segregation relative to the no-social-frictions
case. However, it is sufficiently modest that it does not stand out clearly to the eye in panel
E of Figure 7 in any of the three neighborhoods. This again suggests that spatial frictions
explain a small share of consumption segregation.
    Next, we examine another part of New York City with considerable, but less extreme,
segregation. Figure 8 depicts neighborhoods near the portion of the East River separating
the Lower East Side of Manhattan from Brooklyn.56 Panel A show strong patterns of residen-
tial segregation. Manhattan community district 3 includes Chinatown (with predominantly
Asian residents), the East Village (with predominantly white residents in the northern and
western portions) and the Lower East Side (with predominantly Hispanic residents). Across
the river, Brooklyn community district 1 is home to concentrations of white residents in
Greenpoint and Williamsburg and concentrations of Hispanic residents, especially in the ar-
eas leading out to (mostly Hispanic) Bushwick. Brooklyn community district 2 includes the
mostly white Brooklyn Heights as well as Fort Greene, with a mixture of black, Hispanic,
and white residents. Finally, Bedford Stuyvesant (Brooklyn community district 3) is a tra-
ditionally black area that now has white residents in the area near Fort Greene and Hispanic
residents in areas proximate to Williamsburg and Bushwick.
    Panel B of Figure 8 shows that estimated consumption is strikingly more integrated.
Chinatown shows considerable inflows of white and Hispanic consumers, who are proximate
residents, but more modest inflows of black consumers, who are more remote. The East Vil-
lage and Lower East Side are also notably more integrated, again with only modest numbers
  56
    Table A.17 reports shares of residents and predicted consumers by race for the four community districts
depicted in these maps.



                                                    39
Figure 8: Residential and consumption segregation in lower Manhattan and west Brooklyn




                            A: Residential                       B: Estimated




         C: No spatial                        D: No social                          E: Neither
Notes: These maps depict community district 3 in Manhattan and 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Brooklyn. Each dot
represents 20% of the tract’s residential population or predicted restaurant visitors. See notes to Figure 7.


of black consumers. Greenpoint and Williamsburg host predominantly white consumers who
are augmented by Hispanic consumers residing, presumably, in Williamsburg and Bushwick.
Brooklyn Heights and Fort Greene are similarly host to mostly white consumers augmented
by black and Hispanic consumers. Finally, consumption in Bedford-Stuyvesant is notably
more racially integrated than its residences.
     Panels C, D, and E of Figure 8 reaffirm our finding that consumption segregation is
driven more by social frictions than spatial frictions. To the eye, panel C, which sets spatial
frictions to zero, is nearly identical to panel B. For example, the areas of Chinatown and
Bedford-Stuyvesant continue to be dominated by Asian and black consumers, respectively.
By contrast, panel D, which sets social frictions to zero, noticeably differs from panel B. The
consumption enclaves of Chinatown and Bedford-Stuyvesant don’t entirely disappear, but
they are much more integrated. Indeed, setting both frictions to zero, as in panel E, does
little to integrate consumption more visibly than the removal of social frictions alone.

5.4     Counterfactuals
We next study how changes in transportation infrastructure and in the level of social frictions
may affect the level of consumption segregation we observe. Major changes in transporta-


                                                      40
tion policy have only modest effects on consumption dissimilarity, consistent with the small
contribution of spatial frictions to overall consumption segregation. Conversely, reductions
in social frictions (due, for example, to an improvement in racial tolerance) would integrate
consumption to a greater degree.

5.4.1    Transportation policy and technology
Table 7 shows that the complete elimination of spatial frictions would only modestly reduce
consumption dissimilarity indices. This bounds the conceivable impact of driverless cars or
other “frictionless” technologies on consumption segregation. How might more immediately
feasible transportation projects affect consumption segregation? We consider two counterfac-
tuals relevant to NYC policymakers, noting that interventions may reduce or increase spatial
frictions. First, we forecast the effect of the new Second Avenue Subway on consumption
segregation. Second, we look at the effects of a general slowdown in NYC transit.
    The Second Avenue Subway is an ongoing multi-billion-dollar expansion of the NYC
subway system. When completed, the line will stretch from 125th Street in East Harlem
all the way down the East Side to Hanover Square in the Financial District. We compute
counterfactual travel times for this transportation infrastructure improvement and forecast
the effect on consumption segregation.57 The results are reported in Table 8. The Second
Avenue subway line has almost no effect on consumption segregation. This is the joint effect
of the fact that spatial frictions play a relatively small role in determining consumption
segregation and that the Second Avenue line is inferred to have relatively small effect on
travel times for the majority of the city’s residents.
    Second, we study consumption segregation when automobiles and public transit are 20%
slower. In 2014, NYC lowered the speed limit within the city from 30 mph to 25 mph.58 MTA
subway speeds are also down about 20% in the last few years.59 The effects on consumption
segregation are heterogeneous, with increases for Asian, Hispanic, and white consumers, and
a decrease for black consumers. This notwithstanding, all of the magnitudes are small. Our
conclusion is that even quite substantial interventions in the transport sphere are unlikely
to have a major impact on the integration of consumption.

5.4.2    Social frictions
Next we examine the effects of a decline in demographic-linked social frictions on consump-
tion segregation. At first glance, this may appear to be an odd policy exercise, since social
frictions likely reflect a variety of factors, such as tastes and social networks, that are not
immediately under policymakers’ control. Yet this does not really differentiate it from many
other policy exercises in which we distinguish between targets (e.g., vehicle speed) and in-
struments (e.g., speed limits, policing, etc.). There are government policy initiatives at the
  57
      Appendix E details how we construct the counterfactual transit times. Our computation only captures
the value of new subway connections in the network graph and does not assign any value to benefits such as
alleviating overcrowding, which is a major motivation for the Second Avenue project.
   58
      Caroline Bankoff, “Things to Know About NYC’s New 25-Miles-Per-Hour Speed Limit”, New York, 7
November 2014.
   59
      See Hamilton Nolan, “How the MTA Is Like an Alcoholic”, Fusion, 15 June 2017, and Emma G.
Fitzsimmons, “Subway’s Slide in Performance Leaves Straphangers Fuming”, New York Times, 12 Feb 2017.


                                                   41
                         Table 8: Counterfactual consumption dissimilarity
                                    Estimated 2nd Ave Slowdown Social change
                                        (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)
          Dissimilarity index
          Asian                             .315            .315         .318             .303
          black                             .352            .352         .349             .326
          Hispanic                          .143            .143         .146             .127
          white                             .190            .191         .192             .154
          Pairwise    dissimilarity
          Asian         black               .494            .494         .493             .469
          Asian         Hispanic            .288            .288         .295             .276
          Asian         white               .279            .278         .280             .268
          black         Hispanic            .328            .328         .325             .307
          black         white               .354            .354         .352             .318
          Hispanic      white               .161            .161         .164             .128
          Notes: See notes to Table 7. This table reports venue-level dissimilarity indices based
          on the coefficient estimates in Table 3. Column 1 uses the estimated coefficients.
          Columns 2-4 implement counterfactuals.


federal, state, and municipal levels that aim to encourage understanding and prevent ten-
sions between different demographic groups.60 In short, government policies often aim to
affect some elements that may contribute to what we term social frictions.
    The counterfactual that we examine is the reduction of the magnitude of social frictions
by 50 percent.61 The results are reported in the fourth column of Table 8. The direct effect
of reducing social frictions on consumption segregation is modest relative to the overall level
of consumption segregation, in spite of the fact that these effects are one to two orders of
magnitude greater than the impact of the transportation projects. The residual consumption
segregation reflects taste differences that may well attenuate over time with reductions in
other dimensions of segregation, but are unlikely to disappear over any short or even medium
horizon.
  60
      At the federal level, the Community Relations Service within the Department of Justice “is the Depart-
ment’s ‘Peacemaker’ for community conflicts and tensions arising from differences of race, color, national
origin, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, religion and disability.” It “facilitates the development of
viable, mutual understandings and solutions to the community’s challenges.” In New York City, the Com-
mission on Human Rights has a dual mandate, to educate the public about legal protections for a variety of
groups and “encouraging understanding and respect among New York City’s many communities.”
   61
      Our choice of this magnitude is admittedly arbitrary and ambitious. Halving social frictions might be an
implausibly large change. On one side, 42% of Americans were worried “a great deal” about race relations
in 2017, a peak since Gallup began asking the question in 2001. On the other, race relations improved
considerably over recent decades in a number of dimensions. To mention a single measure, approval of black-
white marriage rose from 4% in 1958 to 87% in 2011. The realm of conceivable changes in social frictions
is quite broad, and we are not aware of evidence disciplining the conceivable magnitude of policy-induced
changes in social frictions.




                                                       42
6      Gentrification
Public concerns about gentrification are primarily about displacement of one group by an-
other. Nominally this is an issue of social class, but in practice it also has a racial component –
neighborhoods shifting composition from less affluent minorities toward more affluent whites.
Since tastes for consumption venues differ by class and race, there is a second concern that
the commercial mix may also shift away from the set of venues well suited to poor and mi-
norities to those favored by affluent whites. This amounts to a concern about the potential
for gentrification to erode the benefits of living in a neighborhood for those who stay behind.
In New York City, the presence of rent-stabilized apartments and New York City Housing
Authority buildings, with low turnover rates, makes this question salient.
    We employ our estimates to quantify the welfare impact of gentrification for incumbent
residents by examining the consequences of changes in resident and restaurant composition.
The gentrification scenario we study is depicted in Figure 9. We select one low-income,
majority-black census tract in Harlem (the white polygon) and compute the change in black
residents’ expected utility if the surrounding census tracts containing (in green) were to
exhibit the residential and restaurants characteristics of high-income, majority-white cen-
sus tracts of the Upper East Side (in orange). The changes in restaurant and residential
characteristics are summarized in the table accompanying Figure 9.

                               Figure 9: Harlem gentrification scenario

                                             Change in                               Mean      Std. Dev.
                                             Share Asian                             0.055       0.038
                                             Share black                             -0.559      0.158
                                             Share Hispanic                          -0.123       0.06
                                             Share white                              0.639      0.178
                                             Robberies per resident                  -0.005      0.003
                                             Spectral segregation index              -1.112      0.379
                                             Yelp rating                              0.009      1.087
                                             Price ($ to $$$$)                       0.509       0.991
                                             Median household income                  77.19     53.795
                                             Euclidean demographic distance           1.24       0.828
                                                            N                                 108




    Notes: We compute the change in black residents’ expected utility in the white polygon if the sur-
    rounding green tracts were to exhibit the characteristics of the orange tracts. The table reports the
    changes in these characteristics.

   As a result of this gentrification, black residents of the unchanged Harlem census tract
experience a 1.1% decrease in the expected utility of patronizing restaurants. This welfare

                                                     43
     Table 9: Welfare losses due to gentrification of surrounding Harlem neighborhoods
                                        Change in value of characteristics (γ∆X̄i , β∆Z̄i )
    Welfare change Initial visit share Social frictions Restaurant traits Other traits
        -1.3%                  .113                -3.048                 -.088               .689
                              Ui0 −Ui                                                  P
  Notes: Welfare loss is 100× Ui for incumbent black residents. Initial visit share is j∈J G Pij . Social
  frictions include EDD, SSI, EDD×SSI, and racial and ethnic population shares of kj . “Restaurant traits”
  include price, rating, cuisine category, and price and rating interacted with median household income.
  “Other traits” include destination income, differences in incomes, and robberies per resident.


loss can be decomposed using a simple approximation of the utility change that we derive
in Appendix E.3:
                                
               0
                          X
                             Pij  × exp(γg2 ∆X̄ij2 + βg1 ∆Z̄j1 + βg2 ∆Z̄ij2 ) − 1 ,
                                                                                 
              Ui − Ui ≈ 
                              j∈J G


where J G is set of restaurants that change due to gentrification, Pij is the probability that an
incumbent resident would visit restaurant j prior to gentrification, and (∆X̄ij2 , ∆Z̄j1 , ∆Z̄ij2 ) are
the average changes in restaurant and residential characteristics due to gentrification. Table 9
reports the results. The 108 restaurants in the gentrifying area account for 12.4% of predicted
visits by incumbent residents prior to gentrification, so changes in the characteristics of these
restaurants and residents could have large welfare effects. The welfare loss we compute
is attributable to increases in social frictions associated with the shift of the surrounding
tracts from mostly black residents to mostly white residents. This is partially offset by
the accompanying increase in income levels, which make these tracts more attractive to
incumbent consumers, ceteris paribus. The changes in restaurants’ price and cuisines have
very small effects on welfare.
    This exercise illustrates potential welfare costs of gentrification to incumbent residents
beyond increases in housing rents they may experience. In this Harlem example, as well as
a Brooklyn example reported in Appendix E.3, the consumption value of the location for
incumbent residents falls by a modest but non-trivial amount. This decline is not due to
changes in restaurants’ characteristics but increased social frictions associated with changes
in surrounding neighborhoods’ racial demographics.


7      Conclusions
How segregated is urban consumption? While racial discrimination has been outlawed for
decades, the current level of integration in consumption venues has been unmeasured. Con-
sumption segregation is an important component of social segregation. It may also be a lost
opportunity for casual contact that can promote greater tolerance and understanding. Our
paper develops an approach to provide measures of urban consumption segregation.
    We use a novel data source to describe restaurant consumption in NYC and exploit prop-
erties of the conditional-logit discrete-choice model to tractably identify how consumers value


                                                    44
venues’ and locations’ characteristics. Our dataset allows us to characterize how consump-
tion in the city depends on travel times, demographic differences, crime rates, restaurant
characteristics, and user characteristics. We then use our estimates to compute measures
of consumption segregation for NYC residents. While NYC is distinctive in terms of its
population density and diversity of restaurants, we believe that our paper’s results for the
largest city in the United States are both interesting in their own right and establish a basis
for studying consumption segregation in other settings.
    Both spatial and social frictions influence consumption choices. Consistent with theories
of spatial competition, spatial frictions play a large role in determining the spatial distri-
bution of consumption within the city. Our estimates show that measures of travel time,
from both home and work by both public transit and by car, are relevant for predicting the
restaurants patronized by NYC Yelp users. Across origin-mode pairs, halving the minutes
of travel time to a venue would imply that the user would be two to nearly four times more
likely to visit the venue from that origin by that mode.
    Social frictions are suggested by the finding that consumers are less likely to visit restau-
rants in neighborhoods with different residential demographics. A venue in a location one
standard deviation more demographically distant from a user’s home location is 25% to 50%
less likely to be visited. Users are also more likely to visit restaurants in neighborhoods where
a larger fraction of the residents share the user’s race. These social frictions are asymmetric,
in the sense that the negative effects of tract-level demographic differences are larger for
black consumers, yet black consumers experience larger tract-level demographic differences
during their average restaurant visit.
    While our estimation approach exploits data on the decision to eat at restaurants across
NYC, the consequences of spatial and social frictions are likely to apply to a much broader
scope of life in the city. These would include both the broader scope of consumption of
non-tradable services, from bars to retailers, and the vast array of non-market activities that
cause residents to traverse the city. For example, in our gentrification exercises, the reduction
in the value of restaurant consumption for incumbent residents is much more attributable to
increases in social frictions than changes in restaurant characteristics. These demographic
changes presumably have consequences for many non-restaurant dimensions of urban life.
    We use our estimates to characterize predicted consumption segregation for the city’s
population. While spatial frictions, social frictions, and demographic differences in tastes
cause dissimilarity in consumption choices across racial and ethnic groups, dissimilarity in-
dices for consumption are considerably lower than the dissimilarity indices for residential
locations. Life in NYC is less segregated than one might infer from looking at residential
segregation alone. Our analysis of these patterns reveals that social frictions contribute
more to consumption segregation than spatial frictions. A consequence of this finding is that
improved transportation linkages within the city would only modestly integrate consump-
tion further, given existing residential patterns. Eliminating social frictions would result in
substantially more integrated consumption.


References
Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Xiangliang Li, “Optimal City Structure,” July 2015.


                                               45
  mimeo.

Allport, Gordon W., The Nature of Prejudice, Addison-Wesley, 1954.

Anderson, Elijah, The Cosmopolitan Canopy: Race and Civility in Everyday Life, W.W.
 Norton & Company, 2011.

  , ““The White Space”,” Sociology of Race and Ethnicity, 2015, 1 (1), 10–21.

Anderson, Michael L. and Jeremy R. Magruder, “Learning from the Crowd: Regression
 Discontinuity Estimates of the Effects of an Online Review Database,” Economic Journal,
 2012, 122 (563), 957–989.

Andrews, Donald W. K. and Gustavo Soares, “Inference for Parameters Defined by Moment
 Inequalities Using Generalized Moment Selection,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (1), 119–157.

Antecol, Heather and Deborah A Cobb-Clark, “Racial and Ethnic Discrimination in Local
 Consumer Markets: Exploiting the Army’s Procedures for Matching Personnel to Duty
 Locations,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 64 (2), 496–509.

Ayres, Ian, Pervasive Prejudice? Unconventional Evidence of Race and Gender Discrimina-
 tion, University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Boustan, Leah, “Racial Residential Segregation in American Cities,” in Gerrit-Jan Knaap
  Nancy Brooks, Kieran Donaghy, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Urban Economics and Plan-
  ning, Oxford University Press, 2011.

Caetano, Gregorio and Vikram Maheshri, “Homophily and Sorting Within Neighborhoods,”
  September 2015.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, “Where is the Land
 of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1553–1623.

Couture, Victor, “Valuing the Consumption Benefits of Urban Density,” May 2015. mimeo.

Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser, “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (3), 827–872.

Dickstein, Michael and Eduardo Morales, “What do Exporters Know?,” December 2016.
  mimeo.

Echenique, Federico and Roland G. Fryer, “A Measure of Segregation Based on Social In-
  teractions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 441–485.

Edelman, Benjamin and Michael Luca, “Digital Discrimination: The Case of Airbnb.com,”
  January 2014. Harvard Business School Working Paper 14-054.

Eizenberg, Alon, “Upstream Innovation and Product Variety in the U.S. Home PC Market,”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (3), 1003–1045.

                                           46
  , Saul Lach, and Merav Yiftach, “Retail Prices in a City: An Empirical Analysis,” July
  2017. mimeo.

Fox, Jeremy T., “Semiparametric Estimation of Multinomial Discrete-Choice Models Using
  a Subset of Choices,” RAND Journal of Economics, December 2007, 38 (4), 1002–1019.

Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Ideological Segregation Online and Offline,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (4), 1799–1839.

  , , and Matt Taddy, “Measuring Polarization in High-dimensional Data: Method and
  Application to Congressional Speech,” May 2017. mimeo.

George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel, “Who Affects Whom in Daily Newspaper Markets?,” Jour-
 nal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (4), 765–784.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Jacob L. Vigdor, “The End of the Segregated Century: Racial Sep-
  aration in America’s Neighborhoods, 1890-2010,” Civic Report 66, Manhattan Instititute
  January 2012.

  , Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz, “Consumer City,” Journal of Economic Geography, January
  2001, 1 (1), 27–50.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1095–1131.

Handbury, Jessie, “Are Poor Cities Cheap for Everyone? Non-Homotheticity and the Cost
  of Living Across U.S. Cities,” July 2013. mimeo.

   and David E. Weinstein, “Goods Prices and Availability in Cities,” The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 258–296.

Harrison, Cassandra, Mohip Jorder, Henri Stern, Faina Stavinsky, Vasudha Reddy, Heather
  Hanson, HaeNa Waechter, Luther Lowe, Luis Gravano, and Sharon Balter, “Using Online
  Reviews by Restaurant Patrons to Identify Unreported Cases of Foodborne Illness—New
  York City, 2012–2013,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, May 2014, 63 (20), 441–
  445.

Hellerstein, Judith K. and David Neumark, “Workplace Segregation in the United States:
  Race, Ethnicity, and Skill,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2008, 90 (3),
  459–477.

Holmes, Thomas J., “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,” Econometrica,
  2011, 79 (1), 253–302.

Houde, Jean-François, “Spatial Differentiation and Vertical Mergers in Retail Markets for
  Gasoline,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5), 2147–82.

Kain, John F., “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentraliza-
 tion,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1968, 82 (2), 175–197.

                                            47
Katz, Michael, “Supermarkets and Zoning Laws,” 2007. Harvard PhD dissertation.

Labaton, Stephen, “Denny’s Restaurants to Pay $54 Million in Race Bias Suits,” New York
  Times, May 25 1994.

Lee, Jennifer, “The Salience of Race in Everyday Life: Black Customers’ Shopping Experi-
  ences in Black and White Neighborhoods,” Work and Occupations, 2000, 27, 353–376.

Logan, John R., Zengwang Xu, and Brian J. Stults, “Interpolating U.S. Decennial Cen-
  sus Tract Data from as Early as 1970 to 2010: A Longitudinal Tract Database,” The
  Professional Geographer, 2014, 66 (3), 412–420.

Luca, Michael, “Reviews, Reputation, and Revenue: The Case of Yelp.com,” March 2016.
  Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 12-016.

  , “User-Generated Content and Social Media,” in David Stromberg Simon P. Anderson,
  Joel Waldfogel, ed., Handbook of Media Economics, Vol. 1B, North Holland, 2016.

Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton, “The Dimensions of Residential Segregation,”
 Social Forces, 1988, 67 (2), 281–315.

   and , American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass, Harvard
  University Press, 1993.

Mayer, Adalbert and Steven L. Puller, “The old boy (and girl) network: Social network
 formation on university campuses,” Journal of Public Economics, February 2008, 92 (1-
 2), 329–347.

McFadden, Daniel, “Modelling the Choice of Residential Location,” in A. Karlqvist,
 L. Lundqvist, F. Snickars, and J. Weibull, eds., Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning
 Models, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1978, pp. 75–96.

Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen J. Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Commuting, Migra-
 tion and Local Employment Elasticities,” November 2015. NBER Working Paper 21706.

Morales, Eduardo, Gloria Sheu, and Andrés Zahler, “Extended Gravity,” June 2017. mimeo.

Myrdal, Gunnar, An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy,
 Harper and Brothers, 1944.

Oberholzer-Gee, Felix and Joel Waldfogel, “Media Markets and Localism: Does Local News
 en Español Boost Hispanic Voter Turnout?,” American Economic Review, December 2009,
 99 (5), 2120–28.

O’Flaherty, Brendan, The Economics of Race in the United States, Harvard University Press,
  June 2015.

   and Rajiv Sethi, “Urban Crime,” in J. Vernon Henderson Gilles Duranton and William C.
  Strange, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 5, Elsevier, 2015, chap-
  ter 23, pp. 1519 – 1621.

                                           48
Pakes, Ariel, “Alternative Models for Moment Inequalities,” Econometrica, November 2010,
  78 (6), 1783–1822.

Paluck, Elizabeth Levy and Donald P. Green, “Prejudice Reduction: What Works? A
  Review and Assessment of Research and Practice,” Annual Review of Psychology, 2009,
  60 (1), 339–367. PMID: 18851685.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. and Linda R. Tropp, “A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact
  theory,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2006, 90 (5), 751–783.

Quillian, Lincoln and Devah Pager, “Black Neighbors, Higher Crime? The Role of Racial
 Stereotypes in Evaluations of Neighborhood Crime,” American Journal of Sociology, 2001,
 107 (3), pp. 717–767.

Schiff, Nathan, “Cities and Product Variety: Evidence from Restaurants,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Geography, 2015, 15 (6), 1085–1123.

Schreer, George E., Saundra Smith, and Kirsten Thomas, ““Shopping While Black”: Ex-
  amining Racial Discrimination in a Retail Setting,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
  2009, 39 (6), 1432–1444.

Smith, Sandra Susan, “Race and Trust,” Annual Review of Sociology, 2010, 36 (1), 453–475.

Taddy, Matt, “Distributed Multinomial Regression,” Ann. Appl. Stat., 09 2015, 9 (3), 1394–
  1414.

Train, Kenneth E., Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, New York: Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 2009.

  , Daniel L. McFadden, and Moshe Ben-Akiva, “The Demand for Local Telephant Service:
  a Fully Discrete Model of Residential Calling Patterns and Service Choices,” The Rand
  Journal of Economics, 1987, 18 (1), 109–123.

Waldfogel, Joel, The Tyranny of the Market: Why You Can’t Always Get What You Want,
 Harvard University Press, October 2007.

Wollman, Thomas, “Trucks Without Bailouts: Equilibrium Product Characteristics for
 Commercial Vehicles,” May 2016. mimeo.

Yelp, “Yelp.com Welcomes 100 Million Unique Visitors in January 2013,” Febru-
  ary 2013. http://officialblog.yelp.com/2013/02/yelpcom-welcomes-100-million-unique-
  visitors-in-january-2013.html.




                                            49
                  Online Appendix (not for publication)

A   Appendix Figures and Tables

           Figure A.1: Restaurants reviewed by users in estimation sample




    Notes: This map depicts the locations of 5363 Yelp restaurant venues reviewed by users in
    our estimation sample. Each dot represents a venue.




                                               50
      Figure A.2: Venue counts by ZIP code, Yelp vs NYC DOHMH




                                     800
                  Count of venues on Yelp in 2005-2011
                                  400          600
                                                                            10021


                     200                                     10079




                                                                               10065
                                                             10184     1007511430
                                                             11351
                                                             11001
                                                               10280
                                                             10169
                                                             10292
                                                               10282
                                                             10166
                                                             11109
                                                             10104
                                                             10175
                                                             10167
                                                             10178
                                                             11359
                                                             10041
                                                             10271
                                                             10080
                                                             10123
                                                             10170
                                                             10285
                                                             11772
                                                             11779
                                     0




                                                                             11249

                                                         0                  200               400            600             800
                                                                          Count of venues by NYC DOHMH in 2011-2014




                    Table A.1: Venue review summary statistics
                                                                            Share of               Share of estimation-sample reviews
Restaurant characteristic                                               all Yelp reviews      all users Asian black white or Hispanic
Price of $                                                                       .227           .242        .233      .334         .241
Price of $$                                                                      .567           .563        .536      .575         .580
Price of $$$                                                                     .161           .158        .181      .084         .148
Price of $$$$                                                                    .045           .037        .050      .006         .032
Rating of 1 stars                                                                .001           .001        .000      .004         .000
Rating of 1.5 stars                                                              .002           .002        .002      .007         .002
Rating of 2 stars                                                                .011           .008        .006      .023         .008
Rating of 2.5 stars                                                              .038           .037        .032      .068         .035
Rating of 3 stars                                                                .141           .144        .125      .204         .150
Rating of 3.5 stars                                                              .358           .369        .358      .344         .379
Rating of 4 stars                                                                .390           .386        .415      .307         .380
Rating of 4.5 stars                                                              .056           .050        .061      .042         .044
Rating of 5 stars                                                                .003           .001        .001      .001         .002
Cuisine: American                                                                .331           .336        .282      .406         .366
Cuisine: Asian                                                                   .248           .256        .340      .177         .200
Cuisine: European                                                                .179           .166        .165      .092         .179
Cuisine: Latin American                                                          .090           .098        .072      .187         .106
Cuisine: No Category                                                             .079           .080        .075      .095         .082
Cuisine: Indian                                                                  .026           .024        .030      .013         .023
Cuisine: Middle Eastern                                                          .026           .022        .023      .020         .025
Cuisine: Veggie                                                                  .016           .014        .011      .006         .016
Cuisine: African                                                                 .003           .003        .002      .004         .003
Located in Manhattan                                                             .749           .802        .857      .581         .778
Located in Brooklyn                                                              .170           .123        .063      .360         .147
Located in Queens                                                                .068           .066        .076      .045         .061
Located in Bronx                                                                 .008           .005        .003      .006         .005
Located in Staten Island                                                         .005           .004        .001      .008         .008
Located in plurality Asian                                                       .084           .088        .121      .056         .069
Located in plurality black                                                       .018           .015        .006      .089         .011
Located in plurality Hispanic                                                    .047           .043        .031      .074         .052
Located in plurality white                                                       .851           .854        .842      .781         .869
Notes: This table summarizes the distribution of reviews across different venue char-
acteristics for all Yelp users as a whole (column 1), our estimation sample (column 2),
and by race within our estimation sample (columns 3–5).


                                                                                         51
                Table A.2: NYC census tract summary statistics
                          Variable                        Mean                 Std. Dev.
Tract characteristics
Population                                              3866                     2115
Spectral segregation index for tract’s plurality        0.914                    2.394
Robberies per resident, 2007-2011 annual average        0.003                    0.009
Tract-pair characteristics
Percent absolute difference in median household income 0.506                     0.355
Percent difference in median household income             0                      0.618
Euclidean demographic distance between tracts           0.455                    0.226
Travel time by public transport in minutes             72.436                   30.319
Travel time by automobile in minutes                   24.937                   10.589
Notes: The upper panel describes 2,110 NYC census tracts for which an estimate of median
household income is available. The lower panel describes 4,452,012 pairs of 2010 NYC census
tracts for which estimates of median household income and travel times are available. Data
on incomes from 2007-2011 American Community Survey, demographics from 2010 Census
of Population, robberies from NYPD, and travel times from Google Maps.




                                            52
                            Table A.3: Varying choice set sizes
                                                            (1)     (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)    (6)
                                                               Asian                 black              white/Hisp
Log travel time from home by public transit                -1.04a   -1.03a    -.953a     -.920a        -1.10a     -1.11a
                                                           (.098)   (.096)    (.123)     (.119)        (.055)     (.053)
Log travel time from home by car                           -1.15a   -1.15a    -1.20a     -1.15a        -1.33a     -1.34a
                                                           (.084)   (.082)    (.151)     (.142)        (.056)     (.054)
Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.25a   -1.26a    -2.02      -1.97         -1.88a     -1.84a
                                                           (.148)   (.149)    (1.66)     (1.47)        (.288)     (.260)
Log travel time from work by car                           -1.61a   -1.61a    -1.91a     -1.93a        -1.97a     -1.96a
                                                           (.174)   (.172)    (.545)     (.577)        (.178)     (.169)
Log travel time from commute by public transit             -.938a   -.931a    -.937a     -.917a        -1.09a     -1.08a
                                                           (.064)   (.062)    (.099)     (.099)        (.043)     (.041)
Log travel time from commute by car                        -1.05a   -1.04a    -1.31a     -1.28a        -1.39a     -1.38a
                                                           (.059)   (.058)    (.157)     (.156)        (.053)     (.050)
Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -.957a   -.924a    -1.89a     -1.74a        -1.16a     -1.14a
                                                           (.115)   (.113)    (.271)     (.265)        (.125)     (.121)
Spectral segregation index of kj                           .138a    .138a     .177b      .125          .045c      .036
                                                           (.048)   (.048)    (.086)     (.083)        (.026)     (.026)
EDD × SSI                                                  -.137    -.138     -.369      -.346         -.095      -.096
                                                           (.108)   (.108)    (.256)     (.271)        (.086)     (.085)
Share of tract population that is Asian                    .973a    .993a     -.015      .028          .364a      .347a
                                                           (.114)   (.112)    (.333)     (.330)        (.131)     (.129)
Share of tract population that is black                    .184     .237      .876b      1.02a         .057       .076
                                                           (.310)   (.306)    (.391)     (.383)        (.257)     (.250)
                                                                                                              c
Share of tract population that is Hispanic                 -.141    -.112     .502       .536          .312       .320c
                                                           (.228)   (.225)    (.359)     (.355)        (.180)     (.177)
Share of tract population that is other                    .636     .729      5.61c      5.53c         1.43       1.36
                                                           (1.98)   (1.95)    (2.99)     (2.95)        (1.84)     (1.81)
                                                               a          a          a             a       a
Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                     .354     .338      .757       .727          .372       .387a
                                                           (.084)   (.082)    (.189)     (.186)        (.080)     (.078)
Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                     .235b    .229b     .140       .102          -.068      -.035
                                                           (.112)   (.110)    (.320)     (.316)        (.115)     (.113)
Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                     .263     .254      .092       -.108         -.249      -.268
                                                           (.180)   (.175)    (1.21)     (1.15)        (.211)     (.207)
Yelp rating of restaurant                                  .561a    .536a     .094       .028          .343a      .344a
                                                           (.060)   (.059)    (.126)     (.123)        (.056)     (.055)
African cuisine category                                   .129     .358      -.009      .037          .361       .170
                                                           (.289)   (.286)    (.534)     (.522)        (.246)     (.242)
                                                               a          a          a             a       a
American cuisine category                                  .411     .428      .596       .551          .596       .604a
                                                           (.053)   (.052)    (.114)     (.112)        (.048)     (.048)
Asian cuisine category                                     .871a    .875a     .279b      .253b         .301a      .297a
                                                           (.052)   (.052)    (.129)     (.127)        (.052)     (.051)
European cuisine category                                  .195a    .193a     -.239      -.283c        .225a      .208a
                                                           (.057)   (.057)    (.148)     (.147)        (.053)     (.053)
Indian cuisine category                                    .338a    .328a     -.562c     -.558c        -.040      -.065
                                                           (.088)   (.087)    (.292)     (.290)        (.094)     (.092)
Latin American cuisine category                            .495a    .505a     1.01a      .922a         .643a      .644a
                                                           (.068)   (.067)    (.129)     (.126)        (.059)     (.058)
Middle Eastern cuisine category                            .304a    .316a     .089       -.026         .279a      .265a
                                                           (.097)   (.096)    (.243)     (.240)        (.090)     (.089)
Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                          .329b    .389a     -.204      -.339         .603a      .621a
                                                           (.131)   (.129)    (.400)     (.401)        (.109)     (.107)
2-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .034a    .036a     -.028      -.023         .040a      .039a
                                                           (.010)   (.010)    (.031)     (.030)        (.009)     (.009)
3-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .074a    .076a     .031       .035          .083a      .079a
                                                           (.013)   (.013)    (.050)     (.049)        (.012)     (.012)
4-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .064a    .063a     -.203      -.163         .082a      .081a
                                                           (.021)   (.020)    (.232)     (.217)        (.022)     (.021)
Yelp rating × home tract median income                     .010     .012c     .007       .014          .014b      .014b
                                                           (.007)   (.007)    (.021)     (.020)        (.006)     (.006)
Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )   -.061    -.063     .837a      .789a         -.113b     -.118b
                                                           (.048)   (.047)    (.122)     (.119)        (.050)     (.049)
Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            .099     .060      .015       .397          .787a      .811a
                                                           (.292)   (.289)    (.821)     (.821)        (.286)     (.282)
Log median household income in kj                          -.095    -.057     .120       -.170         -.696a     -.708a
                                                           (.256)   (.254)    (.719)     (.719)        (.250)     (.246)
Average annual robberies per resident in kj                -3.43a   -3.31a    2.22b      2.18b         -3.65a     -3.82a
                                                           (.657)   (.650)    (1.10)     (1.08)        (.753)     (.751)

Number of origin-mode points                                 6       6          6          6             6         6
Number of venues in choice set                              50      100        50        100            50        100
Number of trips                                            6447     6447      1079       1079          6936       6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’
decisions to visit a Yelp venue, identical to the specifications in Table 3. Standard
errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%).
                                                   53
                      Table A.4: Estimates with home as only origin
                                                                   (1)         (2)           (3)
                                                                  Asian       black      white/Hisp
 Log travel time from home by public transit                      -.966a      -1.28a       -1.29a
                                                                  (.043)      (.065)       (.024)
                                                                          a          a
 Log travel time from home by car                                 -1.12       -1.88        -1.80a
                                                                  (.045)      (.167)       (.049)
                                                                          a          a
 Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj                 -.788       -1.18        -.667a
                                                                  (.122)      (.294)       (.133)
                                                                       a          b
 Spectral segregation index of kj                                 .146        .174         .056b
                                                                  (.051)      (.073)       (.027)
 EDD × SSI                                                        -.136       -.323        -.131
                                                                  (.113)      (.210)       (.083)
 Share of tract population that is Asian                          .972a       -.061         .152
                                                                  (.119)      (.341)       (.137)
 Share of tract population that is black                           .419       .762c         .062
                                                                  (.312)      (.405)       (.265)
 Share of tract population that is Hispanic                       -.395c      .393          .165
                                                                  (.233)      (.386)       (.188)
 Share of tract population that is other                           .272       3.19          1.22
                                                                  (2.04)      (3.48)       (1.98)

 Number of origin-mode points                                       2           2            2
 Number of trips                                                   6447       1079         6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’ decisions to visit
a Yelp venue. Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c
(10%). All estimates in this table restrict the origin-mode pairs to l ∈ {hc, hp}. Unreported controls
include venue price and rating interacted with home tract income, log median household income in
tract of venue, percentage difference and percentage absolute difference in income levels between
home and venue tract, 28 area dummies, 9 cuisine dummies, and robberies per resident.




                                                 54
    Table A.5: Estimates with more disaggregated cuisine categories
                                                             (1)      (2)         (3)
                                                            Asian    black    white/Hisp
Log travel time from home by public transit                 -1.06a   -.962a     -1.13a
                                                            (.108)   (.127)     (.059)
Log travel time from home by car                            -1.18a   -1.22a     -1.36a
                                                            (.093)   (.159)     (.060)
Log travel time from work by public transit                 -1.24a   -1.89      -1.86a
                                                            (.146)   (1.15)     (.281)
Log travel time from work by car                            -1.61a   -1.83a     -1.94a
                                                            (.176)   (.464)     (.169)
Log travel time from commute by public transit              -.943a   -.954a     -1.10a
                                                            (.067)   (.104)     (.044)
Log travel time from commute by car                         -1.06a   -1.37a     -1.44a
                                                            (.063)   (.182)     (.059)
Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj            -1.03a   -1.91a     -1.19a
                                                            (.122)   (.283)     (.131)
Spectral segregation index of kj                            .153a    .065       .051c
                                                            (.051)   (.091)     (.027)
EDD × SSI                                                   -.185    -.165      -.076
                                                            (.123)   (.230)     (.084)
Share of tract population that is Asian                     .890a    .046       .330b
                                                            (.125)   (.356)     (.142)
Share of tract population that is black                     .091     .707c       .112
                                                            (.327)   (.415)     (.270)
Share of tract population that is Hispanic                  -.320    .310       .377b
                                                            (.240)   (.393)     (.190)
Share of tract population that is other                     .425     3.73        .876
                                                            (2.07)   (3.41)     (1.99)
Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                      .244a    .655a      .232a
                                                            (.089)   (.203)     (.084)
Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                      .124     -.151      -.189
                                                            (.120)   (.346)     (.123)
Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                      .143     -.113      -.451b
                                                            (.193)   (1.28)     (.224)
Yelp rating of restaurant                                   .575a    .042       .356a
                                                            (.065)   (.140)     (.061)
2-dollar bin × home tract median income                     .036a    -.027      .041a
                                                            (.011)   (.032)     (.010)
3-dollar bin × home tract median income                     .073a    .066       .080a
                                                            (.014)   (.053)     (.013)
4-dollar bin × home tract median income                     .074a    -.162      .092a
                                                            (.022)   (.243)     (.023)
Yelp rating × home tract median income                      .009     .011       .017b
                                                            (.008)   (.023)     (.007)
Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )    -.055    .929a      -.103c
                                                            (.051)   (.129)     (.053)
Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )             .234     .746       .754b
                                                            (.307)   (.866)     (.302)
Log median household income in kj                           -.231    -.514      -.660b
                                                            (.270)   (.755)     (.264)
Average annual robberies per resident in kj                 -2.78a   2.91b      -3.24a
                                                            (.677)   (1.22)     (.771)

Number of origin-mode points                                 6        6           6
Number of trips                                             6447    1079        6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’
decisions to visit a Yelp venue. Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance
denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%). The unreported controls are 28 area dummies
and 39 cuisine category dummies.

                                           55
     Table A.6: Estimates for the late-adopters subsample
                                                               (1)         (2)           (3)
                                                              Asian       black      white/Hisp
   Log travel time from home by public transit                -1.18a      -.919a       -1.10a
                                                              (.161)      (.188)       (.081)
   Log travel time from home by car                           -1.25a      -1.14a       -1.37a
                                                              (.123)      (.208)       (.090)
   Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.34a      -16.6        -2.07a
                                                              (.206)     (40721.8)     (.493)
   Log travel time from work by car                           -1.71a      -1.99b       -2.13a
                                                              (.238)      (.929)       (.289)
   Log travel time from commute by public transit             -1.07a      -.821a       -1.15a
                                                              (.103)      (.117)       (.068)
   Log travel time from commute by car                        -1.13a      -1.64a       -1.57a
                                                              (.082)      (.428)       (.098)
   Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -.972a      -1.92a       -1.50a
                                                              (.196)      (.431)       (.222)
   Spectral segregation index of kj                           .442a        .277        -.019
                                                              (.128)      (.375)       (.109)
   EDD × SSI                                                  -.407       -.284         .116
                                                              (.260)      (.718)       (.209)
   Share of tract population that is Asian                    .981a        .312        .761a
                                                              (.185)      (.440)       (.232)
   Share of tract population that is black                    -.163       1.10b         .015
                                                              (.555)      (.513)       (.440)
                                                                                 b
   Share of tract population that is Hispanic                 .159        1.17         .828a
                                                              (.357)      (.468)       (.311)
   Share of tract population that is other                    -.022        3.16        -1.69
                                                              (2.99)      (4.01)       (3.32)
                                                                     a         a
   Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                     .394        1.42         .680a
                                                              (.122)      (.292)       (.143)
   Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                     .312c        .202         .093
                                                              (.166)      (.523)       (.207)
   Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                     .186        -.623         .210
                                                              (.274)      (1.70)       (.359)
                                                                     a           b
   Yelp rating of restaurant                                  .584        .429         .351a
                                                              (.092)      (.203)       (.103)
   African cuisine category                                   .087         .012         .468
                                                              (.530)      (.581)       (.412)
                                                                     a         a
   American cuisine category                                  .477        .562         .647a
                                                              (.087)      (.149)       (.083)
   Asian cuisine category                                     .982a       .293c        .302a
                                                              (.087)      (.168)       (.090)
   European cuisine category                                  .336a       -.510b       .365a
                                                              (.093)      (.205)       (.090)
   Indian cuisine category                                    .447a       -.467        -.126
                                                              (.145)      (.380)       (.167)
                                                                     a         a
   Latin American cuisine category                            .607        1.09         .899a
                                                              (.109)      (.168)       (.099)
   Middle Eastern cuisine category                            .349b        .116         .136
                                                              (.156)      (.308)       (.159)
   Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                          .324         .123        .360c
                                                              (.225)      (.538)       (.216)
   2-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .021        -.150a       -.002
                                                              (.015)      (.051)       (.016)
                                                                     a
   3-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .065         .031        .065a
                                                              (.019)      (.089)       (.022)
   4-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .067b       -.065         .039
                                                              (.031)      (.321)       (.038)
   Yelp rating × home tract median income                     .015        -.053         .016
                                                              (.011)      (.036)       (.012)
   Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )   -.013       .965a        -.031
                                                              (.075)      (.162)       (.086)
   Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            .293         1.51        .998b
                                                              (.435)      (1.23)       (.481)
   Log median household income in kj                          -.296       -1.06        -.906b
                                                              (.379)      (1.08)       (.418)
   Average annual robberies per resident in kj                -3.00a      2.94b        -4.46a
                                                              (.966)      (1.47)       (1.23)

   Number of origin-mode points                                6            6           6
   Number of trips                                            2766         707         2647
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of indi-
viduals’ decisions to visit a Yelp venue. The estimation sample is restricted
to Yelp users with later-than-median dates of first review written. Stan-
dard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b
(5%), c (10%). The unreported controls are 28 area dummies.

                                                56
                Table A.7: Estimates using only users’ early reviews
                                                            (1)     (2)             (3)                (4)        (5)     (6)
                                                               Asian                          black                white/Hisp
Log travel time from home by public transit                -1.07a     -1.20a      -1.08a              -1.08a     -1.15a      -1.22a
                                                           (.158)     (.291)       (.199)             (.351)     (.080)      (.135)
Log travel time from home by car                           -1.25a     -1.35a      -1.42a              -1.59a     -1.38a      -1.39a
                                                           (.152)     (.250)       (.264)             (.609)     (.082)      (.122)
Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.29a     -1.41a      -17.53              -1.45      -1.95a      -15.35
                                                           (.248)     (.413)     (12969.00)           (.994)     (.448)     (4257.70)
Log travel time from work by car                           -1.58a     -1.52a      -2.01a              -1.32a     -1.93a      -2.16a
                                                           (.261)     (.294)       (.706)             (.433)     (.215)      (.457)
Log travel time from commute by public transit             -.919a     -.995a      -1.01a              -.950a     -1.11a      -1.13a
                                                           (.094)     (.146)       (.130)             (.222)     (.058)      (.086)
Log travel time from commute by car                        -1.05a     -1.11a      -1.42a              -1.44a     -1.48a      -1.50a
                                                           (.089)     (.130)       (.208)             (.392)     (.081)      (.122)
Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -1.13a     -.996a      -1.88a              -2.05a     -1.31a      -1.31a
                                                           (.172)     (.279)       (.411)             (.765)     (.185)      (.306)
Spectral segregation index of kj                           .118c      .195c        .125               .392       -.015       -.037
                                                           (.063)     (.102)       (.158)             (.574)     (.052)      (.086)
EDD × SSI                                                  -.174      -.203        -.154              -.839      .065         .023
                                                           (.160)     (.242)       (.373)             (1.19)     (.125)      (.225)
Share of tract population that is Asian                    1.07a      1.09a        .354               .839       .378c        .496
                                                           (.168)     (.273)       (.489)             (.833)     (.195)      (.319)
Share of tract population that is black                    .553       .728         1.59a              .966       .248         .892
                                                           (.441)     (.730)       (.596)             (.984)     (.383)      (.627)
                                                                  a          c            b                  c          b
Share of tract population that is Hispanic                 -1.22      -1.05        1.10               1.70       .618         .494
                                                           (.365)     (.608)       (.557)             (.915)     (.267)      (.433)
Share of tract population that is other                    -.009      5.33         5.49               11.27      -2.07       -.819
                                                           (2.90)     (4.62)       (5.44)             (9.67)     (2.93)      (4.65)
                                                                  a          b            a                  b       a
Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                     .348       .406         .742               1.09       .399        .695a
                                                           (.122)     (.199)       (.279)             (.473)     (.117)      (.193)
Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                     .179       .072         1.14c              1.59c      .212         .258
                                                           (.165)     (.269)       (.581)             (.875)     (.172)      (.280)
Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                     .035       -.015        .386               -12.98     -.228       -.179
                                                           (.265)     (.399)       (2.59)        (16381.00)      (.312)      (.505)
                                                                  a       a                                             c
Yelp rating of restaurant                                  .488       .415         .166               .174       .155        .294b
                                                           (.090)     (.146)       (.202)             (.348)     (.084)      (.138)
African cuisine category                                   .384       .453         -.228              -.674      .422         .602
                                                           (.448)     (.757)       (.668)             (1.15)     (.362)      (.537)
                                                                  a       a               b                          a
American cuisine category                                  .403       .430         .410               .245       .595        .583a
                                                           (.077)     (.127)       (.168)             (.273)     (.072)      (.117)
Asian cuisine category                                     .917a      .996a        .190               .215       .371a       .366a
                                                           (.077)     (.126)       (.190)             (.302)     (.077)      (.125)
European cuisine category                                  .189b      .115        -.512b              -.410      .207b        .160
                                                           (.085)     (.140)       (.222)             (.348)     (.080)      (.131)
                                                                  a          c
Indian cuisine category                                    .370       .358         -.706              -.822      -.084       -.041
                                                           (.129)     (.213)       (.458)             (.795)     (.141)      (.232)
                                                                  a       a               a                  a       a
Latin American cuisine category                            .487       .575         .836               .816       .754        .836a
                                                           (.101)     (.162)       (.193)             (.301)     (.088)      (.142)
Middle Eastern cuisine category                            .352b      .220         -.310              -.690      .321b       .453b
                                                           (.140)     (.239)       (.401)             (.782)     (.131)      (.207)
Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                          .728a      .833a        -.399              -.517      .682a       .848a
                                                           (.171)     (.267)       (.617)             (1.06)     (.164)      (.256)
2-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)          .029c      .027         .008               -.040      .036a        .008
                                                           (.015)     (.025)       (.045)             (.077)     (.013)      (.022)
                                                                  a       a                                          a
3-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)          .078       .103         -.175              -.185      .051         .047
                                                           (.019)     (.031)       (.107)             (.159)     (.018)      (.029)
4-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)          .087a      .124a        -.420              -1.20      .089a       .093c
                                                           (.031)     (.046)       (.550)         (4760.20)      (.032)      (.050)
Yelp rating of restaurant × home tract median income       .017       .028         -.003              .016       .030a        .024
                                                           (.011)     (.018)       (.033)             (.059)     (.009)      (.015)
Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )   -.061      -.081        .801a              .613b      -.074       -.047
                                                           (.071)     (.116)       (.182)             (.307)     (.075)      (.122)
Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            .113       -.093        1.37               3.76c      .582         .393
                                                           (.421)     (.686)       (1.22)             (2.06)     (.417)      (.687)
Log median household income in kj                          -.156      -.009        -1.02              -3.27c     -.516       -.295
                                                           (.367)     (.603)       (1.07)             (1.78)     (.363)      (.597)
Average annual robberies per resident in kj                -4.44a     -7.81a       1.84               2.27       -2.75a      -1.27
                                                           (.977)     (1.97)       (1.76)             (3.14)     (1.04)      (1.57)

Number of origin-mode points                                6          6             6                  6         6           6
Number of trips                                            3205       1258          533                205       3431        1314
 Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’
 decisions to visit a Yelp venue, identical to the specifications in Table 3. Standard
 errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%).
 The unreported controls are 28 area dummies. Observations are limited to the first
 half (odd-numbered columns) or first fifth (even) of NYC restaurant reviews posted
 by each user.                              57
                  Table A.8: Origin-mode-specific-intercepts estimates
                                                                   (1)        (2)           (3)
                                                                  Asian      black      white/Hisp
Log travel time from home by public transit                      -1.05a      -1.47a       -1.38a
                                                                  (.206)     (.118)       (.052)
Intercept for home by public transit                               .665      6.34c        3.75a
                                                                  (2.14)     (3.31)       (.389)
                                                                         a          a
Log travel time from home by car                                 -1.31       -1.97        -1.89a
                                                                  (.044)     (.185)       (.048)
                                                                       a         c
Intercept for home by car                                         3.49       5.96         4.46a
                                                                  (.505)     (3.36)       (.351)
                                                                         a
Log travel time from work by public transit                      -1.17       -1.55        -1.52
                                                                  (.120)     (.970)      (2065.5)
Intercept for work by public transit                              1.95a      2.21         -17.0
                                                                  (.552)     (4.85)      (7443.5)
Log travel time from work by car                                 -1.48a      -1.63a       -1.69a
                                                                  (.090)     (.183)       (.058)
                                                                       a
Intercept for work by car                                         2.62       4.46         2.95a
                                                                  (.551)     (3.37)       (.349)
                                                                         a
Log travel time from commute by public transit                   -.973       -1.08        -1.08a
                                                                  (.134)     (.988)       (.135)
Intercept for commute by public transit                            .674      -.246         .100
                                                                  (.589)     (6.45)       (.567)
Log travel time from commute by car                              -1.17a      -1.42        -1.62a
                                                                  (.195)     (1.11)       (.241)
                                                                         a          a
Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj                 -.807       -1.33        -.704a
                                                                  (.124)     (.299)       (.135)
                                                                       a
Spectral segregation index of kj                                  .151       .082         .062b
                                                                  (.051)     (.094)       (.027)
EDD × SSI                                                         -.153      -.169        -.109
                                                                  (.116)     (.240)       (.084)
Share of tract population that is Asian                           .989a      .016          .204
                                                                  (.120)     (.346)       (.139)
Share of tract population that is black                            .176      .903b         .067
                                                                  (.318)     (.411)       (.267)
Share of tract population that is Hispanic                        -.309      .503          .257
                                                                  (.235)     (.389)       (.190)
Share of tract population that is other                            .082      2.62          1.64
                                                                  (2.08)     (3.57)       (2.00)

Number of origin-mode points                                       6           6            6
Number of trips                                                   6447       1079         6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of individuals’ decisions to
visit a Yelp venue. This specification adds five origin-mode-specific intercepts to the specification
in Table 3. Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c
(10%). Only spatial and social friction coefficients are reported for brevity.




                                                 58
Table A.9: Estimates controlling for number of reviews and chain establishments
                                                               (1)        (2)         (3)
                                                              Asian      black    white/Hisp
           Log travel time from home by public transit        -1.09a     -.977a     -1.16a
                                                              (.115)     (.139)     (.062)
           Log travel time from home by car                   -1.18a     -1.20a     -1.37a
                                                              (.094)     (.159)     (.061)
           Log travel time from work by public transit        -1.29a     -1.74b     -1.95a
                                                              (.165)     (.774)     (.317)
           Log travel time from work by car                   -1.67a     -1.69a     -1.98a
                                                              (.195)     (.372)     (.174)
           Log travel time from commute by public transit     -1.02a     -.964a     -1.14a
                                                              (.082)     (.112)     (.047)
           Log travel time from commute by car                -1.07a     -1.34a     -1.46a
                                                              (.065)     (.179)     (.060)
           Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj   -1.08a     -1.79a     -1.13a
                                                              (.128)     (.289)     (.136)
           Spectral segregation index of kj                   .140a      .072       .052c
                                                              (.052)     (.097)     (.028)
           EDD × SSI                                          -.121      -.163      -.072
                                                              (.118)     (.252)     (.085)
           Share of tract population that is Asian            1.06a      -.412       .162
                                                              (.129)     (.374)     (.146)
           Share of tract population that is black            .356       1.07a       .203
                                                              (.334)     (.411)     (.274)
           Share of tract population that is Hispanic         -.049      .516       .506a
                                                              (.247)     (.392)     (.194)
           Share of tract population that is other            -2.64      3.94       -.554
                                                              (2.27)     (3.44)     (2.09)
           Dummy for 2-dollar bin                             .145       .645a      .158c
                                                              (.093)     (.203)     (.086)
           Dummy for 3-dollar bin                             .020       -.335      -.291b
                                                              (.123)     (.356)     (.125)
           Dummy for 4-dollar bin                             -.257      -1.21      -.782a
                                                              (.206)     (1.20)     (.235)
           Yelp rating of restaurant                          .304a      -.143      .141b
                                                              (.069)     (.143)     (.063)
           African cuisine category                           .412       -.146       .333
                                                              (.300)     (.560)     (.263)
                                                                     a       a
           American cuisine category                          .245       .362       .414a
                                                              (.058)     (.123)     (.052)
           Asian cuisine category                             .755a      .179       .193a
                                                              (.058)     (.138)     (.056)
           European cuisine category                          .196a      -.396b     .230a
                                                              (.063)     (.160)     (.058)
           Indian cuisine category                            .467a      -.358       .007
                                                              (.094)     (.303)     (.099)
           Latin American cuisine category                    .406a      .893a      .596a
                                                              (.074)     (.140)     (.063)
           Middle Eastern cuisine category                    .233b      .165        .130
                                                              (.107)     (.255)     (.098)
                                                                     c
           Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                  .247       -.081      .412a
                                                              (.144)     (.416)     (.119)
           Number of Yelp reviews                             .005a      .005a      .004a
                                                              (.000)     (.000)     (.000)
           Establishment belongs to chain                     -.437a     -.226      -.511a
                                                              (.110)     (.192)     (.100)

           Number of origin-mode points                        6          6           6
           Number of trips                                    6447       1079       6936
           Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model
           of individuals’ decisions to visit a Yelp venue. This specification
           adds the number of Yelp reviews and a chain indicator as covari-
           ates to the specifications in Table 3. Standard errors in parenthe-
           ses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%).
           The unreported controls are venue price and rating interacted with
           home tract income, log median household income in tract of venue,
           percentage difference and percentage absolute difference in income
           levels between home and venue tract, robberies per resident, and
           28 area dummies.

                                                     59
  Table A.10: Estimates for minimum-travel-time specification
                                                            (1)      (2)         (3)
                                                           Asian    black    white/Hisp
Log minimum travel time                                    -.932a   -.957a     -1.19a
                                                           (.022)   (.044)     (.019)
Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -1.13a   -2.00a     -1.39a
                                                           (.120)   (.277)     (.130)
Spectral segregation index of kj                           .153a    .113       .045c
                                                           (.051)   (.084)     (.027)
EDD × SSI                                                  -.123    -.214      -.045
                                                           (.115)   (.224)     (.081)
Share of tract population that is Asian                    1.08a    .017       .485a
                                                           (.119)   (.344)     (.136)
Share of tract population that is black                    .328     1.13a       .200
                                                           (.317)   (.396)     (.264)
Share of tract population that is Hispanic                 -.215    .430       .477b
                                                           (.233)   (.379)     (.187)
Share of tract population that is other                    .619     4.60        .315
                                                           (2.04)   (3.36)     (1.97)
Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                     .382a    .778a      .362a
                                                           (.086)   (.195)     (.082)
Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                     .313a    -.061       .001
                                                           (.116)   (.340)     (.120)
Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                     .222     -.007      -.289
                                                           (.188)   (1.22)     (.221)
Yelp rating of restaurant                                  .570a    .062       .338a
                                                           (.064)   (.136)     (.059)
African cuisine category                                   .281     -.199       .289
                                                           (.298)   (.552)     (.259)
American cuisine category                                  .435a    .532a      .583a
                                                           (.054)   (.119)     (.050)
Asian cuisine category                                     .884a    .267b      .301a
                                                           (.054)   (.134)     (.054)
European cuisine category                                  .199a    -.312b     .233a
                                                           (.059)   (.154)     (.055)
Indian cuisine category                                    .390a    -.416      -.032
                                                           (.091)   (.300)     (.097)
Latin American cuisine category                            .520a    1.02a      .685a
                                                           (.070)   (.136)     (.061)
Middle Eastern cuisine category                            .294a    .098       .187b
                                                           (.100)   (.250)     (.094)
Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                          .396a    .001       .583a
                                                           (.137)   (.409)     (.115)
2-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .033a    -.025      .040a
                                                           (.011)   (.031)     (.009)
3-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .071a    .068       .075a
                                                           (.014)   (.053)     (.013)
4-dollar bin × home tract median income                    .073a    -.180      .086a
                                                           (.022)   (.232)     (.023)
Yelp rating × home tract median income                     .011     .006       .017b
                                                           (.008)   (.023)     (.007)
Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )   -.117b   .843a      -.116b
                                                           (.050)   (.125)     (.052)
Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            .173     .419       .882a
                                                           (.305)   (.845)     (.298)
Log median household income in kj                          -.155    -.175      -.751a
                                                           (.267)   (.737)     (.260)
Average annual robberies per resident in kj                -3.05a   2.49b      -3.87a
                                                           (.672)   (1.18)     (.768)

Number of origin-mode points                                1        1          1
Number of trips                                            6447     1079       6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated conditional-logit model of indi-
viduals’ decisions to visit a Yelp venue under the assumption that νijlt = νijt
and γl1 = γ 1 . Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted
by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%). The unreported controls are 28 area dummies.

                                          60
Table A.11: Estimates employing only tract-level demographics
                                                                       (1)
           Log travel time from home by public transit                -1.14a
                                                                      (.045)
           Log travel time from home by car                           -1.26a
                                                                      (.037)
           Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.64a
                                                                      (.126)
           Log travel time from work by car                           -1.82a
                                                                      (.098)
           Log travel time from commute by public transit             -1.06a
                                                                      (.030)
           Log travel time from commute by car                        -1.28a
                                                                      (.033)
           Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -1.37a
                                                                      (.075)
           Spectral segregation index of kj                           .072a
                                                                      (.022)
           EDD × SSI                                                  -.109c
                                                                      (.060)
           Share of tract population that is Asian                    .791a
                                                                      (.078)
           Share of tract population that is black                    .530a
                                                                      (.156)
           Share of tract population that is Hispanic                 .206c
                                                                      (.121)
           Share of tract population that is other                    -.997
                                                                      (1.20)
           Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                     .405a
                                                                      (.051)
           Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                     .104
                                                                      (.073)
           Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                     .003
                                                                      (.126)
           Yelp rating of restaurant                                  .399a
                                                                      (.037)
           African cuisine category                                   .367b
                                                                      (.152)
           American cuisine category                                  .528a
                                                                      (.031)
           Asian cuisine category                                     .563a
                                                                      (.033)
           European cuisine category                                  .174a
                                                                      (.035)
           Indian cuisine category                                    .058
                                                                      (.059)
           Latin American cuisine category                            .663a
                                                                      (.039)
           Middle Eastern cuisine category                            .170a
                                                                      (.060)
           Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                          .525a
                                                                      (.075)
           2-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)          .035a
                                                                      (.006)
           3-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)          .080a
                                                                      (.008)
           4-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)          .071a
                                                                      (.014)
           Yelp rating of restaurant × home tract median income       .013a
                                                                      (.004)
           Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )   .027
                                                                      (.031)
           Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            .260
                                                                      (.185)
           Log median household income in kj                          -.196
                                                                      (.162)
           Average annual robberies per resident in kj                -3.66a
                                                                      (.428)

           Number of origin-mode points                                 6
           Number of trips                                            18015
    Notes: This table reports an estimated conditional-logit model
    of individuals’ decisions to visit a Yelp venue. This specification
    uses no information on user-level racial demographics. Standard
    errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%),
    b (5%), c (10%). The unreported controls are 28 area dummies.
                                          61
              Table A.12: Tract-level residential and consumption segregation
                          Residential                 Consumption dissimilarity
                         dissimilarity Estimated No spatial No social Neither friction
                              (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)
Dissimilarity index
Asian                            .521            .275          .251          .201              .186
Hispanic                         .486            .134          .102          .094              .074
black                            .653            .322          .284          .229              .214
white                            .636            .183          .144          .090              .068
Pairwise   dissimilarity
Asian        Hispanic            .584            .251          .240          .176              .176
Asian        black               .796            .455          .399          .325              .282
Asian        white               .519            .232          .212          .173              .169
Hispanic     white               .658            .158          .113          .090              .025
black        Hispanic            .558            .300          .264          .227              .212
black        white               .822            .323          .287          .215              .207
Notes: See notes to Table 7. In this table, columns 2 through 5 report tract-level dissimilarity indices
based on the coefficient estimates in Table 3 .




      Table A.13: Late-adopter estimates: Residential and consumption segregation
                        Residential                Consumption dissimilarity
                        dissimilarity Estimated No spatial No social Neither friction
                             (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)            (5)
Dissimilarity index
Asian                            .521            .344          .324          .269              .256
Hispanic                         .486            .165          .139          .122              .104
black                            .653            .397          .376          .314              .310
white                            .636            .213          .172          .124              .112
Pairwise   dissimilarity
Asian        Hispanic            .584            .316          .306          .241              .238
Asian        black               .796            .544          .512          .432              .408
Asian        white               .519            .309          .282          .239              .225
Hispanic     white               .658            .179          .129          .095              .031
black        Hispanic            .558            .378          .352          .308              .300
black        white               .822            .396          .374          .299              .304
Notes: See notes to Table 7. In this table, columns 2 through 5 report venue-level dissimilarity indices
based on the coefficient estimates in Table A.6.




                                                  62
 Table A.14: Origin-mode-specific intercepts: Residential and consumption segregation
                                                   Consumption dissimilarity
                      Residential      Est                       No soc          Neither
                      dissimilarity (bias) Est No spatial (bias) No soc friction
                           (1)         (2)    (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)
Dissimilarity index
Asian                             .521         .286      .299       .259         .227       .232          .211
Hispanic                          .486          .12      .123        .09         .101        .1           .079
black                             .653         .335      .331       .296         .278       .269          .252
white                             .636         .161       .17       .124         .113       .116           .09
Pairwise   dissimilarity
Asian        Hispanic             .584         .256      .273       .237         .202       .212          .195
Asian        black                .796         .462      .464       .408          .38       .373          .339
Asian        white                .519         .252      .265       .228         .191        .2           .181
Hispanic     white                .658         .117      .129        .07         .087       .089          .033
black        Hispanic             .558          .31      .302       .271         .263       .253          .239
black        white                .822         .334      .336       .295         .273       .266          .248
Notes: See notes to Table 7. In this table, columns 2 through 7 report venue-level dissimilarity indices
based on the coefficient estimates in Table A.8. Columns 2-3 use the estimated coefficients. Columns 2
and 5 sets the origin-specific intercepts to zero. Column 4 sets the coefficients on travel-time covariates
to zero. Columns 5-6 set the coefficients on demographic-difference covariates to zero. Column 7 sets the
coefficients on travel-time and demographic-difference covariates to zero.



        Table A.15: Home as only origin: Residential and consumption segregation
                        Residential                Consumption dissimilarity
                       dissimilarity Estimated No spatial No social Neither friction
                            (1)           (2)          (3)       (4)            (5)
Dissimilarity index
Asian                             .521            .322           .290           .245               .232
Hispanic                          .486            .156           .114           .110               .088
black                             .653            .348           .322           .269               .260
white                             .636            .200           .153           .112               .093
Pairwise   dissimilarity
Asian        Hispanic             .584            .306           .273           .228               .217
Asian        black                .796            .488           .448           .374               .357
Asian        white                .519            .288           .255           .218               .203
Hispanic     white                .658            .177           .115           .094               .037
black        Hispanic             .558            .326           .297           .263               .250
black        white                .822            .356           .324           .261               .255
Notes: See notes to Table 7. In this table, columns 2 through 5 report venue-level dissimilarity indices
based on the coefficient estimates in Table 3 but constraining all trips to originate at home.


                                                    63
Table A.16: Demographics of residents and consumers in three Manhattan communities
                                                        Consumption share
                  Residential share      Estimated      No Spatial No Social           Neither

                                 Community District 8: Upper East Side
    Asian                0.080              0.095           0.110          0.104        0.119
    Hispanic             0.066              0.329           0.320          0.361        0.347
    black                0.023              0.045           0.052          0.061        0.068
    white                0.810              0.500           0.484          0.442        0.431

                                 Community District 10: Central Harlem
    Asian                0.024              0.047           0.061          0.113        0.148
    Hispanic             0.222              0.152           0.103          0.256        0.181
    black                0.630              0.735           0.756          0.473        0.462
    white                0.095              0.057           0.071          0.142        0.193

                                  Community District 11: East Harlem
    Asian                0.056              0.072           0.099          0.123        0.152
    Hispanic             0.494              0.528           0.417          0.448        0.339
    black                0.309              0.166           0.182          0.111        0.115
    white                0.120              0.205           0.270          0.289        0.363
     Notes: This table reports the share of residents and model-predicted restaurant visitors by
     race in the three community districts illustrated in Figure 7. The five columns correspond
     to the five scenarios reported in the five columns of Table 7.




                                                 64
Table A.17: Demographics of residents and consumers in lower Manhattan and west Brooklyn
                                                          Consumption share
                  Residential share       Estimated       No Spatial No Social Neither

                              Community District 1, Brooklyn: Greenpoint
     Asian               0.050               0.064           0.066          0.080         0.082
     black               0.052               0.284           0.287          0.306         0.298
     Hispanic            0.272               0.324           0.305          0.298         0.283
     white               0.608               0.299           0.315          0.287         0.311

                            Community District 2, Brooklyn: Williamsburg
     Asian               0.066               0.050           0.054          0.060         0.064
     black               0.189               0.338           0.320          0.319         0.289
     Hispanic            0.164               0.244           0.272          0.254         0.286
     white               0.546               0.340           0.327          0.337         0.332

                         Community District 3, Brooklyn: Bedford-Stuyvesant
     Asian               0.021               0.036           0.051          0.076         0.093
     black               0.657               0.684           0.590          0.423         0.307
     Hispanic            0.147               0.144           0.191          0.229         0.280
     white               0.149               0.117           0.151          0.244         0.294

                                    Community District 3, Manhattan
     Asian               0.321               0.182           0.188          0.155         0.157
     black               0.071               0.158           0.163          0.179         0.182
     Hispanic            0.253               0.333           0.312          0.318         0.300
     white               0.332               0.298           0.307          0.320         0.333
      Notes: This table reports the share of residents and model-predicted restaurant visitors by
      race in the four community districts illustrated in Figure 8. The five columns correspond to
      the five scenarios reported in the five columns of Table 7.




                                                  65
B      Data
B.1      Yelp venue data
Assigning venues to census tracts. Yelp describes venues’ locations by their street addresses.
First, we translate these addresses to latitude-longitude coordinates. We determine the
latitude and longitude of each venue by a combination of methods. We match the venue
addresses to a point using the address locators provided by the New York City Department
of Urban Planning and StreetMap North America. For venues with an incorrect ZIP code,
we use the borough in the text of the venue’s address. For venues not matched using these
address locators, we used an alternative address located via the online geocoding service
FindLatitudeAndLongitude. For the addresses that cannot be matched using Esri’s GIS
software or the online service, we find the coordinates using GoogleMaps on a case-by-case
basis. Second, after determining venues’ coordinates, we assign each venue to a census tract
based on a point-in-polygon matching strategy.
    Assigning venues to cuisine types. We create nine cuisine dummies by aggregating Yelp
cuisine classifications into the following categories: African, American, Asian, European,
Indian, Latin American, Middle Eastern, vegetarian. The omitted cuisine category includes
all restaurants with “unassigned” cuisine types, which includes venues whose cuisine is listed
as “restaurant” on Yelp.
    Set of venues included in the sample. The Yelp venues included in our estimation sample
as possible elements of users’ choice sets meet three criteria. First, they had been reviewed
at least once as of 2011. Second, they had both a rating and price listed on Yelp as of 2011.
Third, they are located in a census tract for which Census data on its median household
income is available.
    As one means of validating Yelp’s venue coverage, we compare our count of Yelp restau-
rants by ZIP code to the number of establishments reported in health inspections data by
the New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene (DOHMH). The DOHMH data
report inspection results for 2011-2014, while our Yelp venue data, downloaded in 2011, cov-
ers venues reviewed between 2005 and 2011. Despite this temporal mismatch, the two data
sources report similar venue counts at the ZIP-code level, as shown in Figure A.2.62

B.2      Yelp users data
We started with the roughly 50,000 Yelp users who reviewed a venue in the five boroughs of
New York City prior to 14 June 2011. We collected locational information on these users in
three rounds. In the first round, we examined all reviews written by a randomly selected 25%
subsample of the 50,000 users. In the second round, we selectively examined the remaining
75% of users relying on the first round’s lessons for successfully locating users. In the third
round, we intensively examined reviews by a set of black users in the remaining 75%. The
  62
    Most of the outliers are attributable to the temporal mismatch. The 10021 ZIP code was split into three
in 2007, creating 10065 and 10075 (Sam Roberts, “An Elite ZIP Code Becomes Harder to Crack”, New York
Times, 21 March 2007). A similar story explains ZIP codes 11211 and 11249 (Joe Coscarelli, “Williamsburg
Hipsters Robbed of Prestigious 11211 Zip Code”, Village Voice, 2 June 2011). 11430 is JFK Airport. The
10079 ZIP code does not exist; it appears to be a placeholder on Yelp.



                                                    66
final dataset used for estimation contains only those users whose set of home locations is
made up of venues all within 1.5 miles of each other and similarly for the set of work locations.

B.2.1    Yelp users data: First round
Between 1 January 2005 and 14 June 2011, users in the 25% sample analyzed in the first
round wrote about 230,000 reviews of venues in New York and New Jersey. To identify
residential and workplace locations, we examined the text of reviews that contain at least
one of 26 key phrases. Those key phrases are ten home-related phrases {I live, my apt,
my apartment, my building, my neighborhood, my house, my place, my hood, my block,
laundr}, seven work-related phrases {I work, coworker, colleague, lunch break, my office, my
work, my job}, and nine phrases related to both {my local, delivery, block away, block from
m, blocks from m, close to me, close to my, minutes from m, street from m}.
    16,425 of the 230,000 reviews analyzed in the first-round sample contain at least one
of these phrases. Reading the text shows that twenty-one percent of these flagged reviews
identify a user’s home location and eleven percent of them identify a workplace. Reviews
containing multiple home-related phrases identify a user’s home location in 54% of cases;
reviews with multiple work-related phrases yield a work location 45% of the time.
    This process identified about 1500 users with a residential location, 575 users with a
workplace, and 450 users with both home and work locations. Thus, we have locational
information for nearly one-fifth of the Yelp users we examined. The median user for which
we obtained locational information had reviewed twenty venues in New York and New Jersey,
while the median for which we obtained no information had reviewed five venues. Amongst
users with more than ten reviews of NY/NJ venues, we obtained locational information for
about 40%.
    We identified individuals who changed their residential and workplace locations via two
means. First, we recorded any moves identified in the text of reviews containing the 26
key phrases above. Second, we reviewed the text of reviews containing at least one of four
key phrases: {we moved, I moved, moving into, moving here}. When this search yielded
reviews in which a user reveals that she has recently moved, we eliminated such user from
our sample.
    This first round yielded 241 users who appear in our estimation sample.

B.2.2    Yelp users data: Second round
In the second round, with the remaining 75% of users, we limited our examination to reviews
that were likely to yield both home and work locations for a user. We investigated the text
of 6,426 reviews of venues in New York City written by 569 users with at least one review
containing two home-related phrases and at least one review containing two work-related
phrases. In this round, we did not examine reviews in which the only key phrase was
“delivery”. We used workers on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk marketplace to classify the
text. This work was performed in triplicate, and we only use observations with unanimous
responses.
    This process investigated 569 users and identified home locations for 173 users, work
locations for 38 users, and both locations for 304 users. After imposing the previously


                                               67
mentioned 1.5-mile proximity, non-mover, and tract-covariate-availability restrictions, this
second round yielded 165 users who appear in our estimation sample.

B.2.3    Yelp users data: Third round
In the third round, we limited our examination to reviews that were written by a set of users
identified as black or Hispanic based on their profile photos. We applied the first-round
procedure for locating individuals by examining all the reviews written by these users, and
we included three users who moved within NYC during the estimation sample by including
only their reviews written prior to the move date revealed by the text of their reviews.
    This process investigated 275 users and identified home locations for 133 users, work loca-
tions for 91 users, and both locations for 51 users. After imposing the previously mentioned
1.5-mile proximity and tract-covariate-availability restrictions, this third round yielded 31
users (20 of whom are black) who appear in our estimation sample.

B.3     NYC geographic and demographic data
Our data on census tracts’ geographic areas and populations come from the 2010 Census of
Population (Series G001 and P5). By 2010 Census definitions, there are 2168 tracts in New
York City, of which 288 are in Manhattan.
    The 2007-2011 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimate provides estimates of me-
dian household income (Series B19013) for 2110 of these tracts, for which summary statistics
are provided in Table 1. Of the nine Manhattan tracts without median household income
estimates, seven have a population below 25 persons, one is Inwood Hill Park (population
161), and one is Randall’s Island (population 1648). More than 90% of the NYC tracts
without median household income estimates have populations below 200 persons, the no-
table non-Manhattan exceptions being Bush Terminal (population 2105) and Rikers Island
(inmate population of 11091).
    Tract’s historical demographic characteristics come from the Longitudinal Tract Data
Base, which maps prior Census years’ population counts to the 2010 geographic definitions
(Logan et al., 2014).
    We aggregate New York City’s 59 community boards to define 28 areas, allowing us to use
area dummies to control for unobservable characteristics when estimating spatial and social
frictions. Each of Manhattan’s 12 community districts constitute an area. We aggregate
community districts to define 8 areas in Brooklyn (1, {2,6}, {3,8,9}, {4,5}, {7,11,12,13}, 10,
{14,15}, {16,17,18}) and 6 in Queens ({1,2}, {3,4}, {5,6}, {7,8,11}, {9,10,14}, {12,13}). The
boroughs of the Bronx and Staten Island each constitute one area. We assign each census
tract to one of these areas; tracts split across areas are assigned to the area with the largest
share of tract land area.

B.4     NYC crime data
We compute tract-level robbery statistics using confidential, geocoded incident-level reports
provided by the New York Police Department (NYPD). We aggregate robbery incidents to
the census-tract level; we assign each incident to a census tract based on a point-in-polygon


                                              68
matching strategy using ESRI’s ArcMap software. We compute the average annual robberies
over 2007-2011 for each census tract.


C      Econometrics
Here we provide additional detail to the content of Section 3.

C.1      Estimation procedure: details
In this section, we present additional details on the content of Section 3.3.

Deriving equation (6). Given the assumptions in Section 3.2, it holds that

                                                                  P (d∗ijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
        P (d∗ijt = 1|dijt = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))+
       P (d∗ijt = 1|dijt = 0, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))P (dijt = 0|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
       P (d∗ijt = 1|dijt = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
                             P (d∗ijt = 1|dijt = 1, Jit0 ; p∗it )P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
                                      P (d∗ijt = 1|dijt = 1, Jit0 ; p∗it )P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β)) =
                                                  p∗it 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 }P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β)),

where the final expression is identical to that in equation (6) in the main text. The first
equality in this derivation rewrites the probability that we observe a review of j by i at t as
the sum of the probability that individual i writes such a review and visited j at t and the
probability that individual i writes such a review without visiting j at t. The second equality
imposes the assumption that individuals only write reviews about restaurants they actually
visit. The third equality imposes the assumption that the probability that individual i writes
a review about a restaurant j is independent of the vector of restaurant characteristics Xi
and Zi , and of the set of restaurants J. The fourth equality imposes an implication of equa-
tion (5): the probability that individual i visits restaurant j is independent of the previous
reviews written by i and of the likelihood that individual i writes a review at period t, p∗it .
The last equality imposes the assumptions that the probability that individual i writes a
review about a choice j at t is equal to zero when j is the outside option or was previously
reviewed by i and is otherwise equal to an individual-time-specific constant, p∗it .

Deriving equation (7). Let’s denote the probability that we observe a review by individual i
on a restaurant j at period t conditional on i writing a review at period t as P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it =
1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )). Using Bayes’ Rule,
                                                                P (d∗ijt = 1, d∗it = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))
  P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =                                                             .
                                                                      P (d∗it = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))
The joint probability of observing a review about a restaurant j and observing a review
about any restaurant is equal to the probability of observing a review about restaurant j.

                                                          69
Mathematically,

                                                        P (d∗ijt = 1, d∗it = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
         P (d∗it = 1|d∗ijt = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))P (d∗ijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
                                                               1 × P (d∗ijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
                                                                        P (d∗ijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )).

Analogously, the probability that we observe a review written by i at t is equal to the sum
of the probabilities that i writes a review about each of the possible restaurants j in J,
                                                          X
         P (d∗it = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =   P (d∗ij 0 t = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )).
                                                               j 0 ∈J


Therefore, we can write the probability that i writes a review about a restaurant j at period
t conditional on observing a review (about any restaurant) written by i at t as

                                                                           P (d∗ijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it ))
   P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) = P                    ∗                        0             ∗
                                                                                                                               .
                                                                        j 0 ∈J P (dij 0 t = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit ; (γ, β, pit ))

Applying the result in equation (6), we can rewrite this probability as

                                      P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) =
                            p∗ 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 }P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))
                       P it ∗                                                                   =
                        j 0 ∈J pit 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit }P (dij 0 t = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))
                                               0    0

                                   1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 }P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))
                                                                                             =
                               j 0 ∈J 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit }P (dij 0 t = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))
                                                        0
                           P                     0

                                         1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 }P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))
                                             P                                                           ,
                                                       0
                                                 j 0 ∈Jit   P (dij 0 t = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β))

and, therefore,

     P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) = P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β)).

Applying the result in equation (5), we can additionally rewrite this probability as:

                                                          1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 } l∈L exp(Vijl )
                                                                               P
            ∗        ∗                     0
        P (dijt = 1|dit = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit ; (γ, β)) =      P          P                   ,
                                                                 j 0 ∈J 0   l∈L exp(Vij 0 l )
                                                                                       it


which is identical to that in equation (7) in the main text. Note that, once we condition on
the set of non-reviewed restaurants Jit0 , this probability does not depend on the complete set
of restaurants J; therefore,

         P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β)) = P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β)).



                                                                70
Deriving equation (9). The conditional probability of an individual i writing a review about
venue j at period t, given a randomly drawn set Sit and that i wrote a review (about some
restaurant) at period t, is:

                                                                  P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Sit , Jit0 ; (γ, β)) =
       P (Sit |d∗ijt = 1, d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Sit , Jit0 ; (γ, β))P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β))
  P                   ∗         ∗                            0              ∗        ∗                      0
                                                                                                                        =
   j 0 ∈J 0 P (Sit |dijt = 1, dit = 1, Xi , Zi , Sit , Jit ; (γ, β))P (dijt = 1|dit = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit ; (γ, β))
         it

                                              π(Sit |d∗ijt = 1, Jit0 )P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β))
                                      P                     ∗           0       ∗        ∗                      0
                                                                                                                      =
                                          j 0 ∈J 0 π(Sit |dijt = 1, Jit )P (dijt = 1|dit = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit ; (γ, β))
                                               it

                                            π(Sit |d∗ijt = 1, Jit0 )P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β))
                                      P                   ∗           0       ∗        ∗                      0
                                                                                                                    =
                                        j 0 ∈Sit π(Sit |dijt = 1, Jit )P (dijt = 1|dit = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit ; (γ, β))
                                                       κit 1{j ∈ Sit }P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β))
                                                        P                    ∗        ∗                  0
                                                                                                                      =
                                                            j 0 ∈Sit κit P (dijt = 1|dit = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit ; (γ, β))
                                                             1{j ∈ Sit }P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β))
                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β))
                                                               P
                                                                    j 0 ∈Sit

The first equality comes by applying Bayes’ rule. The second equality accounts for the fact
that, once we condition on the observed review of individual i at period t, our procedure
to draw the samples of venues Sit does not depend on any of the observed characteristics
affecting the utility function Uijlt in equation (1). Finally, the third, fourth and fifth equalities
are implied by equation (8). Combining the last expression above and equation (7), we obtain
that, for every j ∈ Sit

                                                       1{j ∈                          1
                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                       exp(Vijl )
                                                                      Sit }p∗it      {j 6= 0, j ∈       ∗ P
                                                                                                   / dit } 000 0l∈L  P
                                                                                                              j ∈J     l∈L exp(Vij 000 l )
P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Sit , Jit0 ; (γ, β)) = P                                                       P it
                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                      exp(V ij 0 l )
                                                                 j 0 ∈Sit                          / d∗it } P 00 0l∈LP exp(V
                                                                               p∗it {j 0 6= 0, j 0 ∈
                                                                                                             j ∈J     l∈L            ij 00 l )
                                                                                                                      it

                                                          1{j ∈ Sit }1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 } l∈L exp(Vijl )
                                                                                                           P
                                                        = P
                                                             j 0 ∈Sit 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit }
                                                                                     0
                                                                         0       0
                                                                                          P
                                                                                           l∈L exp(Vij 0 l )
                                                          1{j ∈ Sit } l∈L exp(Vijl )
                                                                        P
                                                        = P                    P
                                                                 j 0 ∈S   it      l∈L     exp(Vij 0 l )

where the second equality cancels any term appearing both in the numerator and the de-
nominator and the third equality takes into account that Sit ∈ Jit0 , and, therefore, 1{j 6=
0, j ∈ Jit0 } = 1 for all elements of the set Sit .

Deriving equation (10). The probability that an individual i reviews the restaurants {ji1 , ji2 , . . . , jiTi }
conditional on observing at least one review written by i in each of the periods {1, . . . , Ti }
and on the randomly drawn sets {Si1 , . . . , SiTi } may be written as

        P (d∗iji1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijiTT    = 1|d∗i1 = 1, . . . , d∗iTi = 1, Si1 , . . . , SiTi , Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β)).
                                      i i


Using the relationship between joint and conditional probabilities, we can rewrite this joint


                                                               71
probability as

                     P (d∗iji1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijiT    T    = 1|d∗i1 = 1, . . . , d∗iTi = 1, Si1 , . . . , SiTi , Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β)) =
                                                       i i

P (d∗ijiT T    = 1|d∗i1 = 1, . . . , d∗iTi = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Si1 , . . . , SiTi , d∗ij1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijT −1 Ti −1 = 1; (γ, β)×
         i i                                                                                                     i

               P (d∗iji1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijiT −1 Ti −1 = 1|d∗i1 = 1, . . . , d∗iTi = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Si1 , . . . , SiTi ; (γ, β)) =
                                                i

                              P (d∗ijiT  T     = 1|d∗iTi = 1, Xi , Zi , J, SiTi , d∗ij1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijiT −1 Ti −1 = 1; (γ, β))×
                                        i i                                                                  i

       P (d∗iji1 1   =   1, . . . , d∗ijiT −1 Ti −1   = 1|d∗i1 = 1, . . . , d∗iTi −1 = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Si1 , . . . , SiTi −1 ; (γ, β)) =
                                          i

                                                                                P (d∗ijiT T    = 1|d∗iTi = 1, Xi , Zi , STi ; (γ, β))×
                                                                                         i i

         P (d∗iji1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijiT −1 Ti −1 = 1|d∗i1 = 1, . . . , d∗iTi −1 = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Si1 , . . . , SiTi −1 ; (γ, β)).
                                           i


The second equality takes into account that, conditional on (d∗iji1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijiT −1 Ti −1 = 1),
                                                                                              i
neither the vector of dummies (d∗i1 = 1, . . . , d∗iTi −1 = 1) nor the vector of random sets
(Si1 , . . . , SiTi −1 ) provide any information on the actual restaurant reviewed at period Ti .
The third equality takes into account that all the information on review probabilities at
period Ti contained in the specific vector of past reviews (d∗ij1 1 = 1, . . . , d∗ijT −1 Ti −1 = 1)
                                                                                             i
is already contained in the randomly drawn set SiTi . Therefore, we can rewrite the joint
probability that we observe an individual i reviewing the restaurants {ji1 , ji2 , . . . , jiTi } as
the product of the probability that we observe the review jiTi conditional on the set SiTi
and the joint probability that we observe individual i reviewing the other Ti − 1 restaurants,
{ji1 , ji2 , . . . , jiTi −1 }. Analogously, we can also rewrite this joint probability as the product of
the probability that we observe i reviewing jiTi −1 conditional on the set SiTi −1 and the joint
probability that we observe i reviewing the remaining Ti − 2 restaurants, {ji1 , ji2 , . . . , jiTi −2 }.
Therefore, iterating these steps Ti times, we obtain the expression in equation (10).

C.2         Estimation procedure: simulation
In this section, we simulate data from simple variants of the model described in sections 3.1
and 3.2 for the purpose of illustrating the asymptotic properties of the estimator described
in Section 3.3.
    We generate data for 400 individuals with identical preference parameters (γ, β) who each
make 40 choices, for a total of 16,000 trips. Each individual is located at a randomly drawn
origin, from which they have one transport mode to reach 1,000 restaurants with randomly
drawn locations and ratings.63 Individual i’s utility from choosing restaurant j at period t
is Uijt = − ln distanceij + ratingj + νijt .Therefore, using the notation introduced in Section
3.1, L is a singleton, the cardinality of the set J is 1,000, there is a single demographic
group g, and the vector of preference parameters is {γl1 = γ 1 = −1, γ 2 = 0, β 1 = 1, β 2 =
0}. Consistent with our model, the terms {νijt , ∀i, j, t} are assumed to follow iid logistic
distributions. Conditional on visiting a restaurant, every individual i writes a review with
probability 0.5 if she did not previously review the venue, and 0 otherwise. Therefore, using
  63
    Specifically, each individual and restaurant has a location that is randomly drawn according to latitude ∼
U (40.75, 41.75) and longitude ∼ U (−74.25, −73.25). Restaurant ratings are drawn from rating ∼ U (1, 5).
All draws are independent of each other.


                                                                        72
the notation introduced in Section 3.2, p∗it = 0.5 for all i and t. In our randomly generated
sample, we observe 7,521 reviews.
    The first column in Table C.1 reports estimates that maximize a likelihood function that
(a) uses information on the restaurant visited for all 40 trips by all 400 sampled individuals
and (b) includes the entire choice set J containing all 1, 000 restaurants. Specifically, we
compute the estimates in column one by maximizing the log-likelihood function
                400 X40 X
                                                                                            !
                                                 exp(γ 1 ln(distanceij ) + β 1 ratingj )
                            1{dijt = 1} ln P
               X
       LL1 =                                               1                     1
                i=1 t=1 j∈J                  j 0 ∈J exp(γ ln(distanceij 0 ) + β ratingj 0 )

Not surprisingly, we obtain estimates of the impact of ln(distance) and rating on individuals’
utility that are very close to their true values of −1 and 1. In our empirical application, we
cannot estimate preference parameters this way because we do not observe every restaurant
visit.
    In columns two through five, we infer visits using only information from reviews, as
in our empirical application. Columns two and three illustrate the consequences of two
possible mistakes that a researcher might make when using information on reviews rather
than actual visits. Specifically, column two illustrates the consequences of not taking into
account that individuals do not review restaurants that they have previously reviewed; its
estimates maximize the log-likelihood function
               400 X40 X
                                                                                             !
                                                        1                      1
                                                  exp(γ   ln(distance    ) + β   rating   )
                           1{d∗ijt = 1} ln P
               X                                                      ij                j
       LL2 =                                                1                      1
                                                                                               .
               i=1 t=1 j∈J                    j 0 ∈J exp(γ ln(distanceij 0 ) + β ratingj 0 )

Column three illustrates the consequences of over-correcting and assigning to each individual
a choice set that excludes all venues ever reviewed during the sample period; its estimates
maximize the log-likelihood function
              400 X
                  40 X
                                                                                            !
                                                      1                      1
                                                exp(γ   ln(distance    ) + β   rating   )
                         1{d∗ijt = 1} ln P
             X                                                      ij                j
     LL3 =                                                 1                      1
                                                                                              .
             i=1 t=1 j∈J                   j 0 ∈JiT exp(γ ln(distanceij 0 ) + β ratingj 0 )
                                                    i


In column two the estimates are too small in absolute value, and in column three they are
too large. Column four shows that one can consistently estimate preference parameters using
only reviews. Key to the estimator’s consistency is that we assign to each individual i at
period t a choice set that excludes those restaurants reviewed by i prior to t:
             400 X40 X
                                                                                              !
                                                       1                       1
                                                exp(γ    ln(distance    ) +  β   rating   )
                          1{d∗ijt = 1} ln P
             X                                                       ij                 j
      LL4 =                                                1 ln(distance 0 ) + β 1 rating 0 )
                                                                                                .
             i=1 t=1    0                   j 0 ∈J 0 exp(γ                ij                j
                     j∈Jit                       it


The estimates in column four are very close to the true parameter vector, in line with the
mathematical proof and discussion in Section 3.3. Finally, column five shows that the esti-
mator using information on only a subset Sit of the choice set Jit0 also consistently estimates
the preference parameters:
             400 X40 X
                                                                                               !
                                                       1                        1
                                               exp(γ     log(distance    ) +  β   rating   )
                         1{d∗ijt = 1} ln P
            X                                                         ij                 j
     LL5 =                                                 1 log(distance 0 ) + β 1 rating 0 )
                                                                                                 ,
             i=1 t=1 j∈S                   j 0 ∈S
                                                  it
                                                     exp(γ                 ij                j
                        it




                                               73
with Sit ⊂ Jit0 and drawn randomly according to the probability distribution in equation (8).
The results in column five are implied by the content of Section 3.3.

              Table C.1: Choice sets and consistency in simulated data
                     (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)
   Dummy for:       Visit      Review      Review        Review        Review

   ln(distance)             -1.01            -0.93           -1.09           -1.01           -1.01
                            (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)
   rating                   1.00              0.98           1.04             1.01           1.00
                            (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)
   Choice set               All         All       Never Not previously Not previously
   drawn from:          restaurants restaurants reviewed  reviewed       reviewed
                                                              0
   Choice set:                J                J             JiT i
                                                                               Jit0        Sit ∈ Jit0
   Choice set size:        1, 000            1, 000       i-specific      it-specific         20
   Num. Obs.               16,000            7,521           7,521           7,521          7,521
   Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All five columns use information on the 400 users that form
   the randomly generated population of interest. Each of these users makes 40 choices. For each trip,
   each user writes a review about visited restaurant with probability 0.5.




C.3     A minimum-travel-time specification
Alternatives assumptions about the distribution of the vector of idiosyncratic terms νit and
                          1
travel-time disutilities γg(i)l yield a behavioral model in which individuals always select the
fastest travel time. Consider a model in which the utility to individual i of visiting restaurant
j at period t using origin-mode l may be represented as
                                 1      1      2
                        Uijlt = γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                            1          2
                                                                 Zj + βg(i) Zij + νijt ,
                        1
where the variables Xijl  , Xij2 , Zj , and Zij are described in Section 3.1, and νijt is an un-
observed individual-restaurant-period specific characteristic. The difference between this
demand model and that described in Section 3.1 is that the unobserved component ν does
not vary across origin-mode l. This implies that, conditional on visiting a restaurant j at pe-
                                                                              1   1
riod t, an individual i uses the origin-mode l that maximizes the term γg(i)l    Xijl . Specifically,
this means that the decision over the mode of transport that an individual i uses to visit a
                                                              1        1
restaurant j is only a function of the parameter vector γg(i)    = {γg(i)l , l ∈ L} and observed
covariates. Denote the utility that individual i obtains from visiting restaurant j in period
t if she uses the optimal origin-mode pair as
                                      1      1      2
            Uijt = max{Uijlt } = max{γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                                 1          2
                                                                      Zj + βg(i) Zij + νijt }
                     l∈L              l∈L
                          1      1           2
                 =   max{γg(i)l Xijl } +    γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                          1          2
                                                               Zj + βg(i) Zij + νijt .
                     l∈L


                                                        74
    1        1
If γg(i)l = γg(i) < 0, i.e. the disutility of travel does not vary across origins or modes of
transport and individuals dislike spending time to visit restaurants, then
                          1         1        2
                  Uijt = γg(i) min{Xijl } + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                          1          2
                                                               Zj + βg(i) Zij + νijt .
                                 l∈L

If we additionally assume that the vector νit = {νijt ; ∀j ∈ J } is independent across individ-
uals and time periods and has a joint type I extreme value distribution, then the probability
that individual i decides to visit restaurant j in period t will be
                                             1             1        2
                                        exp(γg(i) minl∈L {Xijl } + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                                                 1          2
                                                                                      Zj + βg(i) Zij )
 P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi ; (γ, β)) = P                 1
                                                                                                                         ,
                                     j 0 ∈J   exp(γg(i) minl∈L {Xij1 0 l } + γg(i)
                                                                              2
                                                                                   Xij2 0 + βg(i)
                                                                                             1            2
                                                                                                  Zj 0 + βg(i) Zij 0 )

where the vectors Xi Zi , γ and β are defined in footnote 15. Given this probability and
following the same steps described in Section 3.3, we derive the following log-likelihood
function
                      N X Ti X
                                                                          !
                                                       exp(V      )
                                 1{d∗ijt = 1} ln P
                     X                                         ij
                                                                            ,
                     i=1 t=1 j∈S                   j 0 ∈S
                                                          it
                                                             exp(V  ij 0)
                                       it


with
                             1         1        2
                      Vij ≡ γg(i) min{Xijl } + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                             1          2
                                                                  Zj + βg(i) Zij ,
                                     l∈L

for every individual i and restaurant j. We report the estimates of such a model in Table
A.10. The results are broadly similar to those in Table 3.

C.4     Nested logit
Step 1: derive restaurant visit probability. Let the set of restaurants J be partitioned into
K non-overlapping subsets (nests) denoted B1 , B2 , . . . , BK . Assume that the probability an
individual i visits restaurant j belonging to nest Bk from origin-mode l at period t is:

                                 P (dijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J; (γ, β, λ)) =
                  P                         P       P                              λg(i)k −1
                     l∈L exp(V ijl /λg(i) )     0
                                               j ∈Bk    l∈L  exp(V  ij 0 l /λg(i)k )

                          PK        P         P                            λg(i)k0            ,                 (C.1)
                             0
                            k =1        0
                                       j ∈Bk0   l∈L exp(V  ijl /λg(i)k 0)



where Xi , Zi , γ, and β are defined in equation (15) and, for every individual i, restaurant
j and mode-origin l, Vijl is defined in equation (4). When λg(i)k = 1 for all k, indicating
no correlation among the unobserved components of utility for alternatives within a nest,
the choice probabilities become those in our baseline model (see equation (3)). In our ap-
plication, we assume that this correlation parameter is common across all nests, such that
λg(i)k = λg(i)k0 for any pair of nests (k, k 0 ).




                                                          75
Step 2: derive restaurant review probability. Given the review-writing model described in
Section 3.2, the probability of observing a review of venue j written by individual i at period
t, conditional on individual i writing a review at t, is
                                 P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β, λ)) =
          1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 } l exp(Vijl /λg(i) )
                                   P                        P              P                           λg(i)−1
                                                               j 00 ∈B(j)     l∈L exp(Vij 00 l /λg(i) )
              P            P                              P               P                          
                       0
                 j 0 ∈Jit        l∈L exp(Vij 0 l /λg(i) )     j 00 ∈B(j 0 )   l∈L exp(Vij 00 l /λg(i) )

where d∗it = Jj=1 d∗ijt is a dummy variable that equals one if i writes a review at period t,
             P
and B(j) denotes the nest to which restaurant j belongs. Defining
                                                               X X                                   
                Iij (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) ) = (λg(i) − 1) ln                    exp(Vij 00 l /λg(i) ) ,
                                                                   j 00 ∈B(j) l∈L

we can rewrite the probability that i writes a review about a restaurant j (not previously
reviewed) at period t conditional on observing a review (about any restaurant) written by i
at t as
                                   P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Jit0 ; (γ, β)) =
                           P                              
                                l∈L exp((Vijl /λg(i) ) exp(Iij (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) ))
                    P             P                                                                 =
                       0
                      j ∈Jit0       l∈L  exp((V ij 0 l /λg(i) ) exp(Iij 0 (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) ))
                               P                                                              
                                   l∈L exp((V  ijl /λ   g(i) ) + Iij (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) )
                     P              P                                                             .     (C.2)
                         j 0 ∈J 0
                               it      l∈L exp((Vij 0 l /λg(i) ) + Iij 0 (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) )



Step 3: reduce choice set. The cardinality of the choice set Jit0 makes it computationally
burdensome to construct the denominator of the probability in equation (C.2). To address
this dimensionality issue, for every individual i and period t in which we observe a review
written by i, we randomly draw a choice set following the procedure described in Section
3.3. The probability of randomly drawing each set Sit is thus that in equation (8). Given
equations (8) and (C.2), we can write the probability that i reviews restaurant j at period
t conditional on a randomly drawn set Sit and that i writes a review at t as
                                  P (d∗ijt = 1|d∗it = 1, Xi , Zi , Sit ; (γ, β)) =
                      1{j ∈ Sit } l∈L exp((Vijl /λg(i) ) + Iij (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) )
                                     P                                                           
                       P           P                                                             .      (C.3)
                         j 0 ∈Sit     l∈L exp((Vij 0 l /λg(i) ) + Iij 0 (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) )



Step 4: derive individual i-specific likelihood function. Using jit to denote the restaurant
reviewed by individual i at period t, the joint probability of observing an individual i writing
the Ti reviews {ji1 , ji2 , . . . , jiTi } conditional on observing a review written by i in each of the
periods {1, . . . , Ti } and on randomly drawing the sets {Si1 , Si2 , . . . , SiTi } is
                      Ti
                         1{j ∈ Sit } l∈L exp((Vijl /λg(i) ) + Iij (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) )
                                           P                                                          
                     Y
                          P             P                                                             . (C.4)
                     t=1     j 0 ∈Sit      l∈L exp((Vij 0 l /λg(i) ) + Iij 0 (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) )



                                                           76
Step 5: derive log-likelihood function. Given equation (C.4) and assuming that we observe a
random sample i = 1, . . . , N of individuals from the population of interest, we can write the
log-likelihood function as
   N X Ti X                             P                                                                   !
                                                exp((V     /λ       ) +  I    (γ     , β     , λ     )
              1{d∗ijt = 1} ln P
                                                       ijl    g(i)         ij   g(i)    g(i)    g(i)
  X
                                            l∈L
                                             P                                                               . (C.5)
  i=1 t=1 j∈S                     j 0 ∈S
                                         it     l∈L exp((V  ij 0 l /λg(i) ) + Iij 0 (γg(i) , βg(i) , λg(i) )
              it




C.5       Moment inequalities
Katz (2007) and Pakes (2010) introduce an estimation approach that uses moment inequal-
ities to handle both large, potentially unobserved choice sets and unobserved heterogeneity
in the individuals’ preferences for some observed choice characteristics. Applied to our set-
ting, in this approach, the utility for an individual i of visiting venue j in period t from
origin-mode l may be written as:
                   Uijlt = γli1 E[Xijl
                                   1
                                       |Iit ] + γi2 E[Xij2 |Iit ] + βi1 E[Zj1 |Iit ] + βi2 E[Zij2 |Iit ],     (C.6)
where γli1 = γl1 + ε1li , γi2 = γ 2 + ε2i , βi1 = β 1 + ε3i , βi2 = β 2 + ε4i and Iit denotes the
information set of individual i at the time of deciding which restaurant to visit at period
t. Under the assumption that Ei [ε1li ] = Ei [ε2i ] = Ei [ε3i ] = Ei [ε4i ] = 0, where Ei [·] denotes
the expectation across individuals in the population of interest, Katz (2007) and Pakes
(2010) show how to derive moment inequalities that bound the average preference parameters
(γ, β). The behavioral model in equation (C.6) differs from that in equation (1) in that: (a)
allows consumers to have imperfect information about the characteristics of the different
restaurants at the time of deciding which restaurant to visit; (b) allows individuals to differ
in their preferences for the different observed characteristics affecting Uijlt ; (c) assumes that
there is no additional individual-restaurant-origin-mode specific characteristics that affects
individual choices and is unobserved to the econometrician (i.e. assumes away the logit shock
{νijlt ; l ∈ L, j ∈ J} included in equation (1)).64
    There are three reasons why we opt for the demand model described in Section 3.1
instead of the model in equation (C.6). First, the observed restaurant and locational charac-
teristics affecting Uijlt are publicly available through Yelp.com, Google Maps, and SocialEx-
plorer.com, so it is unlikely that individuals make large mistakes when forecasting variables
like the time that it takes to travel to a venue or the average price of each restaurant.65
  64
     Dickstein and Morales (2016) show how to estimate a binary choice model in which consumers may
have imperfect information about observable choice characteristics and their choices may be affected by
individual-choice specific unobserved shocks. However, as the estimator introduced in Dickstein and Morales
(2016) cannot handle the large choice sets that consumers face in our empirical application, it is not ideal
for our setting.
  65
     While the NYPD only started making incident-level crime maps available on its website in December
2013, precinct-level crime statistics have been available on the NYPD website since 2003 and updated weekly.
During our study period of 2007-2011, local newspapers like the New York Times produced incident-level
maps based on felony reports.

                                                            77
Second, while using moment inequalities to estimate and perform inference on bounds on a
small set of parameters is computationally straightforward (e.g. Holmes (2011); Eizenberg
(2014); Morales et al. (2017); Dickstein and Morales (2016); Wollman (2016)), doing so for
the set of parameters that we estimate in some of our specifications (i.e. those accounting
simultaneously for spatial and social frictions) is computationally unrealistic.66 Third, even
if we are controlling for a large set of observed restaurant characteristics, it is likely that there
are still multiple unobservable factors (e.g. is the restaurant child-friendly? do the other
people in my party like the restaurant? do I feel like eating at a French restaurant today?)
that may vary across individual-restaurant-occasions triplets and that are likely to be impor-
tant in determining individuals’ restaurant picks. The demand model in Section 3.1 accounts
for all these different factors through the unobserved preference shocks {νijlt ; l ∈ L, j ∈ Jt };
conversely, the behavioral model in equation (C.6) assumes these factors away.

C.6     Endogenous home and work locations
The statistical model described in Section 3.1 implicitly assumes that individuals’ home
and work locations are exogenously determined. However, in practice, individuals optimally
choose where to live and work. Consequently, the home and work locations of every individual
in our sample may be endogenously determined as a function of the characteristics of the
restaurants that they may consider visiting. In this section, we allow home and work locations
to be endogenously determined and discuss the assumptions that we would need to impose
so that the endogenous choice of home and work locations does not bias the estimates of the
preference parameters (γ, β) obtained using the estimation approach in Section 3.3.
    Assume that, in some period 0, individuals choose their home and work locations by
maximizing a utility function that is a weighted average of: (a) the expected utility of
visiting restaurants in future periods, and (b) a function of the characteristics of the home
and work locations that have intrinsic value independently of their properties as sites from
where to launch consumption.
    In order to compute the expected utility of future restaurant visits, we need to make an
assumption on the content of agents’ information sets at the time at which they decide on
their home and work locations. Using the notation in Section 3.1, we assume that, at the
time of deciding on where to live and work, every individual i knows the value of the vector
     1
{(Xijl , Xij2 , Zj1 , Zij2 ); l ∈ L, j ∈ J}. Individual i also knows the distribution –but ignores
the realizations– of the preference shocks {νijlt ; l ∈ L, j ∈ J} corresponding to any period
t subsequent to that when the decision on the location of home and work is taken. Under
this assumption, the expected utility for individual i of visiting restaurants from a particular
home and work location (h, w) is
                        X          XX                                                        
                                               1      1      2     2     1     1    2     2
            Eihw =             log        exp(γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij + βg(i) Zj + βg(i) Zij ) + c,
                  t∈T       j∈J l∈L


where c is the Euler’s constant, and T is the set of periods at which individual i will visit a
restaurant.
  66
    Applying the standard inference procedure to compute confidence sets Andrews and Soares (2010) for
the large number of characteristics included in our exercise would be computationally prohibitive.


                                                 78
   For every possible pair of home and work locations (h, w), we denote the vector of char-
acteristics defining their intrinsic value (independently of their properties as locations from
where to launch consumption) for individual i as Yihw . If we denote as α the weight that
individuals assign to the expected utility that they will obtain from visiting restaurants, we
can write the utility for an individual i of living in location h and working in location w as

                                         Wihw = (1 − α)ωYihw + αEihw ,

where ω is a parameter vector of identical dimensions as Yihw that determines the impact
of each of these characteristics on the utility for individual i of establishing her residence in
location h and her workplace in location w. An individual i lives in location hopt and works
in location wopt if

                            (hopt , wopt ) = arg max {(1 − α)ωYihw + αEihw },                                          (C.7)
                                                   w∈W,h∈H

where W denotes the set of all possible work locations and H denotes the set of all possible
home locations.
   If we were to extend the model of restaurant choice in Section 3 to account for the endoge-
nous selection of home and work locations, the relevant probability entering the likelihood
function for our sample would be the probability that an individual i chooses to visit restau-
rant j at period t conditional on having chosen to live in location hopt and work in location
wopt :
                                                      X
       P (dijt = 1|Vit , hi = hopt , wi = wopt ; α) =   P (dijlt = 1|Vit , hi = hopt , wi = wopt ; α),
                                                             l∈L

and

                                   P (dijlt = 1|Vit , hi = hopt , wi = wopt ; α) =
      Z
             1{Vijl + νijlt > Vij 0 l + νij 0 l0 t ; j 0 ∈ Jt , l ∈ L}f (νit |Vit , hi = hopt , wi = wopt ; α)dνit ,
       νit

where νit = {νijlt ; j ∈ Jt , l ∈ L} and f (νit |Vi , hi = hopt , wi = wopt ; α) denotes the density
function of the vector νit conditional on the vector of observed characteristics determining
the utility of restaurant visits, Vit ≡ {Vijlt ; l ∈ L, j ∈ J}, and conditional on the observed
house and work locations hi and wi being the optimal choices of individual i. Using equation
(C.7), we can rewrite this density function as:

                 f νit |Vit , (hopt , wopt ) = arg max {(1 − α)ωYihw + αEihw } .
                                                                                   
                                                        w∈W,h∈H

This representation of the density function clearly shows that we can recover the choice
probability in equation (5) in the main text as long as we assume that the distribution of
the vector of unobserved restaurant characteristics affecting individuals’ restaurant choices,
νit , verifies two conditions: (a) it is independent of the vector of characteristics determining
the optimal selection of home and work location, Vit and {Yihw , h ∈ H, w ∈ W}; (b) it is
distributed type I extreme value. The model in Section 3 already imposes that the distribu-
tion of the vector νit is type I extreme value and independent of Vit . Therefore, under the

                                                            79
model for home and work location described above, allowing individuals to optimally deter-
mine their home and work will not bias the estimates described in Section 3 as long as we
impose the additional restriction that νit is independent of the vector {Yihw , w ∈ W, h ∈ H}
conditional on Vit .

C.7       Review writing
Here we discuss the potential bias that would affect our estimates of the parameter vector
(γ, β) if the probability that a user reviews a restaurant depends on some characteristic of this
restaurant that is observed by the econometrician and that is correlated with some covariate
in the vector (Xi , Zi ). Assume that the probability that individual i reviews restaurant j
upon visiting j at period t depends on some of the restaurant characteristics included in Zj1
or Zij2 through the following function

      ijt |dijt = 1, Xi , Zi , J, Jit ; (γ, β, pit )) = pit 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit } exp(ζg(i) Zj + ζg(i) Zij ). (C.8)
                                   0            ∗        ∗                 0
  P (dr∗                                                                             1     1    2     2


In the case when ζg1 = ζg2 = 0 for every group g this function is identical to that assumed
in the main text (see equation 6). Conversely, if either ζg1 or ζg2 differ from zero for some
group g, we can write the probability that we observe a review at period t written by a user
i about restaurant j as:


                        P (d∗ijt = 1|Xi , Zi , J, Jit0 ; (γ, β, p∗it )) = p∗it 1{j 6= 0, j ∈ Jit0 }
            P                                                                                               
                         1       1         2      2        1         1        1       2         2        2
               l∈L exp(γ      X
                         g(i)l ijl +     γ     X
                                           g(i) ij  +   (β g(i) +  ζ g(i) )Z j   + (β g(i) + ζ  g(i) )Z  ij )
   ×P         P                                                                                                     ,   (C.9)
                             1      1           2     2         1          1       1       2           2       2
      j 0 ∈Jt     l∈L exp(γ       X
                             g(i)l ij 0 l +   γ     X
                                               g(i) ij 0 +   (β g(i) +   ζ g(i) )Z j0 + (β g(i)  +   ζg(i)  )Z ij 0 )
                                                                                                1
This expression demonstrates that we cannot separately identify the parameter vectors βg(i)
       2                                   1       2
and βg(i)   from the parameter vectors ζg(i) and ζg(i) . However, the estimates of γ are not
affected by the fact that the probability of writing a review depends on the vectors of
restaurant characteristics Zj1 and Zij2 . Furthermore, the probability in equation (C.9) is
identical to that in equation (6) with the only exception that the parameter vectors βg(i)   ˜ 1=
  1
βg(i)    1
      + ζg(i)        ˜ 2 = β 2 + ζ 2 take the place of the parameter vectors β 1 and β 2
               and βg(i)     g(i)   g(i)                                             g(i)       g(i)
in the main text. Therefore, following the same steps indicated in the main text, one can
derive a likelihood function that identifies the parameter vector (γ, β̃). This means that
an expression for the probability of writing a restaurant review as in equation (C.8) does
not prevent us from obtaining consistent estimates of the parameters capturing the spatial
frictions, γ 1 , and the parameters capturing the social frictions, γ 2 . However, the coefficients
on the restaurant characteristics in the vectors Zj1 and Zij2 account both for their effect
on consumers’ propensity to visit and their effect on visitors’ propensity to write reviews:
separately identifying these two effects is not possible.

C.8       Serial correlation in unobserved preferences
As we discuss in Section 3.3, as long as users’ unobserved restaurant preferences (captured
in the vector νit ) are independent over time, the facts that we identify users’ preferences

                                                               80
from their Yelp reviews and Yelp users very rarely review any restaurant a second time do
not prevent us from identifying consumers’ preference parameters. The key to identifying
preference parameters in this case is to compare the restaurant chosen by each individual i
in each time period t to the set of restaurants this user has not previously reviewed.
    If, contrary to our assumption, the preference shocks νit are correlated over time, the
facts that we identify users’ preferences from their Yelp reviews and that users do not gen-
erally review a restaurant twice can generate a selection bias in our estimates of consumers’
preference parameters. To understand this bias, assume for simplicity that the unobserved
preference shocks affecting individual i’s utility of visiting restaurant j through origin-mode
l at period t are the sum of a permanent, origin-mode-independent term ωij and the serially
uncorrelated term νijlt already incorporated in our baseline model. In this case, we can
rewrite the utility function in equation (1) as


                              1      1      2
                     Uijlt = γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                         1
                                                              Zj1 + βg(i)
                                                                     2
                                                                          Zij2 + ν̃ijlt ,   (C.10)

with ν̃ijt ≡ a × ωij + νijlt and where a is a constant that governs the magnitude of the
standard deviation of the permanent shock relative to the transitory component and is equal
to zero in our baseline model.
      Conditional on observable characteristics, user i will more often visit restaurants with
higher values of the preference shocks ν̃ijlt . Given the assumptions on review-writing be-
havior in Section 3.2, user i is therefore more likely to review those restaurants earlier.
Consequently, even if the unobserved preference shocks ν̃ijlt are uncorrelated with all ob-
served restaurant characteristics across all restaurants in NYC (i.e. across all restaurants in
the set J defined in Section 3.1), this correlation will be non-zero for the subset of restaurants
not previously reviewed by consumer i at any period t (i.e. for the restaurants included in
Jit0 ). Specifically, for the subset of restaurants not previously reviewed, ν̃ijlt will be nega-
tively correlated with the part of the utility function in equation (C.10) that is a function of
observable characteristics and parameters to estimate:

                              1      1      2
                             γg(i)l Xijl + γg(i) Xij2 + βg(i)
                                                         1
                                                              Zj1 + βg(i)
                                                                     2
                                                                          Zij2 .
Consequently, if the preference shocks ν̃ijlt are correlated over time, we should expect our
estimation procedure to yield an upward bias in coefficients that are negative and a downward
bias in coefficients that are positive. In other terms, we should expect an attenuation bias
in all our estimates. However, by the same logic, an estimator employing only a subset of
users’ earlier reviews would suffer this selection bias less.
    To verify this reasoning about the nature of the attenuation bias caused by serial corre-
lation in unobserved preferences and the improvement associated with restricting attention
to users’ earlier reviews, we have simulated the following data-generating process:

                    Uijt = 1.0 × ratingj − 1.0 × distanceij + a × ωij + νijt

where both the permanent shock ωij and the transitory shock νijt have type-1 extreme value
distributions. In Table C.2, we apply our estimator to three samples of data generated from
this process. Each sample includes 100 users making 40 trips. In columns 1-3, the choice

                                                     81
                 Table C.2: Estimation in the presence of permanent ωij shocks
                        a = 1, J = 1000              a = 0.5, J = 1000              a = 1, J = 11000
                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
 Rating              0.84      0.85      0.89      0.97       0.99      1.01      0.85      0.85      0.92
                    (0.023)   (0.034)   (0.056)   (0.020)   (0.029)   (0.047)   (0.021)    (0.030)   (0.051)
 Distance            -0.82     -0.86     -0.86     -1.00     -1.00     -0.99     -0.87     -0.91     -0.90
                    (0.025)   (0.035)   (0.055)   (0.020)   (0.027)   (0.042)   (0.022)    (0.030)   (0.049)

 Sample share          1        1/2       1/5        1       1/2        1/5        1        1/2       1/5
 Reviews             2203      1080       404      3408      1679       640      2738      1340       509
Notes: Each triplet of columns reports three estimates applied to subsets of one draw from the data-
generating process Uijt = 1.0 × ratingj − 1.0 × distanceij + a × ωij + νijt . In each draw, there are 100 users
who make 40 trips to restaurants. Since users do not review restaurants they have previously visited, there
are fewer than 4,000 reviews. In the second and third columns of each triplet, the estimation sample is
restricted to the first half and first fifth of each user’s reviews, respectively.


set contains 1000 restaurants and the standard deviation of the permanent shock has the
same magnitude as the transitory shock, a = 1. In column 1, we apply the to estimator the
full sample; in column 2, the first half of each user’s reviews; in column 3, the first fifth.
As expected, the estimates suffer attenuation bias, and this selection bias is reduced as we
restrict the sample to earlier reviews. In columns 4-6, the permanent shock has half the
magnitude of the iid shock, a = 0.5. For this magnitude, the attenuation bias is immaterial
and restricting the sample simply increases the standard errors. In columns 7-9, the choice
set contains 11,000 restaurants, and the selection bias is not as severe as in columns 1-3.


D       Model fit
This appendix details the model-fit results discussed in Section 4.3.

D.1      Isolation indices
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) define an isolation index for racial group g as
                           X vgj  vgj  X v¬gj  v¬g6j 
                      Sg =         ·        −           ·         .
                             j
                                vg     vj       j
                                                   v¬g      vj

This index measure the extent to which members of group g disproportionately visit venues
whose other visitors are also members of group g. The first summation is the visit-weighted
average of the share of a venue’s reviewers who are members of g, using g members’ visits
as the weights. The second summation uses reviews by users who do not belong to racial
group g. Sg is therefore the difference between the average g exposure of members of g and



                                                      82
                   Table D.1: Isolation indices for various model specifications
                                                         Model predictions
                     Data       Pooled      Race-specific Nested 1       Nested 2          Minimum time
  Asian               .087   [.035, .064]    [.056, .089]    [.057, .088] [.057, .089]       [.054, .088]
  black               .087   [.029, .073]    [.043, .089]    [.045, .094] [.043, .093]       [.044, .093]
  white/Hispanic      .045   [.014, .045]    [.025, .057]    [.024, .057] [.026, .059]       [.024, .057]
 Notes: The reported leave-out isolation indices Ŝg , as defined in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011), are
 the values for the estimation sample and the 90% confidence interval for model-predicted outcomes for
 generated samples of the same size. The pooled model imposes common coefficients across all three racial
 groups for the spatial-friction, price, rating, income, and area-dummy coefficients. The race-specific model
 is Table 3. “Nested 1” and “Nested 2” are columns 1-3 and 4-6 of Table D.3, respectively. “Minimum
 time” is Table A.10.


the average g exposure of non-members.67
    The sample analogue of this measure suffers a finite-sample upward bias, so we follow
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) and compute the sample analogue using leave-out means, Ŝg , as
defined in Section 4.3. Table D.1 reports the values of Ŝg for the estimation sample data and
the 90% confidence intervals for a model with pooled coefficients, our preferred race-specific
model (Table 3), two nested-logit specifications (Table D.3), and a minimum-travel-time
specification (Table A.10. The pooled model imposes common coefficients across all three
racial groups for the spatial-friction, price, rating, income, and area-dummy coefficients. It
generates lower values of Ŝg than observed in the data. The race-specific model, nested-logit
specifications, and minimum-travel-time specification all perform similarly in matching the
data.

D.2      Schelling-style segregation
We define a pairing p to be a set p = {j, j 0 } such that Xijl
                                                            1
                                                               = Xij1 0 l , Xij2 = Xij2 0 , Zj1 = Zj10 , and
  2      2
Zij = Zij 0 . In practice, this means that we are comparing two restaurants with the same
cuisine category, price, and Yelp rating that are located in the same census tract. If the two
restaurants have identical shares of users of each race, then gapp = 0. If there is zero overlap
in the racial composition of the two restaurants, then gapp = 1. Our estimator presumes
that gapp = 0. A Schelling-style model in which users’ consumption choices depend upon
the endogenous racial composition of venues’ patrons might predict gapp = 1.
    The sample analogue of this gap measure suffers a finite-sample bias: it will typically be
greater than zero when we observe a small number of restaurant visitors’ races, even if the
“true” value of gapp = 0. We therefore compare the observed gapp to the null hypothesis
of a uniform distribution in which individuals are randomly assigned to j or j 0 within the
pair. The randomization generates a finite-sample draw in which vj and vj 0 are equal to
their observed values and the assignment is drawn from a process with the property that
Pr(g (i) = g|d∗ij = 1) = Pr(g (i) = g|d∗ij 0 = 1) for j, j 0 ∈ p. For example, if there are 20
  67
    Note that Sg as defined by Gentzkow andShapiro
                                                  (2011) is distinct from the “isolation index” in Massey
                                    P vgj    vgj
and Denton (1988), which is simply j vg · vj .



                                                     83
reviews of j and 40 reviews of j 0 , the 60 reviews are randomly allocated between the two
venues so that j is randomly assigned 20 reviews and the remaining 40 are assigned to j 0 .
    In our data, there are 4569 venues in sets of venues that have the same tract-cuisine-
price-rating quadruplet. There are 402 venues with 10-40 reviews in sets of venues that
have the same tract-cuisine-price-rating quadruplet and have at least two venues with 10-40
reviews. We photo-coded all the users who reviewed restaurants in a sample of 119 pairs of
such venues. This yields the results depicted in Figure 6.

D.3     Restaurant fixed effects
We estimate specifications with restaurant fixed effects employing two different procedures.
The main text reports the results for an estimation procedure that employs sampling, as
described in Section 3.3. In this appendix, we report the results of a procedure due to Taddy
(2015). This specification incorporates restaurant fixed effects in a computationally feasible
manner by making a structural assumption about the denominator of the logit probability
expression. In our setting, the assumption is that the expected utility of a restaurant trip is
equal across all users within a racial group. Table D.2 reports estimates. They are generally
congruent with the results in Tables 3 and 5. Since we believe that the structural assumption
of equal expected utilities is unlikely to hold true in reality, we prefer the estimates reported
in Table 5 in the main text.

D.4     Nested logit
Table D.3 reports the estimates obtaining from applying the nested-logit estimator derived
in Section C.4 to two nesting schemes: (a) restaurants of the same disaggregated cuisine
category, Yelp rating, and area, and (b) restaurants of the same disaggregated cuisine cat-
egory, price category, and census tract. For the former, the value of the nest-correlation
parameter λ lies between 1.00 and 1.12; for the latter, 0.88 and 1.09. These values are
near the conditional-logit benchmark of λ = 1. A likelihood ratio test formally rejects the
conditional-logit model in favor of both nested specifications for the sample of Asian users,
and in favor of the cuisine-rating-area nesting in the case of white/Hispanic users. However,
these nested specifications offer little benefit of improved in-sample isolation fit, as shown in
Table D.1 and come at considerably greater computational cost. These specifications take
hours or days to estimate, rather than the few minutes required to estimate Table 3.

D.5     Parametric bootstrap
To assess the finite-sample properties of our estimator under the assumed data-generating
process, we use the observed covariates and estimated parameters reported in Table 3 to
generate 500 samples of observations (equal in size to our estimation data). Estimating our
model on these generated samples yields a distribution of estimates that we can compare to
the normal distribution associated with our asymptotic standard errors.
    Figures D.3 and D.4 depict these for the main specifications reported in Table 3; Figures
D.5 and D.6 for the minimum-travel-time specifications in Table A.10. In each figure, the
solid red line shows the bootstrapped distribution of estimates and the dashed blue line

                                               84
       Table D.2: Restaurant fixed effects, estimated by Taddy (2015) procedure
                                                            (1)       (2)            (3)
                                                           Asian     black     white/Hispanic
Log travel time from home by public transit                -0.96     -0.70         -0.95
                                                           (0.105)   (0.097)       (0.036)
Log travel time from home by car                           -1.01     -0.85         -1.14
                                                           (0.083)   (0.108)       (0.049)
Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.10     -1.68         -1.48
                                                           (0.022)   (0.661)       (0.150)
Log travel time from work by car                           -1.30     -1.59         -1.55
                                                           (0.131)   (0.364)       (0.107)
Log travel time from commute by public transit             -0.89     -0.99         -1.05
                                                           (0.079)   (0.178)       (0.051)
Log travel time from commute by car                        -0.86     -1.47         -1.39
                                                           (0.059)   (0.306)       (0.066)
Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -0.42     -1.19         -0.77
                                                           (0.087)   (0.199)       (0.102)
EDD × SSI                                                  -0.72     -0.97         -0.09
                                                           (0.155)   (0.364)       (0.090)
Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            -0.23      0.87         -0.28
                                                           (0.049)   (0.142)       (0.050)
Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )    0.48     -0.16          0.83
                                                           (0.124)   (0.336)       (0.073)
2-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)           0.03     -0.02          0.04
                                                           (0.010)   (0.029)       (0.009)
3-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)           0.06      0.04          0.08
                                                           (0.013)   (0.048)       (0.012)
4-dollar bin × home tract median income (10k USD)           0.05     -0.13          0.08
                                                           (0.020)   (0.206)       (0.021)
Yelp rating × home tract median income (10k USD)            0.01     -0.01          0.01
                                                           (0.005)   (0.014)       (0.003)
       Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.




                                           85
                                           Table D.3: Nested logit
                                                             (1)      (2)         (3)      (4)      (5)          (6)
                                                              Area-cuisine-rating nests     Tract-cuisine-price nests
                                                            Asian    black white/Hisp     Asian    black white/Hisp
 λ                                                          1.091a    1.007a    1.119a    1.086a    0.876a    0.983a
                                                            (0.002)   (0.006)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.010)   (0.003)
 Log travel time from home by public transit                -1.089a   -0.939a   -1.161a   -1.060a   -0.924a   -1.130a
                                                            (0.015)   (0.022)   (0.010)   (0.014)   (0.021)   (0.010)
 Log travel time from home by car                           -1.210a   -1.191a   -1.420a   -1.175a   -1.152a   -1.353a
                                                            (0.013)   (0.028)   (0.011)   (0.012)   (0.025)   (0.010)
 Log travel time from work by public transit                -1.305a   -1.861a   -2.033a   -1.289a   -1.689a   -1.855a
                                                            (0.021)   (0.197)   (0.056)   (0.021)   (0.157)   (0.046)
 Log travel time from work by car                           -1.723a   -1.803a   -2.126a   -1.650a   -1.665a   -1.929a
                                                            (0.027)   (0.082)   (0.035)   (0.024)   (0.068)   (0.027)
 Log travel time from commute by public transit             -0.981a   -0.931a   -1.136a   -0.955a   -0.920a   -1.092a
                                                            (0.010)   (0.018)   (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.017)   (0.007)
 Log travel time from commute by car                        -1.077a   -1.327a   -1.497a   -1.041a   -1.313a   -1.427a
                                                            (0.009)   (0.031)   (0.011)   (0.008)   (0.029)   (0.009)
 Euclidean demographic distance between hi and kj           -1.034a   -1.845a   -1.210a   -0.995a   -1.839a   -1.197a
                                                            (0.016)   (0.049)   (0.022)   (0.016)   (0.049)   (0.021)
 Spectral segregation index of kj                           0.154a    0.075a    0.037a    0.146a    0.078a    0.045a
                                                            (0.007)   (0.016)   (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.016)   (0.004)
 EDD × SSI                                                  -0.158a   -0.172a   -0.062a   -0.156a   -0.165a   -0.066a
                                                            (0.016)   (0.042)   (0.014)   (0.015)   (0.041)   (0.013)
 Share of tract population that is Asian                    1.114a    0.011     0.385a    0.988a    0.054     0.368a
                                                            (0.016)   (0.061)   (0.024)   (0.016)   (0.060)   (0.022)
 Share of tract population that is black                    0.222a    1.087a    0.159a    0.258a    1.034a    0.130a
                                                            (0.043)   (0.070)   (0.046)   (0.041)   (0.070)   (0.043)
 Share of tract population that is Hispanic                 -0.260a   0.471a    0.392a    -0.167a   0.406a    0.402a
                                                            (0.032)   (0.067)   (0.033)   (0.030)   (0.067)   (0.031)
 Share of tract population that is other                    0.336     3.572a    0.426     0.008     3.685a    0.500
                                                            (0.282)   (0.602)   (0.348)   (0.268)   (0.595)   (0.323)
                                                                 a         a         a         a         a
 Dummy for 2-dollar bin                                     0.405     0.775     0.388     0.377     0.766     0.354a
                                                            (0.012)   (0.035)   (0.014)   (0.011)   (0.034)   (0.013)
 Dummy for 3-dollar bin                                     0.329a    -0.090    -0.027    0.323a    -0.125b   -0.032
                                                            (0.016)   (0.060)   (0.021)   (0.015)   (0.060)   (0.020)
 Dummy for 4-dollar bin                                     0.267a    -0.068    -0.339a   0.262a    -0.124    -0.355a
                                                            (0.026)   (0.215)   (0.039)   (0.024)   (0.213)   (0.036)
 Yelp rating of restaurant                                  0.579a    0.052b    0.334a    0.594a    0.055b    0.343a
                                                            (0.008)   (0.024)   (0.010)   (0.008)   (0.023)   (0.010)
 African cuisine category                                   0.384a    -0.192b   0.427a    0.336a    -0.212b   0.290a
                                                            (0.039)   (0.097)   (0.043)   (0.038)   (0.096)   (0.043)
 American cuisine category                                  0.438a    0.525a    0.606a    0.433a    0.515a    0.590a
                                                            (0.007)   (0.021)   (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.021)   (0.008)
 Asian cuisine category                                     0.881a    0.256a    0.308a    0.871a    0.261a    0.309a
                                                            (0.007)   (0.024)   (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.023)   (0.009)
 European cuisine category                                  0.163a    -0.326a   0.205a    0.174a    -0.311a   0.239a
                                                            (0.008)   (0.027)   (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.027)   (0.009)
 Indian cuisine category                                    0.378a    -0.450a   -0.031c   0.332a    -0.426a   -0.032b
                                                            (0.012)   (0.053)   (0.016)   (0.012)   (0.053)   (0.016)
 Latin American cuisine category                            0.556a    1.008a    0.727a    0.536a    0.991a    0.687a
                                                            (0.009)   (0.024)   (0.010)   (0.009)   (0.024)   (0.010)
 Middle Eastern cuisine category                            0.313a    0.107b    0.248a    0.297a    0.072c    0.199a
                                                            (0.013)   (0.044)   (0.015)   (0.013)   (0.044)   (0.015)
 Vegetarian/vegan cuisine category                          0.307a    -0.004    0.519a    0.341a    0.061     0.593a
                                                            (0.019)   (0.072)   (0.020)   (0.018)   (0.068)   (0.019)
 2-dollar bin × home tract median income                    0.035a    -0.022a   0.045a    0.034a    -0.023a   0.042a
                                                            (0.001)   (0.006)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.006)   (0.002)
 3-dollar bin × home tract median income                    0.077a    0.078a    0.086a    0.075a    0.075a    0.081a
                                                            (0.002)   (0.009)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.009)   (0.002)
 4-dollar bin × home tract median income                    0.075a    -0.169a   0.099a    0.074a    -0.167a   0.095a
                                                            (0.003)   (0.041)   (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.041)   (0.004)
 Yelp rating × home tract median income                     0.012a    0.008b    0.018a    0.011a    0.008c    0.016a
                                                            (0.001)   (0.004)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.004)   (0.001)
 Percent absolute difference in median incomes (hi − kj )   0.131a    0.623a    0.766a    0.206a    0.605a    0.706a
                                                            (0.041)   (0.150)   (0.052)   (0.039)   (0.149)   (0.049)
 Percent difference in median incomes (kj − hi )            -0.061a   0.854a    -0.102a   -0.051a   0.834a    -0.101a
                                                            (0.007)   (0.022)   (0.009)   (0.006)   (0.022)   (0.009)
 Log median household income in kj                          -0.104a   -0.362a   -0.638a   -0.155a   -0.371a   -0.619a
                                                            (0.036)   (0.131)   (0.046)   (0.034)   (0.130)   (0.043)
 Average annual robberies per resident in kj                -3.725a   2.441a    -4.261a   -3.381a   2.558a    -3.740a
                                                            (0.094)   (0.211)   (0.138)   (0.087)   (0.210)   (0.126)

 χ2 test p-value                                             0.00      0.85      0.00      0.00      0.02      0.37
 Number of trips                                             6447      1079      6936      6447      1079      6936
Notes: Each column reports an estimated nested-logit model of individuals’ decisions to visit a Yelp venue.
Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance denoted by a (1%), b (5%), c (10%). Unreported
controls are 28 area dummies. The χ2 test is a likelihood-ratio test for each specification relative to its
corresponding column in Table 3.


                                                            86
depicts the asymptotic distribution. Figures D.3 and D.5 depict the distributions for the
coefficients on our key social-friction covariates and two restaurants characteristics. For these
coefficients, our estimator exhibits finite-sample behavior under the assumed data-generating
process that is very close to the asymptotic distribution. For the spatial frictions depicted
in Figure D.4, our estimator occasionally generates extreme outlying negative coefficients,
which we omit from the plots but are evident from the missing mass in the bootstrapped
density. Figure D.6 shows that these outlying estimates do not arise if we assume that users
visit restaurants using the minimum-time origin-mode pair available to them rather than
optimizing over six the origin-mode pairs. This suggests that the finite-sample behavior
of the estimated spatial-frictions coefficients is attributable to the fact that we inferPthese
six spatial-friction parameters exclusively from restaurant-reviewing outcomes dij = l d∗ijl ,
                                                                                     ∗

without actually observing the origin-mode-level outcomes d∗ijl .




                                               87
Figure D.3: Parametric bootstrap: Social frictions and restaurant characteristics
                                 Asian users




                                       Black users




                                White/Hispanic users




                    Bootstrapped distribution        Asymptotic standard errors



                                                88
Figure D.4: Parametric bootstrap: Spatial frictions
                  Asian users




                        Black users




                 White/Hispanic users




     Bootstrapped distribution        Asymptotic standard errors


                                 89
Figure D.5: Parametric bootstrap:        Social frictions and restaurant characteristics in
minimum-time specification
                                         Asian users




                                         Black users




                                  White/Hispanic users




                      Bootstrapped distribution        Asymptotic standard errors

                                                  90
       Figure D.6: Parametric bootstrap: Spatial frictions in minimum-time specification
            Asian users                  Black users               White/Hispanic users




                              Bootstrapped distribution        Asymptotic standard errors


E       Consumption segregation estimates and counterfac-
        tuals
E.1       Measuring consumption dissimilarity
Here we show how to use the demand model in Section 3, the estimates reported in Section 4,
and data on the joint distribution of home census tracts, work census tracts and race to com-
pute dissimilarity indices.68 Using the definition of conditional and marginal probabilities,
we can write
                                        P (dij = 1, ri = r)    P (dij = 1, ri = r)
               P (dij = 1|ri = r) =                         =P                        .              (E.1)
                                            P (ri = r)        j∈J P (dij = 1, ri = r)

The estimates reported in Section 4 express the probability that an individual i visits a
restaurant j as a function of the home and work location and race of individual i. Therefore,
in order to exploit these estimates, we need to rewrite P (dij = 1, ri = r) as a function of
P (dij = 1|hi = h, wi = w, ri = r), for every possible h and w, where hi indicates the home
census tract of individual i and wi indicates her home tract. We do so implementing the
following steps.
    Using the definition of a marginal probability distribution, we obtain
                                      XX
                P (dij = 1, ri = r) =       P (dij = 1, ri = r, hi = h, wi = w),       (E.2)
                                            h    w
         P                                                            P
where h denotes a sum over all possible home census tracts and w denotes a sum over
all possible work census tracts. Finally, using the relationship between joint and conditional
  68
    We use the Census of Population to obtain information on the share of residents living in each census
tract that belong to each of five races or ethnicities: Asian, black, Hispanics, whites, and others. Using
commuting data from LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES), we identify the five most
common NYC workplace tracts associated with a given NYC residential tract. Assuming that the share of
commutes to each destination tract for a given home tract does not vary across ethnicities/races (since the
LODES data does not identify this demographic information), we recover the joint distribution of home and
work census tracts by race.

                                                          91
probability distributions, we can write
P (dij = 1, ri = r, hi = h, wi = w) =
    = P (dij = 1|ri = r, hi = h, wi = w)P (ri = r, hi = h, wi = w)
    = P (dij = 1|ri = r, hi = h, wi = w)P (ri = r|hi = h, wi = w)P (hi = h, wi = w)
    = P (dij = 1|ri = r, hi = h, wi = w)P (ri = r|hi = h, wi = w)P (wi = w|hi = h)P (hi = h).
Finally, assuming that all individuals living in the same census tract h have the same proba-
bility of commuting to any other census tract w independently of their race, we can conclude
that
  P (dij = 1, ri = r, hi = h, wi = w) =
      = P (dij = 1|ri = r, hi = h, wi = w)P (ri = r|hi = h)P (wi = w|hi = h)P (hi = h). (E.3)
Using the demand model in Section 3 and, specifically, the functional-form assumption in
equation (5), we can write the probability P (dij = 1|ri = r, hi = h, wi = w) as a function
of the parameter estimates presented in Section 4. The probabilities P (ri = r|hi = h),
P (wi = w|hi = h) and P (hi = h) may all be computed using data from the US Census
Bureau. Specifically, P (ri = r|hi = h) denotes the fraction of residents in census tract h
that belong to race or ethnicity r; P (wi = w|hi = h) denotes the fraction of residents in
census tract h that commute to census tract w; and P (hi = h) is simply the fraction of the
overall population that lives in census tract h.69 Combining equations (E.1), (E.2) and (E.3)
we can write
                                  P (dij = 1|ri = r) =
  P P
       P (d = 1|ri = r, hi = h, wi = w)P (ri = r|hi = h)P (wi = w|hi = h)P (hi = h)
P hP wP ij                                                                               .
 j∈J h  w P (dij = 1|ri = r, hi = h, wi = w)P (ri = r|hi = h)P (wi = w|hi = h)P (hi = h)


E.2      Second Avenue Subway counterfactual
This section details how we compute transit times for the counterfactual scenario in which
the Second Avenue Subway is available as a means of public transit. In short, we treat the
NYC subway system as a graph and the Second Ave Subway expansion as the addition of new
nodes and edges to that graph. We use Dijkstra’s algorithm to compute the fastest routes
between nodes of the graph with and without the subway expansion. We then modify the
current Google Maps transit times by the speed improvement attributable to the addition
of the Second Avenue Subway.
    Figure E.7 depicts the Second Avenue Subway addition to the NYC subway system, which
extends the existing Q line and introduces a new T line. The first phase, running from 96th
Street to 57th Street, opened in early 2017, six years after the end of our estimation sample.
Additional phases (some not yet funded) plan to extend Q line farther north and introduce
many new T line stations along Second Avenue.
  69
     Our assumption that P (wi = w|hi = h) is independent of the ethnicity/race of i is necessitated by data
constraints. Our results are robust in the sense that any downward bias in estimated consumption dissimi-
larity due to this assumption is very small. Appendix Table A.15 reports consumption dissimilarity indices
under the constraint that all consumption trips originate at individuals’ residential locations. The resulting
dissimilarity indices are similar and show a similar contribution of spatial frictions to that segregation.

                                                     92
                       Figure E.7: Second Avenue Subway expansion




                       Notes: This figure shows the planned Second Avenue
                       Subway expansion. Source: Wikimedia.


    We compute the change in transit times implied by this entire expansion. We use GTFS
data from transitfeeds.com describing the current system of subway stations and average
transit times between stations connected by subway lines. We introduce the new subway
stations depicted in Figure E.7 and assume that the transit times between them equal the
times between similar stations on A line on the west side of Manhattan. We use Dijkstra’s
algorithm to compute the fastest path between any two stations in the network, for both
the existing subway network and the network enlarged by the Second Avenue expansion.
We compute transit between pairs of census tracts under both scenarios by assigning the
two nearest subway stations to each census tract (based on tract centroids) and assuming
a walking speed of 5 kilometers per hour. While these computations abstract from the
NYC bus system and do not account for congestion, we find that the computed transit
times between tracts for the current network align well with the transit times from Google
Maps that we employ in estimation. We therefore employ the difference in transit times to
construct the counterfactual transit times.
    The census tracts with the largest predicted improvements in average transit times are
those in Manhattan along Second Avenue that are directly served by the new subway stops.
However, there are also substantial gains for census tracts in Queens that are near the F and
R lines and census tracts in Brooklyn that are near the B, F, and Q lines. These gains reflect
improved connections to many Manhattan destinations due to the denser subway network
and new potential transfers between lines. We add these transit-time improvements to the
current Google Maps transit times and recompute predicted visits for all tracts in order to
produce column 2 of Table 8.


                                              93
E.3     Gentrification exercise
This section details the computation of the welfare losses reported in the Harlem gentrifica-
tion exercise in Section 6 and reports similar results for a Bedford-Stuyvesant gentrification
exercise.

E.3.1   Procedure
                                                                                          0     0
We model gentrification as a process by which Xij and Zij becomes Xij and Zij for a
                                                                0              0
gentrifying set of restaurants J G . For j not in J G , Xij = Xij and Zij = Zij . Starting
from the expression for expected utility in our demand system (see Train 2009, Ch. 3),
                                                              !
                                    XX
                          Ui = ln          exp (γXijl + βZij ) + c
                                              j       l
                                                                                 !
                              0
                                          XX                    0       0
                                                                             
                          Ui = ln                         exp γXijl + βZij           +c
                                              j       l


                                          P      P                  !
                                              j∈J Gl ∆ exp (βXijl )
              Ui0   − Ui = ln 1 +             P P
                                               j  l exp (βXijl )
                          P   P
                                  ∆ exp (βXijl )
                                  j∈J G
                        ≈  P Pl
                            j  l exp (βXijl )
                          X X
                        =     Pijl [exp(β∆Xijl ) − 1]
                          j∈J G       l
                                         
                              X
                                      Pij  × exp(γg2 ∆X̄ij2 + βg1 ∆Z̄j1 + βg2 ∆Z̄ij2 ) − 1 ,
                                                                                          
                        ≈
                           j∈J G


where c is Euler’s constant. The first approximation employs the fact that ln (1 + x) is
approximately x when x is near zero. The second approximation employs the fact that we
are randomly assigning the characteristics of Upper East Side tracts and venues to tracts and
venues surrounding the incumbent Harlem tract, so there should be no correlation between
initial Pij and changes in venue and tract characteristics.

E.3.2   Bedford-Stuyvesant exercise
In this section, we report a gentrification exercise for an area of Brooklyn, akin to the gentri-
fication exercise reported in Section 6. We modify the restaurant and tract characteristics of
venues surrounding a low-income, majority-black tract in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighbor-
hood of Brooklyn, as depicted by the white polygon in Figure E.8. We compute the change
in black residents’ expected utility if the surrounding census tracts containing 221 Yelp
restaurants (green polygons) were to exhibit the residential and restaurants characteristics
of high-income, majority-white census tracts of the Upper East Side (orange polygons).


                                                            94
                     Figure E.8: Bedford-Stuyvesant gentrification exercise

                                                         Change in                              Mean        Std. Dev.
                                                         Share Asian                            0.041       0.054
                                                         Share black                           -0.477       0.249
                                                         Share Hispanic                        -0.055       0.106
                                                         Share white                            0.502       0.267
                                                         Robberies per resident                -0.004       0.003
                                                         Spectral segregation index              -0.3       0.306
                                                         Yelp rating                           -0.072        1.03
                                                         Price ($ to $$$$)                     0.692        0.866
                                                         Median household income               68.121      51.652
                                                         Euclidean demographic distance         1.376       1.229
                                                                        N                               221




  Notes: We compute the change in black residents’ expected utility in the white polygon if the sur-
  rounding green tracts were to exhibit the characteristics of the orange tracts. The table reports the
  changes in these characteristics.


    Table E.4 summarizes the decomposition of the resulting welfare loss, akin to Table 9
in the main text. Restaurants in the gentrifying area account for 23.7% of predicted visits
by incumbent residents prior to gentrification. Again, the welfare loss we compute is at-
tributable to increases in social frictions associated with the shift of the surrounding tracts
from mostly black residents to mostly white residents. This partially offset by the increase
in neighborhood incomes. The changes in restaurants’ prices, ratings, and cuisines are im-
material. Thus, the results are very similar to those reported for the Harlem gentrification
exercise in Section 6.

 Table E.4: Welfare losses due to gentrification of surrounding Bedford-Stuyvesant tracts
                                       Change in value of characteristics (γ∆X̄i , β∆Z̄i )
  Welfare change Initial visit share Social frictions Restaurant traits Other traits
        -2.7%                 .203                 -3.13                 -.069                .585
                               Ui0 −Ui                     P
  Notes: Welfare loss is 100 × Ui . Initial visit share is j∈J G Pij . Social frictions include EDD, SSI,
  EDD×SSI, and racial and ethnic population shares of kj . “Restaurant traits” include price, rating,
  cuisine category, and price and rating interacted with median household income. “Other traits” include
  destination income, differences in incomes, and robberies per resident.




                                                    95
