NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION RISK AND
INTERNATIONAL ASSET RETURNS:
SOME EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

Robert E. Cumby

Working Paper No. 2383

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1987

Helpful comments from Ken Froot, Rene Stulz, and participants in the NBER Summer
Institute are acknowledged with thanks. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2383
September 1987

Consumption Risk and International Asset Returns:
Some Empirical Evidence

ABSTRACT

The paper examines if real stock returns in four countries are consistent with consumption—based models of international asset pricing. The
paper finds that ex—ante real stock returns exhibit statistically significant fluctuations over time and that these fluctuations cannot be
explained by consumption—based models when the conditional covariances
between real stock returns and the rate of change of consumption are
assumed to be constant over time. These conditional covariances are then
modeled and the paper finds that they too exhibit statisitcally sig-

nificant fluctuations over time. However, even

when

conditional

covariances are allowed to change over time, the paper finds that the
consumption—based models do not fully explain real stock returns.

Robert E. Cumby
GSBA
New York University
100 Trinity Place

New York, NY 10006

Introduction

The bulk of empirical analysis of international asset returns has
explored returns to speculation in the forward foreign exchange market

or the expected rate of return differential between nominal deposits
demoninated in different currencies. Considerably less work has examined

stock returns internationally.1 This paper departs from the practice of

focusing exclusively on the behavior of returns on forward speculation

or nominal assets and to exmaine the behavior of international stock
market returns.

In particular the paper asks if observed returns are

consistent with the predictions of consumption—based models of international asset pricing.

The paper proceeds as follows. In section 1 the implications of the

consumption—based international asset pricing model are described and
tests of the restrictions on equilibrium expected real returns along the

lines suggested by Hansen and Hodrick (1983) and Gibbons and Ferson

(1985) are implemented. These tests require that the conditional
covariances between real returns and the rate of change of consumption
be proportional across all assets. In section II the estimation of these
conditional covariances is discussed and a test of their proportionality

across assets is implemented. In addition, a test of the consumption—
based international asset pricing model that allows for changing conditional covariances is implemented.

1

In addition, much of the existing work analyzing equilibrium models

of international asset returns such as Solnik (1974) and Stehie
(1977) is a decade old. Problems with the tests in these papers are
discussed in Adler and Dumas (1983).

-2-

I. Testing the Consumption—Based International Asset Pricing Model

In this section we develop and implement a test of the consumption—
based international asset pricing model proposed by Stulz

(1981) using

aggregate indexes from the stock markets of the major industrial
countries. For convenience throughout we will examine equilibrium real
returns from the point of view of a reprensetative investor in the U.S.,

which is taken to be the home country. We begin by defining some nota-

tion. Let P be the dollar price of the jth asset at the end of period

t. Next, let

be the dollar value of the ith assets dividend or

interest payments from the end of period t to the end of period t+k. The

real rate of return earned on asset j from the end of period t to the
end of period t+k, rt3k is defined by,
1 +

(1)

where

rt,k

=

[(Pt+k

+

t,kPTI(1

+

1Ttk is the rate of inflation from the end of period t to the end

of period t+k for a representative domestic investor. Stulz

(1981),

following Breeden (1979), derives a continuous time model of equilbrium
returns. The assumption that trading takes place continuously allows him

to move to the limit of continuous time and derive an equilibrium
relationship

between

asset returns.2 A discrete—time conditional

consumption—based asset pricing model for a representative domestic

consumer—investor can be obtained using the results in Hansen and
Richard (1987), where a "generic" conditional asset pricing model

2

is

Grossman and Shiller (1982) show how a consumption beta model can be

derived from the discrete time first—order conditions of a representative consumer—investor's utility maximization problem by taking
the limit as the trading interval goes to zero. They point out that
distributional assumptions or assumptions about the functional form
of the utility function are alternatives to the use of continuous
time analysis.

—3—

examined.

3

While restrictions on equilibrium returns may be obtained in

this way, the means by which Stulzs results on aggregation across

countries can be obtained in

a conditional discrete—time framework

remains unknown. All that we require here, however, is that

a

consumption—based capital asset pricing model exist for a representative
domestic consumer—investor. In Stulz's model, expected real returns will
sati sfy,
(')

E

'

—

C

rt,k

)

—
—

Pi,t t rt rt,k ]
E

'

E

where r,k is the real return on the benchmark portfolio, r,k is the
real rate of return on a portfolio whose real return is conditinalily

uncorrelated with domestic real consumption growth, and

is the

"consumption beta" of asset j from the point of view of a representative
domestic investor.
=

=

ct+

covt(rk,ct+k/ct)/covt(rk,ct+k/ct)
—

c

is the change of consumption between t and t+k.

A problem encountered when implementing tests of the consumption—beta

model is that the benchmark portfolio is unobserved as is the portfolio

whose return is uncorrelated with consumption. As a result, the two
z

returns, r,

Ic

by

p

and rL

are unobserved. This problem can be circumvented

4.

following the suggestion of Gibbons and Ferson (1985). Since (2)

must hold for all assets we can consider the equilibrium condition for

As Hansen and Richard (1987) point out, the consumption—based capital asset pricing model implies that the benchmark return in their
analysis is the return on the aggregate consumption portfolio.

Gibbons and Ferson (1985) propose the tests to be described as a
means of testing the Sharpe—Lintner version of the CAPM. Extension
to the case of consumption beta models involves no problems provided
we are willing to make assumptions about the constancy of relative

consumption betas over time. This assumption will be discussed
below. The tests may be thought of as tests of any single—beta asset
pricing model.

—4—

assets j and s and subtract the expected real return on asset s from the
e<pected real return on asset j.
.3

E(r,k —

S

rt,k)

=

j,t

—

p

Ps,t)Et&t,k

—

z

r,k)

Next, we can divide this difference by the difference between expected
return on an arbitrarily chosen reference asset,

1,

and the expected

return an asset s. We then find that we have eliminated the unobserved
returns.

(3) E(r —

—

rt,k)/Et(rt,k

r,k)

=

(P,t

—

P5,

In order to simplify notation, we will supress the terms involving rk

and will refer to the difference between rk and rk simply as rk.
Next, we must model the expected returns as they too are unobservable. We assume the econometrician observes some data

that are in-

cluded in the time—t information set of agents and consider the projec-

tion of expected real profits onto X.
(4)

E(r,) = Xtaj

+

where uk is the projection equation error, which is orthogonal to
by construction. Since ex—ante returns are unobservable we work with

observable realized profits, which can be decomposed into expected
profits and a forecast error,

(4') r =

+

Uk + E,k = Xtaj

+

The key assumption that allows us to make inferences about the behavior
of ex—ante returns based on the observed behavior of realized returns is

the assumption that expectations are rational. That is we assume that
forecast errors are unforecastable given information available at the

time the forecast is made. Since

is assumed to be in the time t

information set of agents, Ek is orthogonal to X. In addition, Uk
is orthogonal to X by construction so that the composite error term is
orthogonal to Xr Estimating equation (4') by OLS thus produces consis—

—5--

tent estimates of the projection equation m's under the appropriate
regularity conditions.5 In order to test hypotheses concerning the m's,

we must have a consistent estimate of their covariance matrix. In the
empirical work carried out in this paper, k3, and tt3 is not realized

until t+3. Thus

will follow a second—order moving average process

(IIA(2}). In addition, Uk does not have to be serially uncorrelated so

that the composite error will be serially correlated. Consistent estimates of the variance—covarjance matrix of m. are calculated with a
3

method outlined by Hansen (1982) and Cumby, Huizinga and Obstfeld (1983)
that allow both for serial correlation and for conditional heteroscedas—
ticity in the residuals. This is an attractive feature of this technique

since an assumption of conditional homoscedasticity of asset returns is
unlikely to be satisfied.

6

If we combine (3) with the projection equations, (4) and (4'), that

the econometrician uses to estimate conditional expectations based on
the observable data
1

j

rtk =
=

Thus

m =

r

we obtain,

nj,tEtftt,k)

+

1

r tUtmi + utk)
1

a .
.,t 1

+

1

Gibbons and Ferson (1985) show that if we assume that

the ratio of the consumption betas, is constant over time (or,
equivalently, the conditional covariances between asset returns and the

rate of change of real consumption are proportional across assets) a
test of the asset pricing model (3) can be carried out by estimating a

In particular, we require X and !. to be stationary and ergodic.
6

Cumby and Obstfeld (1984), Hodrick and Srivastava (1984), and
Giovannini and Jorion (1987) all find evidence of conditional
heteroscedasticity in speculative returns in the foreign exchange
market. Giovannini and Jorion also find similar conditional heteros—
cedasticity in U.S. stock market returns.

—6—

system of projection equations and testing the hypothesis that the
coefficients in each equation are proportional to the coefficients in
the first equation.7 If there are N assets and k regressors in each of
the projection equations, there will be Nk regressors in the system but
only k + (N—i) parameters when the proportionality restrictions are

imposed. There are thus Nk — (k+N—1) parameter restrictions that can be

tested. If the model is correct and if the auxiliary assumptions con-

cerning the constancy of the relative consumption betas and the
rationality of expectations are correct, these parameter restrictions
should be satisfied by the data.

Estimation of the restricted system of equations and testing o the
parameter restrictions can be carried out using Hansen's (1982) generalized method of moments (6MM) procedure. pplication of the 6MM procedure

is orthogonal to T1k,

begins by noting that each element of
j.

for

all

Thus there are Nk orthogonality conditions in the projection equa-

tions for the real returns. The 6MM estimator is obtained by choosing
the parameters of the system so as to make the sample versions of the
orthogonality conditions as close to their population value of zero as

possible by minimizing a quadratic form in the sample orthogonality
conditions. In this case where there are Nk orthogonality conditions and
k +

N

—

1

parameters, there are k + N —

1

first—order conditions for the

minizmiation of the quadratic form and thus we can only set k +

N

—

1

linear combinations of the sample orthogonality conditions to zero.
Hansen (1982) notes that if the constraints of the model are true, the

additional Nk —

(k

+ N —

1) sample orthogonality conditions should be

close to zero as well. However if the constraints are not satisfied, the

The assumption that the conditional covariances are proportional
across assets is tested below.

—7—

additional sample orthogonality conditions should not be close to zero
and thus the value of the criterion function, which is a quadratic form
in these orthogonality conditions, should be large. Hansen (1982) proves

that under the null hypothesis that the constraints are satisfied the
criterion function is distrubuted as

with degrees freedom equal to

the number of parameter restrictions. Thus, estimation and testing may
be carried out quite simply by using the appropriate 6MM estimator.

Hansen and Hodrick (1983) test the restricitions implied by a single—

beta CAPM model of the foreign exchange risk premium. The test they
carry out is equivalent to the Gibbons—Ferson test. Perhaps this is not
surprising since both are tests of single—beta asset pricing models. The

fact that the two tests are identical is obscured somewhat by differences in interpretation in the motivation of the tests. Hansen and
Hodrick assume that the betas are constant and treat the expected return

on the benchmark portfolio as an unobserved latent variable assumed to

be linearly related to some data X. Since the expected return on the

benchmark portfolio enters the equilibrium condition for returns to

speculation in each currency, they obtain a set of proportionality
restrictions on a system of equations. Gibbons and Ferson, on the other

hand substitute out the expected benchmark return by using an arbitrarily chosen reference asset and derive a set of proportionality
restrictions that are identical to those obtained by Hansen and Hodrick.

We now turn to the results from estimating the projection equations

describing the behavior of real stock returns and the tests of the
consumption beta model. We consider the returns on the aggregate market

indexes in four countries, the United States, the United Kingdom, West

Germany, and Japan taken from Morgan Stanleys Capital International
Perspective. Together, these four represent 84 of the capitalized value

-8—

of the Capital International world index. A sample of January 1974 to
December 1986 is chosen to coincide with the period of floating exchange

rates. Three—month holding period returns measured in U.S. dollars are

calculated for each of the aggregate portfolios. We take rk to be the
real return on a safe nominal dollar deposit and thus subtract the real
three—month eurodollar deposit rate from each.8

In estimating the projection equations (4), we need to consider what

variables to use in the regressions. In principle any variables in

the information set are reasonable candidates. The

used in the

projections are the dividend yield on each of the national market
portfolios, the rate of change of consumption (ct+3/ct — 1) lagged 3
months, terms of trade (TOT) for each country, and inflation in each
country lagged three months (1T.?3). There are thus fourteen variables

in ' including

a constant term. Consumption and the terms of trade

are employed since various models suggest that these should affect
savings and investment decisions and therefore affect equilibrium expected returns. Inflation is also included in

since several studies

have pointed to a systematic relationship between stock returns and
inflation.

8

10

Exchange rates are end of month rates taken from International
Financial Statistics. The three—month eurodollar rate is from Morgan

Guarantys World Financial Markets. U.S. inflation is calculated
using the CFl—U, which is taken from the Survey of Current Business.

The consumption data are real spending an nondurables and services
per capita, taken from the Survey of Current Business. The terms of
trade are calculated as the ratio of the unit value of exports to
the unit value of imports, which are obtained from International
Fiancial Statistics, as are the CPI data for all countries but the
U.S.
10

Solnik (1983) and Gultekin (1983) present international evidence on
this relationship. Stulz (1986) presents an equilibrium model in
which expected real stock retruns are related to expected inflation.

—9—

Table 1 contains the results from the projections of real stock

returns on X. The

statistics for testing the null hypothesis that

all coefficients but the constant term are zero are presented along with

their probability values and the R4 from each projection.11 The results

indicate that we can reject the null hypothesis that expected stock
returns are constant at all reasonable significance levels)2

Table 2 contains the results of the tests of the consumption—based
models when the relative consumption betas are assumed to be constant.
Estimation of the full system of four equations each of which contains

14 regressors proved to be computationally infeasible, We therefore
carry out the Gibbons—Ferson tests in reduced systems of two each)' The
U.S. market index is chosen to be the reference asset in each case.

In

each of these reduced systems there are 28 orthogonality conditions and
15 parameters to be estimated. There are thus 13 parameter restrictions

in each system. The values of the criterion functions, which are
random variables with 13 degrees freedom, are 24.3 for the first pair
countries (U.S. and U.K), 16.2 for the second pair of countries (U.S.

and West Germany), and 24.1 for the third pair of countries (U.S. and

The R4 is the squared correlation coefficient of the dependent
variable and its fitted value.
12

The autocorrelations of the residuals from the projections are
generally consistent with a second—order moving average as would be
expected if the projection error component of the composite error is
small relative to the forecast error component, indicating that a
reasonable information set has been chosen. All tests reported in
the paper have also been carried out lagging X4 one period to ac—
comodate possible reporting lags. In no instance does this affect
the results of the hypothesis tests.
Estimation requires the inversion of a matrix that is Nk x Nk, which
is in this case 56 x 56. Attempts to compute this inversion proved
unsuccessful. If the restrictions are rejected by the data, the use
of the three smaller systems does not present any problems in inter-

preting the test results since the full system test would simply
provide stronger rejections.

-10-

Japan). The restrictions implied by the consumption beta model are then
rejected at standard significance levels in two of the three cases.

II. Modeling Conditional Covariances

The behavior of the conditional covariance between asset returns and

the rate of change of consumption plays a central role in consumption—

based models asset pricing. In this section we discuss modeling this
conditional covariance with two goals in mind. First, it may be possible
that the restrictions implied by the consumption—beta model are rejected

due to time varying relative consumption betas. If the conditional
covariances can be modeled, the constancy of the relative consumption
betas can be tested. Second, if we find that the relative consumption
betas change over time, we want to determine if the movement they exhibit can account for ex—ante real stock returns.

The estimation of the conditional covariance may be carried out by
extending the results of Amemiya (1977) and Hasbrouck (1985) who consider a regression model in which the variance of the disturbance term

is linearly related to a set of observable data and derive the large

sample distribution of estimators of the parameters of the linear
variance function.14 The extension to the case at hand is derived in
Cumby (1986).

We are interested in estimating the conditional covariance between
the rate of change of consumption and real aggregate stock returns.

14

Hasbrouck (1985) extends the results in Amemiya (1977) in several
important directions. Most importantly, he allows the regressors to
be stochastic, does not require that the regression disturbance be
normal, and allows the addition of a stochastic disturbance to the
linear variance function.

—11—

=

COvt (r

rtk,ct+k/:t)

k

= Et((rt,k_rt,k_Et(rtk_rtkct+k/c_Etcf4k,c,,]

+k cr
—

=

where

The econometrician, who is assumed to observe a

set of variable, X, can use as

an

estimate of the conditional

covariance the projection of j,t onto
=
J,t

8. +

X

t .1

t

It will prove convenient to rewrite the projection as,
=

Where

+ t,kt,k

xtej +
and

ut) =

Since

and

— ).
t( cc

The

unobservable, we

-

need to work with the residuals, ,k =
X

+

are the disturbances from projections of r and

onto , respectively.

—

X8

and

=

pro iection
can then be rewritten in terms of observ—

abl cc,

'i ,c
't,I:t,k =

+

j

t -

qt,tjj) t,tcc +
c

-

j

In Cumby (1986) it is shown that the OLS estimate of 8.
and

is

tcc1tji?
S

consistent

asymptotically normal with a covariance matrix that can be consis-

tently estimated using the techniques described in Hansen (1982) and
Cumby, Huizinga, and Obetfeld (1983).15

Once a consistent estimate of 8 and its asymptotic covariance matrix
are obtained, we can test hypotheses about the conditional covariance of

It should be pointed out that since we are examininq the conditional
and not the conditional covariances of the c,

covariances of the

the covariances we estimate are the sum of the covariances of the
projection errors and the covariances real returns and real consumption. Therefore any inference about the movement of the conditional
covariance of rca] returns and real consumption over time based on
the evidence presented here is conditional on assumptions we make

concerning the movements of covariance of the projection errors over
time. If the data do a good job of describing the movements cf real
returns so that the proiection errors are small, we may reasonably
assume that the covariance of projection errors is small. The es-

timates will then be dominated by movements in the conditional
covariances of real returns and real consumption.

—12—

real consumption and real stock returns. The first of these hypotheses
is the constancy of this conditional covariance. This hypothesis is the

hypothesis that all elements of 8. are zero except for the constant
term. Next,

if the hypothesis of a constant conditional covariance is

rejected, we need to determine if the comovements of the conditional
covariance and real stock returns are consistent with the consumption—
based international asset pricing model. We proceed in two steps. First,

we can test the assumption of constant relative consumption betas re-

quired for the Gibbons—Ferson test by using the projection equations
(5). If relative consumption betas are constant over time, the conditional covariances must all move together over time. The hypothesis that
the the conditional covariances move together can be tested by determining if the coefficients in the projection equations (5) are proportional

across assets. This test can be carried out in the manner described
above.

The second step is to determine if observed returns are consistent

with the consumption—based international asset pricing model when we
allow for variation over time in the conditional covariances. In order

to see how we can do this, rewrite (3), using the definition of the
consumption betas to obtain,
(3d)

E(r,k)IEt(r,fr)

=

Next, substitute realized real returns less a forecast error for the
expected returns and impound the forecast errors into the error term.

Finally,
(6)

F..

add and subtract (a. Ii 4) and rewrite to obtain.

j,

F'

F.

(r / ) =

where

j,t

a +

br

/r

1

£

—

by

—

C Cr .

/r 1,t )

(r

,..

—

.

/r 1t

) 3

jt
t,k
jt
t,k t,k
is the difference between E(rk)IEt(r,k) and r,k/r,k. If

1,t

stock returns are consistent with the consumption based model of inter-

national asset pricing, we expect to find a=O and b1. Two problems

—13—

arise when estimating the parameters of (13). First, the realized real

return on the right hand side of
forecast error,

(13) will be correlated with the

We therefore need to use and instrumental vari-

ables procedure to obtain consistent estimates of a and b. Second, since

the left—hand—side variable uses the fitted values from the projections

rather than the true conditional covariances and expected return, an
additional component arises in the error term. This additional component
may introduce both heterscedasticity and serial correlation to the error
in

(6)

that we need to take into account in estimation. Instrumental

variables estimation of (6) taking account of possible heteroscedastic

and serially correlated errors can be carried out using the two—step

two—stage least squares technique of Cumby, Huizinga, and Obstfeld
(1983). The choice of instruments is straightforward since the variables

used in the real return projection equations will be uncorrelated
with the error term. Since the serial correlation in the error term is
of unknown order, the spectral estimator of the covariance matrix of the
parameters of (6) is used.
In

estimating

and

testing

hypotheses about the conditional

covariances, the choice of the data to include in

must again be made.

It seems natural to use the same information to estimate the behavior of
conditional first moments and conditional second moments so the same set
of

as is used above will again be employed. Prior to proceeding with

estimation, a problem with consumption data should be confronted. Published data measure consumption over an interval rather than at a point
in time. Using the results in Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger (1986),

it can be shown that if monthly data sampled quarterly are used and if

the covariance between real returns and real consumption growth is
constant, the estimate of the covariance obtained using interval con—

—14—

sumption data will understate the true "spot" covariance by twenty
percent.

In order to correct for this bias the dependent variables in

the projections (12) could be multiplied by 1.2 prior to estimation.
Doing so would, of course, leave the test statistics unchanged. Since
such a correction would also leave relative consumption betas unchanged,
this correction is pursued here.

The results of estimating the conditional covariances can be found in
Table 3, where the

2

statistic; for testing the the constancy of condi-

tional covariances are reported along with their probability values and

the R' from each projection. In all cases but the West German market

index, the hypothesis of constant conditional covariances can be
rejected at standard significance levels. In the West German case rejection is at the eleven percent level.

Given that the covariances change over time, do they do so in a way

that explains the behavior of ex—ante real returns? Table 3 also con-

tains the results of the tests of proportionality of the conditional
covariances for the three pairs of assets examined above. The tests are

carried out using the GMM procedure used in carrying out the Gibbons—
Ferson tests. Again there are 28 orthogonality conditions in the each
system and 15 parameters to be estimated in each so that each system has

13 restrictions to be tested. The table reports the 2(13) statistics
for the hypothesis that the conditional covariances are proportional
along with the corresponding probability values. We can see that the
proportionality constraints are rejected at the six percent level for
the U.S., Japan combination, and at the 12 percent level for the U.S.,
U.K. combination. There is no evidence that the constraints do not hold
for the U.S. , West Germany combination. Thus a violation of the assump-

tion of proportional conditional covariances may account for the reiec—

—15-

tion

of the restrictions implied by the single—beta model with constant

relative betas for the U.S. and Japan, but is unlikely to account for
the rejection for the U.S. and the U.K. Since the single—beta model with

constant relative betas is not rejected for the U.S. and Germany, failing to reject the proportionality of conditional covariances is reassuring.

Table 4 contains the results of the tests of the consumption—based
model of international asset pricing with conditional covariances that
are allowed to vary over time. Recall that under the null hypothesis we

expect to find a slope of one and an intercept of zero. In all three
cases we find that while the slope coefficients are positive, they are
less than one. The largest slope coefficient (approximately .5) is found

in the U.S. — Japan

combination, the combination that exhibited the

strongest evidence against the hypothesis of constant relative consumption betas. The hypothesis that the slope coefficient is one is rejected

at reasonable significance levels in all cases. Although movements in
relative consumption betas and relative returns are positively corre-

lated as the consumption—based model predicts, rejection of the null
hypothesis that the slope coefficients are one implies that even when
conditional

covariances

are

allowed

to change over time, the

consumption—based international asset pricing model falls short of

fully

explaining observed real stock returns.

Since evidence against the model is found only when U.K. and Japanese
returns are examined, barriers to international investment may be behind

the results. Capital controls were in place in the U.K. until October
1979 and restrictions on capital movements in Japan were not eased until

after 1980.

An attempt to carry out the tests using data only from the

latter part of the sample was made. However, the sample turned out to be

—16—

too short to obtain reliable estimates.

III. Concluding remarks

The paper examines if real stock returns is four countries are consistent with consumption—based models of international asset pricing. Tests

such as those suggested by Gibbons and Ferson (1985) are considered

first. These tests require that we assume that the

conditional

covariance of real stock returns and the rate of change of real consumption move together over time for all assets. The restrictions implied by

the consumption—based model assuming the proportionality of the condi-

tional covariances are rejected by the data when combinations of the

U.S. and the U.K and the U.S. and Japan are examined. No evidence
against the restrictions is found when the U.S. and Germany are considered. Next, estimates of these conditional covariances are presented

and the evidence shows that, like the ex—ante real stock returns, they
exhibit statistically significant fluctuations over time. The assumption

of proportonal conditional covariances necessary for implementation of
the Gibbons—Ferson test is also tested and is rejected in the two cases

in wh3ch the model is rejected by the Gibbons—Ferson test. This raises

the possibility that the rejections may be ue to the auxiliary assumption of constant relative consumption betas rather than a failure of the

model itself. A final set of tests is carried out in which conditional

covariances are allowed to change over time and the results indicate
that

observed

real stock returns cannot be explained fully by

consumption—based models of international asset pricing.

—17—

References

Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio choice
and corporation finance: 4 synthesis, Journal of Finance, 38, 925—977.

Amerniya, Takeshi, 1977, 4 note on a heteroscedastic model, Journal of
Econometrics, 6, 365—370.
Douglas T. , 1979, 4n intertemporal - asset
pricing model with
stochastic consumption and investment opportunities, Journal of Finar—
cial Economics, 7,265—196.

Breeden,

1986, Is it risk? Explaining deviations from uncovered
interest parity, working paper, New York University Graduate School of

Cumby, Robert E. ,

Business Admini strati on.

Cumby, Robert E. , John Huiznga, and MaLirice Ubetfeld, 1983, Two—step
two—staqe least squarco estimation in models with rational expectations,
Journal cf Econometrics, 11, 333—355.

Culiby Robert E. and Maurice Dbstfeld, 1984, International interest rate
erd price level linkages under floating exchange rates: 4 review of
recent evidence, in J. F. 0. Bilson arid P. Marston (eds), Exchange Rate

Theory

tional

and Practice, Chicago: Unvesity of Chcao Press for
Bureau

of

the Na-

Economic Research.

Gibbons, Micril P. and Wayne Ferscn, 1985! Testing asset pricing models
with char.'inq expectations of an unobservable market
of Financial Economics, 14! 217—23s.

portfoio, Journal

Giovannini, Alberto and Philippe Joriori, 1987, Interest rates and risk
premia in the stock market and in the foreign exchange market, Journal
of International Honey and Finance! 6, 107—123.

Grossman, Sanford J.

and

Robert J.

Shiller,

1982! Consumption cor—

relatedness and risk measurement in economies with non—traded assets and
heterogeneous nformatiop, Journal of Financial Economics, 10, 195—210.

Gulte:n, N. Bulent, 1983, Stock market returns and inflation: Evidence
from other countries, Journal of Fnarce, 08, 49—65.
Hansen,
moments

Lars P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of
estimators, Econometrica, 50, 1029-1054.

Hansen, Lars P. and Robert

3. Hodrick, 1983, Risk averse speculation in
the forward foreign exchange market: An econometric analysis of linear
models, in J.4. Frenkel (ed)
Rates and
internatioai
Exchange
hcroecunomics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

neon, Lars P. and Scott F.

Richard, 1987,

The role cf conditcnn

information in deducing testable restrctions implied by
pricing

models, Econometnica,

Z5

5G7—13.

dynamc

asset

—18—

Hasbruck, Joel1 1985, Ex ante uncertainty and ax post variance in
1iner return

models: Ar econometric analysis, workinq paper, New York

University, Graduate School of Business Administration.
Hodrick, Robert J. and Sanjay Srivastava, 1984, An investigation cf risk
and

return in forward foreign exchange, Journal of International honey

and Finance, 3, 5—29.

Solnik, Bruno, 1974, The international pricing of risk: An empirical
investiqation of the world capital market structure, Journal of Finance,
29, 48—54.
E:olnik, Brur!o, 1983,

The relationship between stock prices and irfla—

tionary expectations: The international evidence, Journal of Finance,
3, 35—48.
Stehie, Richard, 1977, An empirical test fo the alternative hypotheses

of national and international pricing of risky assets, Journal
493—5('2.

Finance,

Stuiz, Rene M., 1981, A model of
Financial

Stulz,

of

internatonai asset pricing, Journal of

Economics, 9, 383—4O.

Rene

M., J9S.,

Finance, +11 2')9—223.

Asset pricing and expected inflation, Journal

of

Table 1: Ex Ante Real Stock Returns*

—rare

Tests with Dividend
and

=

+

r-nfrv

Eb.D.
ji it/P.it
X

Yield1 Consumption Growth Terms of Trade1

Inflation

d.c t Ict—

+

+

Ef

jip.it it3
ip.

R

(13)

140.76

e..TOT.
ji it

+

.471

(. 00:

71.13

.46

(0. 00)

45.24

.

(. 19E-04)

Table

2: &ibbons—Ferson Tests of

Snoie

8eta Model of Stock

Returns*

Countries

US., U.I.

24.32

U.S., Sermany

16.17

(0. 03)
(0. 24)

U.S.1 Japan

24.08
(0.

03)

* The sample period is 1974:1 to 1986:12. R2 is defined as the
squared correlation coefficient of the dependent variable and its

fitted valuç. Marginal significance levels are in parentheses
below the

statistics.

Table 3: Conditional Covariances
P. Chi—Square Tests with Dividend Yield, Consumption Growth, Teres of
Trade, and In+lation*
3

t,k t,k

a.
j

Country

+

it

Eb . (D. If.

ji it
.

jt

d.c

/c

t—

+

Ee . TOT.
.

ji

it

+

Ef

it3
j p.it /p.
.

(13)

76.89

U.S.

+

.119

(0.00)
48.04

U.K.

.269

(.64E—05)
Germany

19.44

Japan

75.21

.057

(.11)
.148

(0. 00>

B. Tests of the Proportionality of Conditional Covariances

Countries

X.2 (1.

U.S. L!.K.

19.24
( 0 .

U.S. Germany

11.69
(0.

U.S.,

Japan

55)

21.76
(0.

* The

12

06)

sample period is 1974:1 to 1984:12. R2 is defined as the
squared correlation coefficient of the dependent variable and its
fitted vslu. Marginal significance levels are in parentheses
below the ) statistics.

Table 4:

Tests of Consumption Based Mode] with
Time—Varying Conditional Covariances

j,tUS,t
Country

U.K..

Germany

US
+ brfr/rk
3

=

a.

b.

3

3

0.144

0.105

(0.009)

(0.023)

—0.082
(0.

Japan

035)

—0.064
(0.020)

* The saapie

0.263

(0. 179)
0.498

(0. 167)

period is 1974:1 to 1986:12. Asymptotic standard

errors are in parentheses.

