                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS OF
                   (IMPROVING) PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS:
                       EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                    Karthik Muralidharan
                                        Paul Niehaus
                                     Sandip Sukhtankar

                                     Working Paper 23838
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23838

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2017, Revised March 2020

We thank David Atkin, Abhijit Banerjee, Prashant Bharadwaj, Gordon Dahl, Taryn Dinkelman,
Roger Gordon, Gordon Hanson, Clement Imbert, Supreet Kaur, Dan Keniston, Atila Lindner,
Aprajit Mahajan, Edward Miguel, Ben Moll, Dilip Mookherjee, Imran Rasul, Mark Rosenzweig
and participants in various seminars for comments and suggestions. We are grateful to officials
of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, including Reddy Subrahmanyam, Koppula Raju,
Shamsher Singh Rawat, Raghunandan Rao, G Vijaya Laxmi, AVV Prasad, Kuberan Selvaraj,
Sanju, Kalyan Rao, and Madhavi Rani; as well as Gulzar Natarajan for their continuous
support of the Andhra Pradesh Smartcard Study. We are also grateful to officials of the Unique
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) including Nandan Nilekani, Ram Sevak Sharma, and
R Srikar for their support. We thank Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) and Ravi Marri,
Ramanna, and Shubra Dixit for their help in providing us with administrative data. This paper
would not have been possible without the continuous efforts and inputs of the J-PAL/UCSD
project team including Kshitij Batra, Prathap Kasina, Piali Mukhopadhyay, Michael Kaiser,
Frances Lu, Raghu Kishore Nekanti, Matt Pecenco, Surili Sheth, Pratibha Shrestha, and Kartik
Srivastava. Finally, we thank the Omidyar Network (especially Jayant Sinha, CV Madhukar,
Surya Mantha, and Sonny Bardhan) and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (especially Dan
Radcliffe) for the financial support that made this study possible. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
General Equilibrium Effects of (Improving) Public Employment Programs:
Experimental Evidence from India
Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar
NBER Working Paper No. 23838
September 2017, Revised March 2020
JEL No. D50,D73,H53,J38,J43,O18

                                          ABSTRACT

Public employment programs may affect poverty through both the income they provide and their
effects on private labor markets. We estimate both effects, exploiting a large-scale experiment
randomized across 157 sub-districts (with an average population of 62,500 each) that improved
the implementation of India's national rural employment guarantee scheme. The reform raised
low-income households' earnings by 13%, with 90% of this gain coming from non-program
earnings, driven by increases in both market wages and private-sector employment. Workers'
reservation wages increased and their employment gains were higher in treated areas with more
concentrated landholdings, consistent with monopsonistic labor markets. We also find increases
in credit, private assets, and longer-term enterprise counts and non-agricultural employment,
underscoring the far-reaching market impacts of the initial reform. Overall the results suggest that
public employment programs can effectively reduce poverty in developing countries, and may
also improve economic efficiency.

Karthik Muralidharan                             Sandip Sukhtankar
Department of Economics, 0508                    Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego              University of Virginia
9500 Gilman Drive                                Charlottesville, VA 22904
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                          srs8yk@virginia.edu
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu

Paul Niehaus
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
pniehaus@ucsd.edu
   Public employment programs, in which the government provides jobs to those who seek
them, are among the most common anti-poverty programs in developing countries. The
economic rationales for such programs include self-targeting through work requirements,
public asset creation, and making it easier to implement a wage floor in informal labor-
markets by making the government an employer of last resort.1 The world’s largest such
program is the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) in India, with 600
million rural residents eligible to participate and a fiscal allocation of 0.5% of India’s GDP.
   Whether and to what extent such programs raise incomes and reduce poverty is a first-
order policy question. If all that mattered were the direct earnings from the program itself,
we could answer this question simply using survey data on program earnings. What com-
plicates matters is that labor-market general equilibrium (GE) effects on market wages and
employment could attenuate or amplify the direct income gains from the program. For
instance, program earnings might understate net income gains for the poor to the extent
that public employment programs raise market wages, or overstate them to the extent that
they reduce private employment. The magnitudes of these effects in turn depend on the
underlying structure of the labor market.
   Given the importance of the NREGS, there is a large literature on its impacts. However,
the existing evidence is hampered by four factors. The first is the lack of experimental
variation, with the consequence that studies often reach opposing conclusions depending on
the data and identification strategy used (see Sukhtankar (2017)). Second, it is well-known
that NREGS implementation quality varied considerably across time and space. This makes
it difficult to interpret the wide range of estimates of NREGS impact to date, because this
divergence could reflect unmeasured variation in implementation quality. Third, since labor
market effects of NREGS may spill over across district boundaries, most existing estimates
may be biased by not accounting for spillovers to untreated units (as in Miguel and Kremer
(2004)). Finally, since the period of NREGS rollout had only a “thin” round of the National
Sample Survey (NSS) that does not have representative district-level data on consumption,
existing studies have not been able to study the impact on poverty.
   In this paper we address these challenges by combining exogenous experimental variation,
a demonstrable first-stage impact on implementation quality, units of randomization large
enough to capture labor-market GE effects, and geocoded units of observation disaggregated
enough to test and correct for spatial spillovers. Specifically, we worked with the Government
of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh (AP) to randomize the order in which 157 sub-districts
   1
     Workfare programs may also be politically more palatable to taxpayers than unconditional “doles.” Such
programs have a long history, with recorded instances from as early as the 18th century in India (Kramer,
2015), the public works constructed in the US by the WPA during the Depression-era in the 1930s, and more
modern programs across Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and Asia (Subbarao et al., 2013).


                                                    1
(mandals) with an average population of 62,500 each introduced a new system (biometric
“Smartcards”) for making payments in NREGS.2 In prior work, we show that Smartcards
substantially improved the performance of NREGS on several dimensions: it reduced leakage
of funds, increased program earnings, reduced payment delays and the time required to collect
payments, and increased real and perceived access to work, without changing fiscal outlays
on the program (Muralidharan et al. (2016), henceforth MNS). Thus, Smartcards brought
NREGS implementation closer in specific, measured ways to what its architects intended.
   The impacts of improving NREGS implementation are unlikely to be the same as the
impacts of rolling out the program itself. Yet, given well-documented implementation chal-
lenges – including poor access to work, high rates of leakage, and long delays in receiving
payments (Mehrotra, 2008; Imbert and Papp, 2011; Khera, 2011; Niehaus and Sukhtankar,
2013b) – improving implementation on these metrics is likely to meaningfully increase any
measure of effective NREGS. Further, since improvements in the effective presence of N-
REGS were achieved without increasing NREGS expenditure in treated areas, our results
are likely to be a lower bound on the anti-poverty impact of rolling out a well-implemented
NREGS from scratch (which would also transfer incremental resources to rural areas).
   We study the impact of improving NREGS implementation using detailed data on in-
come (by source), wages, and employment from ∼5, 000 detailed surveys conducted in a
representative sample of all households registered for NREGS, who comprise 49.5% of rural
households. We measure wages and employment in the month of June (which is in the peak
NREGS period), and income for the year preceding the survey. These surveys were con-
ducted two years after the randomized roll-out of the Smartcard program, before the control
group was treated. To study impacts on the full population, we supplement this survey
data with three different censuses of income, employment, and livestock conducted by the
government independently of our efforts and at around the same time.
   We find, first and foremost, that this improvement in NREGS implementation led to large
and widespread increases in the incomes of the rural poor. In an independently-conducted
household census, the proportion of rural households in the lowest income bracket fell by 4.9%
(a 4.1 percentage point reduction on a base of 83%). In our survey, which is representative
of NREGS-registered households, we find mean earnings increased by 12.7%, leading to a
17.4% reduction in an income-based measure of poverty (a 4.9 percentage point reduction
on a base of 28.2%). We find no evidence of corresponding changes in the prices of consumer
goods, suggesting real—not merely nominal—earnings gains.
   Second, the majority of these income gains are attributable to gains in earnings from
   2
    The original state was divided into two states on June 2, 2014. Since this division took place after our
study, we use “AP” to refer to the original undivided state.



                                                     2
sources other than the NREGS. Among NREGS-registered households, increases in NREGS
earnings accounted for only 10% of the total income increase, with the rest coming from
private-sector earnings.3 In turn, the majority of the increase in non-NREGS earnings (over
80%) comes from an increase in market labor income.
   Third, this increase in earnings reflects in part the fact that market wages rose substantial-
ly: by 10.6% in treated areas during June, a month of peak NREGS activity. This increase
is comprised of two effects. First, we find a significant positive ITT effect on market wages in
treated mandals of 6.5%. Second, we also find strong evidence of spatial spillovers, with sig-
nificantly higher market wages in control areas that had a greater fraction of treated villages
in their neighborhood. Ignoring these spillovers would bias the treatment effects downwards.
We estimate that spillovers increased wages in the control group by another 4.1%, and the
adjusted increase in market wages was 10.6%.
   Fourth, despite the increase in wages, we find an increase, not a decrease, in market em-
ployment among NREGS-registered households. Spillover-adjusted estimates of days worked
in the private sector increased by 20% (1.4 days on a base of 7.1 days/month). Days worked
on NREGS went up by 29% (0.9 days on a base of 3.2 days/month), and days idle or unpaid
fell by 13% (2.4 days on a base of 18 days/month). The probability of migration was also
higher, though not significant (p = 0.22). Thus, to the extent that migration is primarily for
employment, we also see no decrease in the likelihood of being employed outside the village.
   The fact that both wages and employment increased in tandem is central to the large
income gains we estimate: wage gains were not offset by reduced employment, but instead
were augmented by increased employment. We consider two broad explanations. First, this
could reflect an inward shift in labor supply in the context of imperfectly competitive labor
markets (e.g. oligopsony). Second, this could reflect an outward shift in labor demand.
   We find clear evidence that labor supply to private sector jobs shifted inwards. Reservation
wages increased in line with wage realizations, suggesting that an improved NREGS increased
workers’ bargaining power by enhancing outside options. Moreover, changes in market em-
ployment covary systematically with measures of monopsony.4 Specifically, treatment led
to significantly greater increases in private-market employment in villages with greater land
concentration, as measured by a normalized Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI). While this
index likely does not capture all aspects of employer market power, we estimate that it can
explain 35% of the overall increase in market employment.
   3
     In the control group, the mean household earned 7% of its income from NREGS and 93% from other
sources. Thus, treatment increased earnings in similar proportions.
   4
     Following usage in the literature (e.g. Manning (2003)), we use the term “monopsony” broadly to
describe situations where there are “few potential employers within ‘reasonable’ distance of workers so that,
from the perspective of a worker, the labour market appears to be ‘thin”’.



                                                     3
   We find less evidence of increased labor demand within the 2-year time-frame of our study.
Labor demand could rise due to the creation of productivity-increasing public assets under
the NREGS, but we calculate that even under generous assumptions, the Smartcard program
could have increased the total rural capital stock by at most 1%, not nearly enough to lead to
our observed labor market impacts. Alternatively, the increased income from higher wages
could have a secondary effect on local labor demand through an increase in demand for
locally-produced products. However, we see no increase in household consumption spending
that would point to this mechanism.5 We also do not see increases in consumer goods prices
that would transmit a demand shock to producers and ultimately to labor markets. Finally,
the large increase in market wages we document are hard to reconcile with a Keynesian
aggregate-demand channel driven by slack labor demand.
   In the longer run, we expect the increased income among the rural poor to transmit further
through the economy – including through increased demand as households recognize that
the income gains are not transitory. While fully characterizing these longer-run impacts
is beyond the scope of the paper, we find and report evidence of additional expansion in
economic activity. First, independent census data show that holdings of livestock, and
of buffaloes in particular, increased significantly, and survey data show a 12.8% increase
in land ownership and a 29% increase in borrowing among NREGS-registered households.
This suggests that increasing wages and incomes may have reduced credit constraints and
enabled private investment. Second, using data from the Economic Census conducted a
year after the 2-year-long experiment concluded, we find a 23% increase in the number of
business establishments, and a 35% increase in employment reported by these establishments
in treated mandals (an 8 percentage point increase on a base of 23%). These employment
gains are concentrated in non-agricultural sectors (manufacturing, construction, and retail
trade), perhaps suggestive of structural transformation (see discussion in Section 4.4.2).
   Our analysis has (at least) two important limitations. First, our survey data only cover
NREGS-registered households. This is appropriate, as these are the households that NREGS
was designed to benefit and our focus in this paper is on labor-market GE effects on this
population (who could potentially have been hurt by a reduction in market employment).
But it limits our ability to fully characterize GE effects on the economy. While results using
census data reassure us that overall income, employment, and assets went up, they likely
still mask distributional effects. In particular, higher wages presumably hurt land-owning
employers by reducing their monopsonistic rents, which we do not observe directly. Second,
our labor market data are most detailed for the month of June. This is again by design, since
   5
     As we see below, this result is consistent with households interpreting the initial income shock as tran-
sitory and investing these income gains instead of consuming them.



                                                      4
this is the period of peak NREGS participation, and is thus the period where our experiment
had the greatest relevance for improving NREGS implementation (and for any downstream
impact on labor markets). However, this limits our ability to study the transmission of wage
and employment effects to the rest of the year.
   Our first contribution is to the literature and policy debate on the impact of public works
programs on rural labor markets, incomes and poverty (Imbert and Papp, 2015; Beegle et
al., 2017; Bertrand et al., 2007; Sukhtankar, 2017). In addition to confirming some prior
findings, like the increase in market wages (Imbert and Papp, 2015; Berg et al., 2018; Azam,
2012), our data and methodology allow us to report several new results including significant
gains in income and reduction in poverty, and positive effects on private sector employment.
Taken together, our results suggest that public employment programs can both enhance
economic efficiency and reduce poverty.6
   Second, we contribute to the literature on rural labor markets in developing countries gen-
erally (Rosenzweig, 1978; Jayachandran, 2006; Kaur, 2019), and on the impacts of minimum
wages specifically (e.g. Dinkelman and Ranchhod (2012)). Our results are consistent with
evidence from the US and elsewhere pointing to a lack of large negative employment effects
of raising minimum wages (see Card and Krueger (1994), Cengiz et al. (2019) and Harasztosi
and Lindner (2019), among others). They also add to a growing body of evidence on the
existence of employer market power, including in labor markets that we might expect to be
more competitive than those in rural India: see for example, Dube et al. (2020) for online
labor markets, and (Naidu et al., 2016) for migrant labor markets.
   Third, our results highlight how public options can influence private markets even when
they themselves capture only modest market shares. Critics have argued that the NREGS
could not have meaningfully affected market wages because NREGS work constitutes only
a small share of rural employment (Bhalla, 2013). However, ∼50% of rural households in
AP are registered for NREGS, and 32% actively participated at some point in 2011-12 (in
NSS data). These facts, along with our results on increased reservation wages, suggest that
what matters is not only the NREGS’s “market share”, but also its credibility as an outside
option. Improving this option can in turn raise wages in the private sector, as suggested by
Dreze and Sen (1991); Basu et al. (2009).7
   Fourth, and related, our results highlight the importance of accounting for general equilib-
   6
     We provide a more extended discussion of how our results relate to existing evidence on public employ-
ment programs in India and globally in Section 5.
   7
     In a related vein, Beaudry et al. (2012) show that changes in city-level industrial composition affect
average wages by 3-4 times more than would be expected based on a simple accounting approach, likely
because they affect wage bargaining, and Clemens and Gottlieb (2017) show that Medicare pricing affects
private sector health care prices in the US, despite comprising less than a third of the market.



                                                    5
rium effects in program evaluation (Acemoglu, 2010). Ignoring these effects (say by random-
izing program access at the individual level) would have led to us to sharply underestimate
impacts on rural wages and poverty. Even analyzing our own data while ignoring market
spillovers to control areas would meaningfully understate impacts on wages and employmen-
t. Viewed positively, our study demonstrates the feasibility of conducting experiments with
units of randomization large enough to capture general equilibrium effects (Cunha et al.,
2019; Muralidharan and Niehaus, 2017; Egger et al., 2019).
   Fifth, our results highlight the importance of program implementation quality in devel-
oping countries as a first order issue in and of itself. Our estimates of the wage impacts
of improving NREGS implementation, for example, are about as large as estimates of the
impact of rolling out the program itself (Imbert and Papp, 2015). More generally, in settings
with high corruption and inefficiency, investing in better implementation of a program could
be more cost-effective than spending more on the program as is. For instance, Niehaus and
Sukhtankar (2013b) find that increasing the official NREGS wage had no impact on workers’
program earnings, while we find that improving implementation without increasing program
wages or outlays significantly increased both program and market earnings.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the context, related
literature, and Smartcard intervention. Section 2 describes the research design, data, and
estimation. Section 3 presents our main results on income, wages, and employment. Section
4 explores the roles of labor supply, demand, and market structure as well as longer term
impacts, Section 5 interprets our results in the context of the existing literature, and Section
6 concludes with a discussion of policy implications.


1       Context and intervention
1.1     The NREGS
The NREGS is the world’s largest public employment scheme, entitling any household living
in rural India (i.e. 11% of the world’s population) to up to 100 days per year of guaranteed
paid employment. It is one of the country’s flagship social protection programs, and the
Indian government spent roughly 6.8% of its budget (∼0.5% of GDP) on it in 2011-12.8
Coverage is broad: ∼50% of rural households in Andhra Pradesh were registered for the
program in 2011-12, meaning that they had a jobcard and were therefore legally entitled
to request work at any time. NREGS jobs involve manual labor compensated at statutory
    8
    NREGS spending source: https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/budget2011-2012/ub2011-12/bag/
bag5.pdf, outlays source: https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/budget2011-2012/ub2011-12/bag/bag4.
pdf, both accessed October 1, 2019.


                                               6
piece rates, and are meant to induce self-targeting. NREGS projects typically involve labor-
intensive public infrastructure improvements such as minor irrigation or water conservation
works, minor road construction, and land clearance for cultivation. Projects are proposed
by village-level local governance bodies (Gram Panchayats) and approved by sub-district
(mandal) offices.
   As of 2010, NREGS implementation suffered from several known issues. Rationing was
common even though de jure jobs should be available on demand, with access to work con-
strained both by budgetary allocations and by local capacity to implement projects (Dutta
et al., 2012). Corruption occurred through over-invoicing the government to reimburse wages
for work not actually done and paying workers less than their due, among other methods
(Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2013a,b). Finally, the payment process was slow and unreliable:
payments were time-consuming to collect, and were often unpredictably delayed for over a
month beyond the 14-day period prescribed by law.
   Debate continues over the impacts of the NREGS on a wide range of outcomes (see
Sukhtankar (2017) for a review). For rural incomes, specifically, debate has hinged on the
fact that the scheme accounts for only a small share of rural employment in nationally rep-
resentative surveys (4% across India in 2011). Given this, skeptics argue that it cannot have
played a meaningful role in rural poverty reduction: “how can a small tail wag a very very
large dog?” Bhalla (2013). Others have pointed out that even if it did raise labor incomes by
raising rural wages, this could come at the cost of crowding out private sector employment
(Murgai and Ravallion, 2005). This debate continues to have policy significance as national
and state governments can in practice decide how much to prioritize the scheme by adjusting
fiscal allocations to it.9


1.2     Smartcards
To address the leakage and payments challenges described above, the Department of Rural
Development of the Government of AP introduced a new payments system, which we refer to
as “Smartcards” for short. This involved two major changes. First, the flow of funds shifted
in most cases from government-run post offices to banks, who worked with local partners
(called banking correspondents) to make last-mile payments in cash, typically in the village
itself. Second, the protocol for authenticating when collecting payments changed from one
based on paper documents and ink stamps to one based on biometric authentication. Our
description here is brief; further details are available in MNS.
   In MNS, we show that the Smartcards reform improved NREGS implementation quality
  9
    Work availability fell sharply in the second half of 2016, for example, following a cut in the NREGS
budget : http://thewire.in/75795/mnrega-centre-funds-whatsapp/, accessed November 3, 2016.


                                                   7
on several dimensions. Payments in treated mandals arrived in 29% fewer days, with arrival
dates 39% less varied, and took 20% less time to collect. Households earned more working
on NREGS (24%), and there was a substantial 12.7 percentage point (∼41%) reduction in
leakage (defined as the difference between fiscal outlays and beneficiary receipts). Program
access also improved: both perceived access and actual participation in NREGS increased
(17%). These gains were widely distributed; we find little evidence of heterogenous impacts,
and treatment distributions first order stochastically dominate control distributions for all
outcomes on which there was a significant mean impact. Fiscal outlays, on the other hand,
were unchanged. Overall, Smartcards substantially improved NREGS implementation in
directly measured ways, and made it a more credible option for the rural poor. Reflecting
this, users were strongly in favor of Smartcards, with 90% of households preferring it to the
status quo and only 3% opposed.


1.3     Interpreting Smartcards’ impacts on earnings
Given that Smartcards brought the effective presence of NREGS in treated areas closer
to the intentions of the program’s framers, one might think of them as an instrumental
variable for an abstract, composite measure of “effective NREGS.” In practice, this idea
is difficult to implement because NREGS implementation quality is multi-dimensional and
spans job access and availability, job receipt, wages received net of corruption, and speed
and reliability of payments. Our results are therefore best interpreted as the reduced form
impact of improving NREGS implementation quality on all of these dimensions.
   In addition to NREGS, Smartcards were also used to make payments in the rural social
security pensions (SSP) program. However, improvements in SSP implementation are un-
likely to affect labor markets because the SSP program was targeted to the rural poor who
were not able to work.10 We test and show that treatment did not generate income gains in
households where all adults were eligible for the SSP (see Section 3.2).
   The creation of Smartcard-linked bank accounts could have also affected labor market
outcomes indirectly through promoting financial inclusion. In practice, this was highly un-
likely because (a) the government asked banks to fully disburse NREGS wage payments as
soon as possible and not leave balances in the account, and (b) the accounts had limited
  10
    Specifically, pensions were restricted to those who are Below the Poverty Line (BPL) and either widowed,
disabled, elderly, or had a displaced traditional occupation. The scale and scope of SSP is far narrower than
that of the NREGS: only 7% (as opposed to 49.5%) of rural households are eligible, and the benefit is
modest, with a median and mode of Rs. 200 per month (∼$3, or less than two days earnings for a manual
laborer). Finally, the impact of Smartcards on SSP was much less than on NREGS: we found no changes in
the payments process, and a small reduction of leakage from 6% to 3%, in part because payment delays and
leakage rates were low to begin with.



                                                     8
functionality: they were not connected to the online core banking servers, relied on offline
authentication, and could only be accessed through a single banking correspondent (see Ap-
pendix A.3 in MNS for more details). Reflecting these facts, only 0.3% of households in our
endline survey reported having money in their account.11
  Overall, the Smartcard intervention was run with the primary goal of improving the pay-
ments process and reducing leakage in the NREGS and SSP programs. It was not integrated
into any other program or function either by the government or the private sector. We there-
fore interpret the results that follow as consequences of improving NREGS implementation.


2      Research design
2.1     Randomization
We summarize the randomization design here; MNS provides further details. The experiment
was conducted in eight districts with a combined rural population of around 19 million in
the erstwhile state of Andhra Pradesh (AP).12 To enable an evaluation of the Smartcard
program, the Govt. of AP agreed to randomize the order in which the Smartcard system
was rolled out across mandals (sub-districts). We randomly assigned 296 mandals – with
average population of approximately 62,500 each – to treatment (112), control (45), and
an intermediate “buffer” wave (139).13 Figure A.1 shows the geographical spread and size
of these units. We created the buffer group (Wave 2) to serve as a temporal buffer in
which the government could deploy Smartcards while we conducted endline surveys, after
deploying them in treated mandals and before deploying them in controls, and we did not
collect any survey data in non-study mandals (see Appendix C in MNS for details). We
stratified randomization by district and by a principal component of mandal socio-economic
characteristics.
   Treatment and control mandals are well-balanced on stratification variables, as well as
other mandal characteristics from the census (Table A.1). Differences are significant at the
  11
     Further evidence that opening bank accounts, and even paying NREGS wages into these accounts, is
unlikely on its own to affect labor-force participation is provided by Field et al. (2019), who find that paying
NREGS wages into women’s bank accounts had no impact on their labor supply in Madhya Pradesh, unless
also accompanied by training to women on how to use these accounts (which also led to an increase in
balances maintained in the account). No such training was provided in our setting.
  12
     The 8 study districts are similar to erstwhile AP’s remaining 13 non-urban districts on major socioe-
conomic indicators, including proportion rural, scheduled caste, literate, and agricultural laborers; and
represent all three historically distinct socio-cultural regions (Tables D.1 and D.2 in MNS Online Appendix).
  13
     We dropped 109 of the total 405 mandals prior to randomization, either because the Smartcards program
had already started there or because they were entirely urban and hence had no NREGS. Excluding these 109
mandals does not affect internal validity; they are also similar to the 296 randomized mandals on observables
(see Table D.3 in MNS).


                                                       9
5% level in 2 out of 22 cases. Table A.2 shows balance on focal outcomes for this paper
along with other socio-economic household characteristics from our baseline survey. None
of the 34 variables are significantly different at the 5% level, and 4 out of 34 variables are
significantly different at the 10% level, slightly more than one might expect by chance. In
the analysis below we test the sensitivity to chance imbalances by controlling for (village
means of) baseline outcome values.


2.2     Data
We use data on registered NREGS beneficiaries from original surveys of jobcard holders
conducted during August-September of 2010 (baseline) and 2012 (endline). We designed
these surveys both to understand how Smartcards affected access to NREGS work and
payments, and also how this affected household’s earnings and well-being more broadly. We
measured annual household earnings by category (NREGS, other agricultural labor, other
labor, farm income, business income, and other miscellaneous income) based on annual recall
at the time of the survey. We also asked detailed questions about household members’ labor
market participation, wages, reservation wages, and earnings during June, a month of peak
NREGS participation in Andhra Pradesh.14
   We sampled a panel of 880 villages (technically Gram Panchayats, but the distinction is
not relevant in this case) across 157 mandals in 8 districts, and a repeated cross-section of
NREGS-eligible households from these villages, yielding a target sample of 5,278 households
at endline. Of these we were able to survey 4,943.15 We over-sampled households that
were listed as having recently been paid in order to gain precision in estimating leakage in
MNS.16 We therefore re-weight the observations to make all estimates representative of the
population of jobcard-holding households (who are the ones eligible to work on NREGS).
This population made up 49.5% of rural households in Andhra Pradesh (our calculations
from the NSS Round 68 in 2011-12).
   We verify in MNS that Smartcards did not affect either the size or composition of the sam-
pling frame of jobcard holders, so that treatment effects reported below are not confounded
  14
     The peak NREGS months are May and June during the lean season between harvesting of the winter
crops and planting of the summer/monsoon crops. We focus our detailed measurement on the month of
June because our surveys were conducted in August-September and June was the peak NREGS month for
which respondents could best recall detailed wage, and employment details.
  15
     Of the remaining, 200 were ghost households, while we were unable to survey or confirm the existence
of 135. The corresponding figures for baseline are 5,244; 4,646; 68 and 530 respectively. Note that the totals
we report in MNS differ because they also include a separate sample of pension beneficiaries.
  16
     We sampled a panel of villages but a repeated cross-section of households because of the low auto-
correlation in the household-level likelihood of working on NREGS during our survey periods two years
apart.



                                                     10
by changes in the composition of registered households.17 The sample also likely represents
the entire universe of rural workers employed in agriculture.18 Compared to non-holders,
jobcard-holding households are larger and more likely to belong to historically disadvan-
taged scheduled castes (Table A.3).
   Our survey data are representative of the universe of intended NREGS beneficiaries, and
the main goal of this paper is to study the impact of improving NREGS on the outcomes of
these beneficiaries (including private market wages and employment). Because our survey
data exclude the 50.5% of rural households who are not registered for NREGS, we com-
plement them with three different and entirely independent censuses of income, assets, and
employment conducted by the government.
   The first is the Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC), which provides basic informa-
tion about income for the entire population. The SECC was a nation-wide census conducted
to enable governments to determine which households were “Below the Poverty Line” (BPL)
and thereby eligible for various benefits. The survey collected data on income categories for
the household member with the highest income, the main source of this income, household
landholdings (which we use to construct measures of concentration of land-holdings at the
village level), caste, and education. The SECC was conducted in Andhra Pradesh during
2012 using the layout maps and lists of houses prepared for the regular 2011 Census. The
data include approximately 1.8 million households in our study mandals.
   The second is the Livestock Census of India, a nation-wide census conducted quinquen-
nially by the Government of India, with the 19th round also conducted in Andhra Pradesh
in 2012. The census reports mandal-level headcounts of 13 types of livestock including the
most economically important (e.g. cattle, buffaloes) as well as a number of others. We have
data at the mandal level for all 157 of our study mandals.
   The third is the Economic Census of India, a nation-wide census of enterprises and em-
ployment conducted roughly quinquennially since 1977. It counts enterprises involved in all
non-agricultural economic activities, as well as those agricultural enterprises that are not
involved in crop production and plantation. It collects data on the industrial classification of
the enterprise, number of employees, and demographic details of the owner of the enterprise.
We use data from the sixth round – conducted in 2013 – one year after the experiment was
  17
     This likely reflects the fact that all households who may have wanted to work on NREGS were already
registered for it by 2010 (five years after the launch of the program). The churn in registered households
between the baseline and endline was only 2%, likely reflecting migration and new household formation. See
MNS Appendix C and Tables C.4-C.9 for further details.
  18
     In the NSS, 59% of all workers are part of households that hold a jobcard; in our sampled households,
68% of workers work primarily in agriculture. This suggests that we can account for agricultural workers
representing 59% ∗ 68% = 40% of the workforce, if anything slightly higher than the 2011 census figure of
33% who report primarily working in agriculture.



                                                   11
over, to study longer-term effects of improving NREGS implementation.
   To examine consumer goods prices, we use unit cost data from Round 68 (2011-2012) of
the NSS. Because the overlap between villages in our study mandals and the NSS sample is
limited to 60 villages, we use the NSS data primarily to examine treatment effects on price
levels, for which it is the best available data source.
   To test for effects of improved NREGS on rural public goods, we use data on land under
cultivation and under irrigation from the District Statistical Handbooks (DSH) published
each year by the Govt. of Andhra Pradesh based on data from the Office of the Surveyor
General of India.19 Finally, we use geocoded point locations for each census village from the
2001 Indian Census to construct measures of spatial exposure to treated neighbors.
   Figure 1 summarizes the data sources we use, the recall period that they correspond to,
and the outcomes they cover.


2.3     Estimation strategy
Consider first a simple comparison of outcomes across treatment and control mandals (i.e.
intent-to-treat estimates):

                          Yimd = α + βT reatedmd + δd + λP Cmd + imd                                 (1)

   Here Yimd is an outcome for household or individual i in mandal m and district d,
T reatedmd is an indicator for a treatment group mandal, δd are district fixed effects, and
P Cmd is the first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify
randomization.20 When using survey data, we also report specifications that include (when
                                                                        0
available) the baseline village-level mean of the dependent variable Y pmd to increase precision
and assess sensitivity to any randomization imbalances (recall that we have a village-level
panel and not a household-level one).
   If outcomes for a given unit (household, village, etc.) depend only on the treatment status
of the mandal in which it lives, then β in Equation 1 identifies a well-defined treatment effect.
If improving the NREGS affects labor markets more broadly, however, there is no reason
to expect these effects to be neatly confined within mandals. To the extent markets are
integrated, upward pressure on wages in treated mandals (for example) might affect wages
  19
    Details on data sources for the DSH are at: http://eands.dacnet.nic.in/, accessed March 22, 2016.
  20
    As in MNS, we include the principal component itself rather than fixed effects based on its strata as
treatment status does not vary within a few strata. Hence, the latter approach implies dropping 4% of
the sample. We test for robustness to including fixed effects and dropping these observations, and results
are substantively unchanged. These and other robustness checks are available in an online Appendix (at
Muralidharan et al. (2020)) and are referred to in the rest of the text as “available online”.



                                                   12
in nearby parts of control mandals. In other words, treatment effects will likely depend on
both the own treatment status of a village as well as the fraction of villages around it that
are treated.
  Figure 2 illustrates this conceptually. The difference between the intercepts (βT ) represents
the effect of a village being treated when none of its neighbors are treated, and movement
along the x-axis represents the additional effect of having more neighbors treated. Thus, the
unadjusted intent-to-treat effects, represented by yIT T , captures both the effect of a village
being treated, and the mean difference in the fraction of treated neighbors between treatment
and control villages (xIT T ). The spillover effect, represented by ySP , captures the extent to
which outcomes in the control group are affected by spillovers. These also correspond to the
extent to which ignoring spillovers will understate treatment effects (as shown in a different
setting by Miguel and Kremer (2004)). The adjusted treatment effect, represented by yAT E ,
corrects for this bias, and is the difference in expected outcomes between a village in a treated
mandal with the mean fraction of treated neighbors and a village in a control mandal with
no treated neighbors, which represents the counterfactual outcome had no mandals been
treated.21
  The practical importance of this issue is seen in Figure A.1, where we see that there are
some control mandals (like Clow ) whose neighboring mandals are not treated, while there are
others (like Chigh ) whose neighbors are treated. We therefore need methods to (i) test for
the existence of such spillover effects, and (ii) estimate the average spillover in the control
areas, and (iii) adjust treatment effects for these spillovers.
  As with any such spatial problem, outcomes in each village could in principle be an
arbitrary function of the treatment status of all the other villages. We take a simple and
transparent approach, modeling spillovers as a linear function of the fraction ÑpR of villages
within a radius R of panchayat p and within a different mandal which were assigned to
treatment.22 We exclude villages from the same mandal as panchayat p in this calculation
in order to ensure that our measure of spillovers is exogenous conditional on own-mandal
treatment assignment.23 Figure A.2 illustrates the construction of this measure.24 Table
  21
     It is also possible to estimate a “Total Treatment Effect” (yT T E in the Figure) that extrapolates to
estimate the total treatment effect if all mandals are treated compared to one where none are treated. We
do not focus on yT T E since it requires extrapolation beyond the coverage induced by the experiment.
  22
     We use a linear function both because it is the most natural functional form for spillovers, and because
higher-order terms are never significant.
  23
     To see the issue, note that within a treated mandal a village closer to the center of the mandal will tend
to have higher values of NpR , as more of their neighbors are from the same mandal and fewer from other
mandals. The opposite pattern will hold in control mandals. Thus, we cannot interpret a coefficient on NpR
as solely a measure of spillover effects without making the additional assumption that the direct effects of
treatment are unrelated to location. Merfeld (2019) finds intra-district differences in wages as a function of
distance to the district border, suggesting that this assumption may not hold.
  24
     We drop non-study mandals from both the numerator and denominator in constructing the measure of

                                                      13
A.4 reports tests showing that our outcomes of interest are balanced with respect to these
measures at baseline.
  To test and adjust for spillovers, we estimate

                                                  R
                        Yipmd = α + βT Tmd + βN Ñpmd + δd + λP Cmd + imd                                  (2)

Here βT captures the effect of being in a treated mandal and βN the effect of having a higher
fraction of neighboring mandals (excluding your own mandal) who are treated. The average
total treatment effects experienced by treatment and control mandals respectively are

                                                  ¯ and β̄ = β · Ñ
                                 β̄T = βT + βN · Ñ               ¯                                         (3)
                                                    T     C   N     C


   The choice of a radius R is inherently somewhat arbitrary. We set R = 20, which is
roughly the distance a worker could commute by bicycle in one hour at a speed of 20 km
/ hour, and then examine sensitivity to alternative radii (ranging from 10km to 30km) in
Table A.7. Effects could of course propagate beyond the distance over which any single actor
is willing to arbitrage as changes in one market ripple on to the next. We do not estimate
the decay of spillover effects with distance as we lack the power to separately estimate effects
within various bands.
   For wage and employment outcomes, we present estimates for the ITT effects, spillover
effects, and the adjusted treatment effects. We focus on spillover-adjusted estimates for
wages and employment because data for these were collected in the month of June, which
is during the peak period of NREGS (see Figure A.3) and the time of the year when the
Smartcards intervention was most relevant for improving NREGS and for affecting the labor
market. For outcomes based on annual recall (such as income and assets) where we are
underpowered to detect spillovers, we focus on the ITT estimates in the text and present
spillover-adjusted estimates in the Appendix for completeness.
   For outcomes in our survey data we use standard asymptotic inference clustered at the
mandal level. When we report estimates that adjust for cross-mandal spillovers, we also
report (Conley, 2008) standard errors which allow for spatial autocorrelation in the error
term.25 For outcomes in census data we calculate standard errors using randomization
spatial exposure (since we have no data in these mandals). We treat villages assigned to mandals in the
buffer group as untreated in our default specification because treatment rolled out in these mandals much
later than in the treatment group. We also test robustness to excluding the buffer group from both the
numerator and denominator and results are qualitatively unchanged (available online).
   25
      Spatial autocorrelation is unlikely to be a concern for inference on direct treatment effects as treatment
is spatially negatively autocorrelated by design (as randomization is stratified geographically), but could be
for inference on neighborhood measures which are positively autocorrelated.



                                                      14
inference.26 Regressions using census data are unweighted, while those using survey samples
are weighted by inverse sampling probabilities to be representative of the universe of jobcard-
holders. When using survey data on wages and earnings we trim the top 0.5% of observations
in both treatment and control groups to remove outliers, but all results are robust to including
them (available online).


3      Results
3.1     Effects on earnings and poverty
We start by reporting impacts on income and poverty using census data. Panel (a) of Table
1 reports experimental estimates of impact on income categories in the SECC data, showing
marginal effects from logistic regressions27 for each category individually and an ordered
logistic regression across all categories. The lowest, middle, and highest income categories
correspond to households where the highest-earner reports monthly earnings below Rs. 5,000,
between Rs. 5,000 and Rs. 10,000, and greater than Rs. 10,000, respectively. Treatment
led to 4.1 percentage points fewer households in the lowest income category (a 4.9% reduc-
tion on a base of 83%), 2.6 percentage points more households in the middle category (a
20% increase on a base of 13%), and 1.4 percentage points more households in the highest
category (a 36.8% increase on a base of 3.8%). Using an ordered logit specification, we see
that treatment significantly increased the log-odds ratio of being in a higher income catego-
ry. All estimates using SECC data are unaltered by controls for (arguably predetermined)
demographic characteristics such as age of household head, caste, and literacy.
   The SECC data let us test for income effects in the entire population, but have two
limitations when it comes to estimating magnitudes. First, much information is lost through
discretization: the 4.1% reduction in the share of households in the lowest category which we
observe does not reveal the magnitude of their income increase. Second, because the SECC
only captures the earnings of the top income earner in each household, it is possible that it
over- or under-states effects on overall household earnings.
   We therefore turn to our survey data, which are representative of the households registered
for NREGS (comprising half the rural population), for a better sense of magnitudes of
impact on the population that the program aimed to serve. Columns 1 and 2 of Panel (b)
  26
     Our randomization and sampling procedures were such that we cannot use randomization inference for
survey outcomes. We first assigned mandals to treatment, control, and non-study groups and then sampled
within treatment and control mandals. Re-randomization typically assigns to treatment or control some of
the non-study mandals for which we have no survey data.
  27
     Using probits or linear probability model makes no qualitative or significant quantitative difference to
the results (available online).


                                                     15
of Table 1 report estimated impacts on annual household income, with and without controls
for the mean income in the same village at baseline. In both specifications we estimate
that treatment increased annual income by over Rs. 8,700. This is a large effect, equal to
12.7% of the control group mean or 17.9% of the national expenditure-based rural poverty
line for a family of 5 in 2011-12, which was Rs. 48,960 (Government of India, Planning
Commission, 2013). Of course, expenditure- and income-based poverty lines may differ and
this comparison is illustrative only. But if these lines were taken as equivalent, we estimate
a 4.9 percentage point or 17.4% reduction in poverty for the universe of potential NREGS
beneficiaries (Figure A.4).


3.2     Direct versus indirect effects on earnings
In an accounting sense, the effects on earnings and poverty we find on NREGS jobcard holders
in the survey data above must work through some combination of increases in households’
earnings from the NREGS itself and increases in their non-program (i.e. private sector)
earnings. We examine this decomposition using our survey data, which includes measures
of six income categories: NREGS, agricultural labor income, other physical labor income,
income from own farm, income from own business, and miscellaneous income (which includes
all remaining sources, including salaried income).
   Columns 3-8 of Panel (b) of Table 1 report treatment effects on various income categories
separately. Earnings in most categories increase, with significant gains in wage labor – both
agricultural and other. Effects on own farm earnings (which include earnings from livestock)
are positive but insignificant. NREGS earnings increase modestly (p = 0.12) and the increase
in annual NREGS earnings is consistent with treatment effects on weekly NREGS earnings
reported in MNS (estimated during the peak NREGS period).28 Overall, the increase in
NREGS income accounts for only 10% of the increase in total earnings (proportional to the
share of NREGS in control group income). Nearly 90% of the income gains are attributable
to non-NREGS earnings, with the primary driver being an increase in earnings from market
labor, both in the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors.
   Data from the control group help clarify why increases in NREGS earnings on their own
  28
    In MNS, we report a significant increase in weekly earnings of Rs. 35/week during the seven weeks
corresponding to the peak NREGS season. Average weekly NREGS earnings per year are 49.6% of the
average weekly NREGS earnings in these seven weeks (calculated using official payment records in the
control mandals as shown in Figure A.3). Thus, the annualized treatment effect on NREGS earnings should
be Rs. 35 × 52 weeks × 0.496 or Rs. 903/year, which is exactly in line with the Rs. 914 measured in the
annual recall data reported in Table 1. However, the results here are marginally insignificant (p = 0.12)
compared to the significant ones in MNS, likely due to the lower precision of annual recall data compared to
the more precise data collected for the seven-week reference period in MNS, with job cards on hand to aid
recall.


                                                    16
are unlikely to make a meaningful impact on poverty. NREGS earnings specifically account
for just 7% of control group earnings, compared to 93% from other sources (which is broadly
consistent with nationally representative statistics, in which the NREGS is a relatively small
source of employment). Even a 19% increase in NREGS income as we find, would only
increase total income by 1.3%. In contrast, the average household earns roughly 1/3 of its
income from wage labor, primarily in agriculture, and 1/3 from self-employment activities,
also primarily in agriculture. Thus, the effect of improving NREGS on market wages and
employment is likely to be a much more important channel of overall impact on rural incomes
(as we show below).
   Figure A.4 plots the empirical CDF of household earnings for treatment and control groups
in our survey data. We see income gains throughout the distribution, with the treatment
income distribution in the treatment group first-order stochastically dominating that in the
control group. The broad-based gains seen in the universe of NREGS jobcard holders are
also seen in the SECC data representing the full population.
   We test for differential treatment effects in our survey data by measures of household vul-
nerability using a linear interaction specification (Table A.5). We find no differential impacts
by caste or education, suggesting broad-based income gains consistent with Figure A.4. We
also see that the treatment effects on earnings are not seen for households who are less like-
ly to work (those headed by widows or those eligible for social security pensions), thereby
corroborating the point that increased labor market earnings were the key channel for the
overall income gains we find. Overall, increases in earnings were broad-based across cate-
gories of households who were registered for the NREGS, but did not accrue to households
whose members were unable to work.
   We next examine the drivers of private sector labor earnings gains – in particular, wages
and employment.

3.2.1   Wages

To examine wage effects we use our survey data for the month of June 2012, the peak NREGS
period, for which we collected detailed data on wages and employment for all survey respon-
dents (the SECC does not include wage information). We define the dependent variable as
the average daily wage earned on private-sector work across all respondents who report a
private-sector wage. We report results for the full sample of workers reporting a wage, with
checks for robustness with respect to sample composition in Section 4.5 below.
   The naive ITT (comparing means across treatment and control mandals) suggests a sig-
nificant increase of Rs. 7.9 in daily market wages (Table 2), equal to 6.4% of the control
group mean. By itself, this is slightly larger than the highest estimates of the market-wage

                                              17
impacts of the rollout of the NREGS itself as reported by Imbert and Papp (2015).
   In addition, we find robust evidence of spillover effects on market wages, consistent in sign
with the direct effects (Column 1, Table 2). The coefficient βN is statistically significant
and slightly larger in magnitude than βT , the impact of own treatment status.29 In other
words, going from having no neighbors treated to having all neighboring villages treated is
as important as having your own mandal treated. These results provide independent corrob-
oration of the evidence from the ITT specifications using a distinct source of experimental
variation (i.e. variation in neighbors’ as opposed to own treatment status), with the main
and spillover results both rejecting the null of no effect in the same direction.
   As seen in Figure 2, the spillovers to the control group will bias the naive ITT effects
downwards. We estimate that the mean effect of the reform on control mandals was a
significant Rs. 5.1 increase in wages (multiplying βN of 11 by 0.45, which is the mean value
of ÑCp ), which is 65% of the naive ITT estimate). Adjusting the naive ITT for this downward
bias, we estimate an adjusted treatment effect on the treatment group of Rs. 13, or 10.5%
of the control group mean. Note that standard errors for adjusted effects on this and other
wage and employment outcomes are slightly smaller when we use the method of (Conley,
2008), so that the default clustered standard errors are likely conservative.
   Our data on wages and employment are for the month of June, since this is a peak month
of NREGS, and the period when our experiment had the greatest relevance for improving
NREGS implementation. However, our income results are based on annual data and so a
natural question is to ask whether the wage increases in June spilled over to the rest of
the year even when NREGS activity was much lower. While we do not have detailed data
on wages by month, we conducted interviews with village leaders, where we asked them to
report the “going wage rate” for each month of the year. Figure A.5 plots impacts on this
measure by month. The estimates are imprecise (since we have only one data point per
village-month), but suggest that there were also temporal spillovers in wage gains from peak
NREGS months (May and June) to the rest of the year.30
   This pattern is consistent with several (non mutually exclusive) interpretations. First,
while not much NREGS work appears to have been done during the end of the year (Figure
A.3), almost all study villages had at least one NREGS project active for a majority of
2012, with availability dropping to a low of 40-50% of villages towards the end of the year
(Figure A.5). Thus NREGS may still have been a viable outside option in many villages
even outside the peak season. Second, wages may also be linked across time due to various
  29
      We examine in Table A.6 whether βN differs for villages in treated as opposed to control mandals. We
find evidence of spillovers in both cases and never reject that these are equal.
   30
      A similar pattern is seen in Imbert and Papp (2015), who also find positive but imprecise wage impacts
in the “rainy season” amounting to 61% of the dry season impact (which is the estimate they also focus on).


                                                    18
forms of nominal rigidity, including concerns for fairness (Kaur, 2019) and labor tying over
the agricultural cycle (Bardhan, 1983; Mukherjee and Ray, 1995). The latter literature in
particular suggests that landlords who provide insurance in the lean season pay lower wages
in the peak season.31 In these models, better NREGS availability and higher market wages
in the lean season would imply a reduced need for insurance from landlords and a resulting
higher wage in the peak (non-NREGS) season.

3.2.2    Employment and Migration

Next, we examine treatment effects on employment in June. We classify days spent during
the month of June into three categories: days spent idle or doing unpaid work, days spent
working on the NREGS, and days spent working in the private sector.
   We find a significant decrease in days spent idle, with impacts coming from both own
treatment status as well as spillovers (Table 2). The spillover effect is significant and larger
in magnitude than the effect of the village’s own treatment status. The adjusted treatment
effect is 2.4 days, or 13.3% of the control group mean.
   The decrease in days spent idle appears to have been reallocated across both NREGS
work32 and private sector work, with significant adjusted treatment effects on both outcomes
(Columns 4 and 5).33 NREGS work increases by 28.8%, consistent with the increases in
NREGS payments and access we find in MNS.
   We also find significant positive effects on private sector employment, with an adjusted
treatment effect of 20% of the control mean. As in the case of wages, the spillover results are
directionally similar to the main effects, which provides an independent exogenous source of
validation of the main results. Specifically, the ITT estimates use the exogenous variation
induced by random assignment of mandals to a binary treatment or control status. However,
the spillover estimates use the continuous variation induced by the (also exogenously deter-
mined) fraction of neighboring mandals that were treated. Thus, the directional similarity
of the naive ITT and the spillover effects reinforce the finding that the effects of improv-
  31
     One common way in which this insurance is provided is through loans in the lean season, with “interest”
collected in the form of lower wages in the peak season (Mukherjee and Ray, 1995).
  32
     Note that in Table 5 of MNS, we report impacts on the extensive margin of whether a household worked
on NREGS (and find a significant positive impact in treated areas) because our main concern there was with
impact on access to work. Here we focus on decomposing total change in employment across NREGS and
market labor, and hence present results on average days worked.
  33
     Note that the number of observations for days worked on NREGS is larger: This is because we can impute
zero time spent working on the NREGS in June for individuals who reported never working on NREGS. We
do not impute missing values for private-sector work. Response rates for private-sector work do not differ
by treatment status (Table A.13), and the results are unchanged if we restrict attention to respondents for
whom we observe all three – NREGS work, private work, idle/unpaid work – outcomes (available online)




                                                    19
ing NREGS implementation are positive on both market wages and employment.34 It also
highlights that not correcting for spillovers can lead to incorrect estimation and inference
regarding impacts on both wages and employment.35
   Finally, we examine impacts on labor allocation through migration. Our survey asked
two questions about migration for each family member: whether or not they spent any
days working outside of the village in the last year, and if so how many such days. Table
A.11 reports effects on each measure. We estimate a small and insignificant increase in
migration on both the extensive and intensive margins. Spillover effects are also positive
but generally not statistically significant. As our migration questions may fail to capture
permanent migration, we also examine impacts on household size and again find no significant
difference. These results are consistent with the existence of countervailing forces that may
offset each other: higher rural wages may make migration less attractive (Imbert and Papp,
2019), while higher rural incomes make it easier to finance the search costs of migration
(Bryan et al., 2014; Bazzi, 2017).


3.3     Effects on consumer goods prices
The earnings results above show impacts on nominal, and not real, earnings. Since Smart-
cards affected local factor (i.e. labor) prices, they could also have affected the prices of
local final goods, and thus the overall price level facing consumers, if local markets were not
sufficiently well-integrated into larger product markets.
  To test for impacts on consumer goods prices we use data from the 68th round of the NSS.
The survey contains detailed household × item-level data on expenditure and number of
units purchased for a sample representative at the state and sector level (rural and urban).
The data cover over 300 goods and services in categories including food, fuel, clothing, rent
and other fees or services over mixed reference periods varying from a week to a year. We
define unit costs as the ratio of expenditure to units purchased, restricting the analysis to
goods that have precise measures of unit quantities (e.g. kilogram or liter) and dropping
goods that likely vary a great deal in quality (e.g. clothes and shoes). We then test for price
impacts in two ways. First, we define a price index Pvd equal to the price of purchasing
  34
      Our focus in this paper is on household-level economic outcomes and not on intra-household heterogene-
ity. For completeness, we examine heterogeneity of wage and employment effects by gender. Point estimates
of the impacts on female wages are lower than those on male wages, but not significantly so. On employment,
the increase in days worked is always greater for men than for women, but the differences are not always
significant (available online).
   35
      The finding that increasing the effective presence of a public employment program increased not only
market wages but also market employment differs from existing evidence to date, which typically finds
crowd-out of private employment by public employment. This divergence is likely explained by important
differences in study design, empirical strategy, and data; we discuss these in Section 5.


                                                    20
the mean bundle of goods in the control group, evaluated at local village prices, following
Deaton and Tarozzi (2000):
                                                        n
                                                        X
                                                Pvd =         q̄cd p̃cv                                         (4)
                                                        c=1

  Here q̄cd is the estimated average number of units of commodity c in panchayats in control
areas of district d, and p̃cv is the median unit cost of commodity c in village v. Conceptually,
treatment effects on this quantity can be thought of as analogous to the “compensating
variation” that would be necessary to enable households to continue purchasing their old
bundle of goods at the (potentially) new prices.
  The set of goods for which non-zero quantities are purchased varies widely across house-
holds and, to a lesser extent, across villages. To ensure that we are picking up effects on
prices (rather than compositional effects on the basket of goods purchased), we initially
restrict attention to goods purchased at least once in every village in our sample. The draw-
back of this approach is that it excludes roughly 40% of the expenditure per village in our
sample. We therefore also present a complementary set of results in which we calculate (4)
using all available data. In addition, we report results using (the log of) unit cost defined at
the household-commodity level as the dependent variable and including all available data.
While these later specifications potentially blur together effects on prices with effects on the
composition of expenditure, they do not drop any information.
  Regardless of method, we find little evidence of impacts on price levels (Table 3). The
point estimates are small and insignificant and, when we use the full information available,
precise enough to rule out effects as large as those we found earlier for wages.36 These results
suggest that the treated areas are sufficiently well-integrated into product markets for the
most commonly consumed goods (like food grains) that higher local wages and incomes did
not affect average prices. Alternatively, they are also consistent with the finding (see below)
that household consumption did not go up significantly (since they seem to have treated
the income gain as temporary and saved or invested most of it), which may have limited
potential upward pressure on prices. Overall, the lack of impact on prices suggests that the
increases in wages and income we find are real and not just nominal.
  36
    The R2 values reported in Table 3 are close to 1. This is because the village-level regressions (in Columns
1 and 2) rely on just 60 observations, and district fixed effects account for a substantial extent of the variation.
Similarly, most of the variation in the item × household level regression (Column 3) is accounted for by item
fixed effects.




                                                        21
4      Understanding labor market impacts
We turn next to changes in labor supply and demand that may explain the pattern of
wage and employment impacts described above, along with other longer-term impacts and
robustness checks.


4.1     Labor supply
One mechanism that could contribute to the increased wages we find is labor market com-
petition: a (better-run) public employment guarantee may improve the outside option for
workers, shifting the curve describing the supply of labor to the private sector inwards and
thus driving up wages.37 Theoretical models emphasize this mechanism (Ravallion, 1987;
Basu et al., 2009), and it has motivated earlier work on NREGS wage impacts (e.g. Imbert
and Papp (2015)), but prior work has not been able to directly test this hypothesis. Specifi-
cally, since prior work only has data on market wages, it has not been possible to distinguish
shifts in labor supply and labor demand.
   We are able to test for a shift in labor supply using data on reservation wages that we
elicited in our survey. Specifically, we asked respondents if in the month of June they would
have been “willing to work for someone else for a daily wage of Rs. X,” where X started
at Rs. 20 (15% of average wage) and increased in Rs. 5 increments until the respondent
agreed. One advantage of this measure is that it applies to everyone, and not only to those
who actually worked. Respondents appeared to understand the question, with 98% of those
who worked reporting reservation wages less than or equal to the wages they actually earned
(Table A.13).
   We find that treatment significantly increased workers’ reservation wages by approximately
Rs. 5.5, or 5.7% of the control group mean (Table 2, columns 1-2). The increase in reservation
wage in treated areas provides direct evidence that making NREGS a more appealing option
would have required private employers to raise wages to attract workers.
   Further, consistent with NREGS improvements from Smartcards not taking place in con-
trol mandals, we find no significant spillover effect on reservation wages. The coefficient on
fraction of neighboring villages treated is small and not statistically significant (Table 2, col-
umn 2). However, while we find no evidence of spatial spillovers on reservation wages, we do
find strong evidence of such spillovers on market wages. This suggests that reservation wages
respond to NREGS improvements in the same village (which now provide a more credible
  37
     In the extreme, if all jobs were perfectly substitutable and the NREGS wage were constant, the supply
of labor to the private sector at any lower wage would fall to zero. In this case the effect of competition with
NREGS on private sector labor markets is equivalent to the effect of an enforced minimum wage.



                                                      22
outside option), but are not affected by the number of treated villages in the neighborhood.
However, market wages face more upward pressure when a larger fraction of workers in the
neighborhood are treated.
  The labor supply response to the improved outside option helps explain our wage results,
but on its own an inward shift in supply would clearly lead to lower employment. Below we
explore explanations for why employment may have increased.


4.2     Employer market power
As seen above, an improved NREGS may increase workers’ bargaining power with employers
by providing them with a more credible outside option.38 If labor markets were competitive,
this should lead to a reduction in market employment. However, if labor markets in rural
Andhra Pradesh were oligopsonistic to begin with, then such a wage increase could also lead
to an increase in employment.
   Figure 3 provides a simple sketch of this argument. When employers do not have market
power and are price takers, a (binding) increase in reservation wages would lead to an increase
in market wages and a reduction in employment. However,, when employers do have market
power, they will ration employment relative to competitive markets and keep wages below the
marginal product of labor to maximize their rents. In such a setting, an improvement in the
outside option measured by the reservation wage (or enforcement of a minimum wage above
the monopsonistic equilibrium) will still exert upward pressure on wages but can result in
an increase rather than a decrease in employment (see Manning (2003) for a more extended
discussion).
   We find evidence consistent with the existence of employer market power in our setting.
Using household level data from the SECC, we construct a normalized Herfindahl-Hirschman
index (HHI) of land holdings at the village level as a measure of land concentration.39 . We
also use an alternative measure of village-level land concentration based only on concentra-
tion among households with more than 1 acre of land, since those with landholdings less
than an acre are highly unlikely to employ private sector labor. On both measures, we find
that villages with a higher level of land concentration have lower levels of employment, and
we find a significantly greater positive effect on employment in these villages when they are
  38
     Note that an increase in worker bargaining power does not have to lead to higher wages through direct
negotiation. If their participation constraint goes up (as seen by the increased reservation wages), landlords
will need to raise wages simply to get workers to show up.
  39
                                             PN
     We calculate the HHI as follows: Hp = i=1 s2i , where s is the share of the village’s land owned by each
household i in village p, and N is the total number of households in the village. We then normalize H to
                  Hp − N1p
arrive at Hp∗ =   1− N1p




                                                     23
treated (Table 4, Panel (a), Columns 3 and 6). Both facts (the negative coefficient on em-
ployment on H ∗ and the positive coefficient on T ×H ∗ ) are consistent with monopsonistic
labor markets.40
   To better interpret the magnitudes of these effects, we also present the results for a stan-
dardized version of H ∗ (normalized to mean zero, and standard deviation of one) in Panel
(b). Treated villages whose land concentration is a standard deviation above the mean had
0.5 to 0.6 days of additional private-sector employment (Table 4, Panel (b)). The estimates
in Panel (b) also allow us to account for the possibility that the intervention changed land
concentration (which is a concern since the SECC data were collected after the intervention).
We do this by standardizing the HHI separately within treatment and control groups for the
results reported in Table 4, Panel (b). Thus, the results can be interpreted as showing the
differential treatment effects on employment at the same level of relative land concentration
within the treatment and control groups. Finally, we also verify that the treatment did not
affect land concentration: the mean difference in HHI is 0.0001, p = 0.9 (table available
online).
   This measure of land concentration is likely to understate the extent of employers’ market
power. For instance, as suggested by Anderson et al. (2015), land-holders of the same caste
(jati ) may collude quite effectively, making land-holdings more concentrated than measured
by the HHI on household-level landholdings. Unfortunately, data on jati in the SECC has
not been released by the Government of India. Yet, despite the likely understatement of
market power, this measure of concentration alone can explain nearly 35% of the positive
effects on employment we find. The mean HHI in our data is 0.029, and the coefficient on
the interaction with treatment is 6.5 (Table 4, Panel (a), Column 6). Multiplying the 2 gives
us 0.19 which is 35% of the ITT effect on employment of 0.54.41


4.3     Labor demand
A potentially contributing factor to increases in both wages and employment is an increase
in labor demand (i.e. an outward shift of the demand curve). Since we find an increase in
days worked on the NREGS in MNS, one plausible mechanism of such an increase in demand
would be an increase in productivity-augmenting public assets created under NREGS (such
  40
      The negative coefficient on employment on H ∗ is only a correlation across villages, but it is consistent
with employers having market power. The key test of monopsony is that an exogenous increase in the
reservation wage will lead to an increase in market employment when employers have greater market power
(proxied by land concentration in this case), and this is what we find evidence of. Predictions on whether
the change in market wage will be higher under monopsony are less clear. Consistent with this, we do not
find a differential impact on market wage as a function of land concentration (Table C.6).
   41
      We do not extend this analysis to include spillovers due to the additional complexity of accounting for
differential concentration of land-holdings in neighboring villages.

                                                      24
as roads, irrigation canals, etc).
   However, none of the evidence we have supports this conjecture, and some simple calcula-
tions based on an illustrative model suggest that the asset creation channel was likely to be
small. First, we find no changes in the number and composition of NREGS projects reported
across treatment and control mandals (Table A.15). While we do not have independent
measures of assets created, we can directly test for productivity gains by examining changes
in land utilization, which might result from land improvements or minor irrigation works.
We do not see effects on the amount of land sown or on the total area irrigated (Table A.16),
ruling out effect sizes larger than 16% and 10%, respectively. Finally, Appendix B shows that
the assets created would have to be implausibly large to generate the wage and employment
results: in short, the entire capital stock in treated areas would have to increase by 28%,
while even the most generous assumptions suggest an increase on the order of 1%.42
   A second plausible mechanism is an increase in aggregate demand through increased N-
REGS income. However, the government did not spend any more money in treated areas
(MNS), and although more money made it into the hands of workers as opposed to corrupt
officials, the magnitudes are too small for this channel to be important. Even, in the extreme
case where the MPC from additional NREGS income for workers is 1 and that of interme-
diate officials is zero, the total increase in NREGS earnings in treated areas is only 1.3% of
the control mean (Table 2), which is unlikely to create much additional demand.
   A more plausible aggregate demand channel is that the initial increase in labor market
income may have further augmented labor demand through an increase in demand for locally-
produced products. However, we find no evidence of this mechanism during the 2-year
horizon of our study. In particular, we see no increases in household consumption spending
in our surveys that would point to this mechanism. Table A.14 shows estimated impacts on
household expenditure on both frequently (Columns 1 & 2) and infrequently (Columns 3 &
4) purchased items from our survey. Both estimates are small and statistically insignificant.
However, the consumption results are not very precisely estimated, because expenditure
was not a focus of our household survey.43 Thus, though the point estimates are close to
zero, we cannot rule an 8% increase in expenditure on frequently purchased items or a 15%
increase in spending on infrequently purchased items. In Column 5 we use monthly per capita
  42
      In brief, we (generously) assume that the 24% increase in payments received by workers we find in MNS
is the increase in NREGS asset creation; we estimate that NREGS capital formation during 2010-12 is 4%
of all capital stock (using NREGS budget and National Accounts data); multiplying the two gives us the
total increase in capital stock due to the intervention as 0.96%.
   43
      The entire expenditure module in our survey was a single page covering 26 categories of expenditure;
for comparison, the analogous NSS consumer expenditure module is 12 pages long and covers 23 categories
of cereals alone. The survey design reflects our focus on measuring leakage in NREGS earnings and impacts
on earnings from deploying Smartcards.



                                                    25
expenditure as measured by the NSS, which gives us a far smaller sample but arguably a
more comprehensive measure of expenditure. The estimated treatment effect is positive and
insignificant, but again imprecise, and we cannot rule out a 16% increase in expenditure
(consistent with a marginal propensity to consume ranging from 0 to 1, and hence not very
informative).
   We also do not see increases in the consumer goods prices that would transmit a demand
shock to producers and ultimately to labor markets. Finally, the large increase in market
wages we document are also inconsistent with a Keynesian aggregate-demand channel driven
by slack labor demand or by other models of involuntary unemployment at a given market
wage. In these models, increases in labor demand would typically increase employment
without increasing wages, which is not what we see.
   To summarize, we find no direct evidence of an increase in labor demand with most relevant
point estimates being close to zero. However, given the confidence intervals, we cannot rule
out the possibility that increases in labor demand had at least some role to play in increasing
both wages and employment.


4.4     Longer-run effects
The main focus of this paper is on studying the labor market GE effects of improving NREGS
implementation, and the overall impact of the reform on income and poverty. However, the
resulting increase in incomes of the rural poor are likely to have further cascading effects on
overall economic activity. In this section, we present additional results that are consistent
with an overall expansion of economic activity in treated areas.

4.4.1   Credit and assets

Our survey collected information on two asset categories: liquid savings and land-ownership.
We find positive estimated effects on both measures (Table 5a, Panel (a)), with the effect
on land-ownership significant; treatment increased the share of households that owned some
land by 4.9 percentage points, or 8.3%. We also see a 16% increase in total borrowing,
which could reflect crowding-in of borrowing to finance asset purchases. Importantly, this is
driven entirely by increases in informal borrowing, with no increase in borrowing from formal
financial institutions, consistent with the fact that Smartcards were not a viable means of
accessing financial services beyond NREGS and pension benefits (Table A.17).
   After land, livestock is typically the most important asset category for low-income house-
holds in rural India, and a relatively easy one to adjust as a buffer stock. We test for effects
on livestock holdings using data from the Government of India’s 2012 Livestock Census. The


                                              26
Census reports estimated numbers of 13 different livestock categories; in Table 5b we report
impacts on the 7 categories for which the average control mandal has at least 100 animal-
s. We find positive impacts on five of the seven livestock categories, including substantial
increases in the number of buffaloes (p = 035). A Wald test of joint significance across the
livestock categories rejects the null of no impacts (p = 0.04). The 21% increase in buffalo
holdings is especially striking since these are among the highest-returning livestock asset in
rural India, but often not accessible to the poor because of the upfront costs of purchasing
them (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1993).
   Overall, we see positive impacts on holdings of arguably the two most important invest-
ment vehicles available to the poor (land and livestock). This is consistent with the view
that households saved some or all of the increased earnings they received due to Smartcards,
and acquired productive assets in the process.44

4.4.2    Non-agricultural employment

Over time, as households see the increases in labor market income as permanent, they are
likely to spend this additional income. Combined with the increases in productive assets
this may, over time, result in increased economic activity overall. We use data from the 2013
Economic Census – three years after the start of the intervention, and one year after the
end of the experiment – to examine this possibility. The Economic Census surveys every
single nonfarm establishment, capturing data on the type of activity as well as number of
employees. Since 40% of control villages had been exposed to the Smartcards intervention by
2013 (as compared to 87% of treatment), these results should be interpreted as the longer-
term effects of the two additional years of exposure to Smartcards during the experimental
study period (2010-2012) as well as the differential exposure in the year after the experiment
(2012-13).
   We find significant increases in treatment areas of 23% in the number of enterprises and
35% in the number of employees (Table 6). These results hold with and without controls for
the 2005 Economic Census, as well as the total working population from the 2011 Population
Census. Since the average working age population in a mandal is 29,600, and the average
number of employees in the control mandals is 6,797, this represents an 8 percentage point
increase in non-agricultural employment on a base of 23%.
   Studying the reasons for these long-term increases in overall economic activity is beyond
the scope of this paper, which aims to study the contemporaneous labor-market GE effect-
  44
    This result also suggests that focusing solely on consumption as a measure of welfare (as is common
in household surveys) may have missed the full picture and concluded that there was no effect of improv-
ing NREGS implementation, when in fact, there was a considerable increase in income which was being
invested/saved.

                                                  27
s of a well-implemented public employment program. Yet, these increases in longer-term
non-agricultural employment are consistent with the idea that exogenous wage increases in
low-income settings can promote a structural transformation. These results are for exam-
ple consistent with the “big push” model of development developed by Magruder (2013)
where a mandated increase in the wages of the rural poor drives coordination on a modern-
izing, higher-investment equilibrium. They are also consistent with higher wages inducing
productivity-enhancing mechanization as shown in the case of the US by Hornbeck and
Naidu (2014). Understanding this channel better is an important topic for future research.


4.5    Robustness
We run a number of robustness tests. These include, amongst others, (i) alternative choices
of sample (e.g. restricting to only those of working age, or only NREGS workers) (ii) selec-
tion/composition effects on those who report work (or wages), including weighting wages by
number of days worked and (iii) spillover-adjusted estimates for all outcome data.
   The alternative sample choices do not qualitatively change any of our wage and employ-
ment results, and we can also show no significant composition/selection effects on those who
report work (available online). The spillovers are almost always in the same direction as the
main ITT effects, but are typically not significant for the outcomes based on annual data or
for outcomes that are stocks and not flows (income results in Tables A.8 and A.9), migration
(Table A.11), price (Table A.10) and savings, credit, and assets (Table A.12). This is not
surprising since the experiment was most powered to detect effects on NREGS and labor
markets during the peak period of NREGS itself (which is why our surveys collected data
on wages and employment for June).


5     Discussion
Our results add to previous work on the impacts of workfare programs around the world as
well as the impacts of the NREGS in particular.
   Relative to work outside of India, a key contribution is the scale of the experimental
variation we study. Two well-identified studies have estimated zero or negative effects on
income, for example, but because they vary access to public employment at the individual as
opposed to the regional level they are not able to estimate effects on private sector wages and
employment and thus the total effects these interventions would have had if implemented
at scale (Bertrand et al., 2007; Beegle et al., 2017). Our results suggest that these indirect
effects contribute critically to the overall income effects of the NREGS, accounting for 90%


                                              28
of total income gains.
   Relative to work on the NREGS specifically, we make contributions in both identification
and measurement. Existing work (reviewed in Sukhtankar (2017)) has sought to exploit
the phased initial rollout of the program during 2006-2008 for identification in one way
or another. However, both difference-in-differences and regression discontinuity approaches
based on this rollout have limitations.45 In addition, correcting estimates for spillovers has
usually been infeasible as most outcome data are geocoded at the district level, the same
level as the identifying variation.46 Due in part to these challenges, existing estimates of key
parameters have varied widely.47 The combination of experimental variation with units of
randomization and measurement appropriately-sized to test, and correct for spillovers allows
us to improve identification relative to the literature to date.
   Our measurement of key objects of interest including implementation quality, income,
employment, reservation wages, and employer market power also allows for meaningful con-
tributions. First, differences in findings across studies may reflect differences in unmeasured
implementation quality. Estimates that exploit the staggered NREGS rollout are especially
sensitive to this issue because implementation in the early years of the program was thought
to be particularly weak (Mehrotra, 2008), and thus, may not accurately reflect impacts under
higher-quality steady state program implementation. Our main contribution in this regard
is to have household-level evidence (from MNS) that the treatment did improve the effective
presence of NREGS on the ground on almost every metric that matters for its credibility as
an outside option (including access to work, reduced corruption and leakage, and reliabili-
ty and convenience of collecting payments). This allows our results on labor markets and
income to be interpreted as the downstream effects of doing so.
   Second, our data on incomes (from both surveys and a census) allow us to fill a gap in
the current literature, where studying impacts of NREGS on income and poverty has been
constrained by the fact that the NSS does not collect data on incomes, and conducted only
a “thin” round on consumption in the relevant years of program rollout (that can only yield
state-level estimates and not district-level ones).
   Third, existing evidence on employment has also been constrained by measurement. For
instance, Imbert and Papp (2015) report that the increase in public employment under
  45
     Specifically, the parallel trends assumption required for differences-in-differences estimation does not
hold for many outcomes without additional controls, while small sample sizes limit the precision and power
of regression discontinuity estimators at reasonable bandwidth choices (Sukhtankar, 2017).
  46
     In one recent exception, Merfeld (2019) finds evidence of spillovers using ARIS/REDS data with village
geo-identifiers, suggesting that ignoring spatial spillovers can substantially bias estimates.
  47
     For wages, for example, studies using a difference-in-differences approach estimate a positive 4-5% effect
on rural unskilled wages (Imbert and Papp, 2015; Berg et al., 2018; Azam, 2012) while a study using a
regression discontinuity approach finds no impact (Zimmermann, 2015).



                                                      29
NREGS was accompanied by a 1-1 crowd-out in private employment. However, this measure
of “private sector employment” (based on NSS data) includes wage employment for others
as well as domestic work and self-employment. This is important since self-employment may
represent low marginal product activities, the crowding out of which may not matter much
for efficiency; indeed, Imbert and Papp (2015) themselves note that “the fall in private sector
work may in part represent a fall in disguised unemployment or private sector work with
close to zero productivity.” We directly measure paid market employment (unconfounded
with self-employment), which is the main outcome of interest, and also correct for spatial
spillovers, which turn out to be substantial. In particular, not accounting for and adjusting
the spillovers would have underestimated both the wage and employment impacts.
   Finally, our data on reservation wages allows us to confirm that improving NREGS did
lead to an inward shift in labor supply (which cannot be inferred just from market wages),
and our data on land-holdings allow us to construct measures of land concentration and
test for employer market power. Overall, the evidence we find of monopsony power is both
novel and central to explaining the overall pattern that wages and employment both went
up together. There is a long-standing debate over the market power of rural employers,
with several studies suggesting the existence of such power (e.g. Griffin (1979); Anderson
et al. (2015)). However, to the best of our knowledge there has been no direct evidence of
monopsony in rural labor markets to date. A key prediction of the theory of monopsony
is that an increase in the wage floor (either through a minimum wage or improved outside
option) will lead to an increase in employment in the presence of employer market power,
and this is exactly what we find. The interaction of the NREGS with an imperfect, frictional
labor market is thus key to understanding its impacts on poverty. In this sense our results fit
within the new literature on frictions in rural labor markets including (Breza et al., 2019), as
well as literature finding evidence of employer market power even in labor markets that would
plausibly be more competitive than rural labor markets in a developing country (Manning,
2003; Naidu et al., 2016; Dube et al., 2020).


6    Conclusion
This paper contributes to our understanding of the economic impact of public employment
programs in developing countries. In particular, it contributes (a) improved identification:
using experimental variation with units of randomization large enough to capture general
equilibrium effects and units of measurement granular enough to capture spatial spillover
effects; (b) measures of implementation quality: enabling us to interpret impacts as the
results of demonstrable changes in actual presence of the program; and (c) new outcome

                                              30
measures: including reservation wages, income, and assets, with independent census data on
the latter two.
   Overall, the results are consistent with the following broad narrative. Improving NREGS
implementation improved its value as an outside option for the rural poor (as seen in increased
reservation wages). This in turn forced employers to raise market wages to attract workers.
Crucially for efficiency, this raised private employment – at least in part because of the wage
increase was in the context of monopsonistic labor markets. Higher wages and income in turn
induced increased credit and purchase of assets. Over time, the combination of higher wages,
credit, and investment appear to have stimulated broader economic activity as seen by the
increase in non-agricultural enterprises as well as employment in the Economic Census.
   One natural question is how the effects of improving the NREGS compare to the (hypo-
thetical) comparison between a “well-implemented NREGS” and “no NREGS.” We expect
that the effects would be broadly comparable, but with larger income effects. Smartcards
increased the labor-market appeal of and participation in NREGS without increasing fund
flows. In contrast, the NREGS per se transfers large sums from urban to rural areas. A de
novo rollout of a well-implemented NREGS would thus likely have effects on wages, employ-
ment and income larger than those we find here, though in the same direction.
   Our results highlight the value of experimental “at scale” evaluation of large social pro-
grams. In particular, the experimental findings have led us to question, test, and reverse our
own priors on NREGS. Our prior (following the default view of competitive labor markets)
was that wage increases without corresponding gains in productivity would likely reduce pri-
vate employment and potentially attenuate impacts on poverty. Yet, finding positive effects
on employment forced us to question the default assumption of competitive labor markets,
and look for credible ways to test this assumption. Our analysis and results show that em-
ployers in this setting do have market power, and that programs like NREGS can not only
reduce poverty, but also be efficiency enhancing in such settings. In the absence of an at
scale experiment, we may have thought that the results on income and employment were
being driven by identification issues, and not probed the monopsony possibility as deeply.
   Our results also highlight political economy issues in the design and implementation of anti-
poverty programs in developing countries. Landlords typically benefit at the cost of workers
from low wages and from the wage volatility induced by productivity shocks, and may be
hurt by programs like NREGS that raise wages and/or provide wage insurance to the rural
poor (Jayachandran, 2006). Anderson et al. (2015) have argued that “a primary reason... for
landlords to control governance is to thwart implementation of centrally mandated initiatives
that would raise wages at the village level.” While we do not directly observe landlord or
employer profits, our findings show that improving NREGS substantially raised market wages


                                              31
and employment, and likely reduced monopsonistic rents of landlords. The results underscore
landlords’ incentive to oppose such improvements and helps rationalize their documented
resistance to the program (Khera, 2011; Misra, 2019; Mukherji and Jha, 2017).
   Finally, our results illustrate how the costs of corruption and weak implementation may
go beyond the direct costs of diverted public resources and extend to the broader economy
(Murphy et al., 1993). Empirical work on corruption has made great strides quantifying
leakage as the difference between fiscal outlays and actual receipts by beneficiaries (Reinikka
and Svensson, 2004; Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2013a; Muralidharan et al., 2017) and study-
ing the impacts of interventions on these measures (Olken, 2007; Muralidharan et al., 2016).
However, it has been more difficult to identify the broader economic costs of corruption. Our
results suggest that weak NREGS implementation may hurt the poor much more through di-
luting its general equilibrium effects than through the diversion of NREGS wages themselves.
Consequently they also underscore the importance of building state capacity in developing
countries for better implementation of social programs.



References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Theory, General Equilibrium, and Political Economy in Development
 Economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (3), 17–32.
Anderson, Siwan, Patrick Francois, and Ashok Kotwal, “Clientelism in Indian Vil-
 lages,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (6), 1780–1816.
Azam, Mehtabul, “The Impact of Indian Job Guarantee Scheme on Labor Market Out-
 comes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” Working Paper 6548, IZA 2012.
Bardhan, Pranab K., “Labor-Tying in a Poor Agrarian Economy: A Theoretical and
 Empirical Analysis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1983, 98 (3), 501–514.
Basu, Arnab K., Nancy H. Chau, and Ravi Kanbur, “A Theory of Employment
 Guarantees: Contestability, Credibility and Distributional Concerns,” Journal of Public
 Economics, April 2009, 93 (3-4), 482–497.
Bazzi, Samuel, “Wealth heterogeneity and the income elasticity of migration,” American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (2), 219–255.
Beaudry, Paul, David A Green, and Benjamin Sand, “Does Industrial Composition
 Matter for Wages? A Test of Search and Bargaining Theory,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (3),
 772–793.
Beegle, Kathleen, Emanuela Galasso, and Jessica Goldberg, “Direct and Indirect
 Effects of Malawi’s Public Works Program on Food Security,” Journal of Development


                                              32
  Economics, 2017, 128, 1–23.
Berg, Erlend, Sambit Bhattacharyya, Rajasekhar Durgam, and Manjula Ra-
  machandra, “Can Rural Public Works Affect Agricultural Wages? Evidence from India,”
  World Development, March 2018, (103), 239–254.
Bertrand, Marianne, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan,
  “Obtaining a Driver’s License in India: An Experimental Approach to Studying Corrup-
  tion,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2007, 122 (4), 1639–1676.
Bhalla, Surjit, “The Unimportance of NREGA,” The Indian Express, July 24 2013.
Breza, Emily, Supreet Kaur, and Nandita Krishnaswamy, “Scabs: The Social Sup-
  pression of Labor Supply,” NBER Working Paper Series 25880, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research 2019.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, “Under-
  investment in a profitable technology: The case of seasonal migration in Bangladesh,”
  Econometrica, 2014, 82 (5), 1671–1748.
Card, David and Alan Krueger, “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of
  the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,” American Economic Review,
  1994, 84, 772–793.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer, “The Effect
  of Minimum Wages on Low-Wage Jobs,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2019,
  134 (3), 1405–1454.
Chatterjee, Shoumitro, “Market Power and Spatial Competition in Rural India,” Working
  Paper, The Pennsylvania State University 2019.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua D Gottlieb, “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s
  Influence on Private Physician Payments,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (1),
  1–39.
Conley, Timothy G, “Spatial Econometrics,” in Steven Durlauf and Lawrence Blume, eds.,
  The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Houndsmills, 2008, chapter 7, pp. 741–747.
Cunha, Jesse, Giacomo DeGiorgi, and Seema Jayachandran, “The Price Effects
  of Cash Versus In-Kind Transfers,” Review of Economic Studies, January 2019, 86 (1),
  240–281.
Deaton, Angus and Alessandro Tarozzi, “Prices and poverty in India,” Technical Re-
  port, Princeton University 2000.
Dinkelman, Taryn and Vimal Ranchhod, “Evidence on the impact of minimum wage
  laws in an informal sector: Domestic workers in South Africa,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 2012, 99 (1), 27 – 45.
Dreze, Jean and Amartya Sen, Hunger and Public Action, Oxford University Press,


                                          33
  1991.
Dube, Arindrajit, Jeff Jacobs, Suresh Naidu, and Siddharth Suri, “Monopsony in
  Online Labor Markets,” Technical Report 1, American Economic Review: Insights 3 2020.
Dutta, Puja, Rinku Murgai, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle,
  “Does India’s Employment Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment?,” Policy Research
  Working Paper Series 6003, World Bank 2012.
Egger, Dennis, Johannes Haushofer, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and Michael
  Walker, “General equilibrium effects of cash transfers: experimental evidence from
  Kenya,” Technical Report, UC San Diego 2019.
Field, Erica M., Rohini Pande, Natalia Rigol, Simone G. Schaner, and Chari-
  ty Troyer Moore, “On Her Own Account: How Strengthening Women’s Financial Con-
  trol Affects Labor Supply and Gender Norms,” Technical Report 26294, NBER Working
  Paper Series September 2019.
Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Jourbal of Political Economy, 04 2002,
  110 (2), 458–474.
Government of India, Planning Commission, “Press Notes on Poverty Estimates,
  2011-12,” Technical Report 2013.
Griffin, Keith, The political economy of agrarian change: An essay on the Green Revolu-
  tion., Springer, 1979.
Harasztosi, Peter and Attila Lindner, “Who Pays for the Minimum Wage?,” American
  Economic Review, August 2019, 109 (8), 2693–2727.
Hornbeck, Richard and Suresh Naidu, “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and
  Economic Development in the American South,” American Economic Review, 03 2014,
  104 (3), 963–990.
Imbert, Clement and John Papp, “Estimating leakages in India’s employment guar-
  antee,” in Reetika Khera, ed., The Battle for Employment Guarantee, Oxford University
  Press, 2011.
   and , “Labor Market Effects of Social Programs: Evidence from India’s Employment
  Guarantee,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2015, 7 (2), 233–263.
   and , “Short-term Migration, Rural Public Works, and Urban Labor Markets: Evidence
  from India,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 03 2019.
Jayachandran, Seema, “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in
  Developing Countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (3), pp. 538–575.
Kaur, Supreet, “Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets,” Technical Report 10,
  American Economic Review October 2019.
Khera, Reetika, The Battle for Employment Guarantee, Oxford University Press, 2011.


                                          34
Kramer, Howard, “The Complete Pilgrim,” http://thecompletepilgrim.com/
 bara-imambara/ 2015.
Magruder, Jeremy R., “Can minimum wages cause a big push? Evidence from Indonesia,”
 Journal of Development Economics, 2013, 100 (1), 48 – 62.
Manning, Alan, “The Real Thin Theory: Monopsony in Modern Labour Markets,” Labour
 Economics, 04 2003, 10 (2), 105–131.
Mehrotra, Santosh, “NREG Two Years on: Where Do We Go from Here?,” Economic
 and Political Weekly, 2008, 43 (31).
Merfeld, Joshua D, “Spatially heterogeneous effects of a public works program,” Journal
 of Development Economics, 2019, 136, 151–167.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, “Worms: identifying impacts on education and
 health in the presence of treatment externalities,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (1), 159–217.
Misra, Kartik, “Does historical land inequality attenuate the positive impact of India’s
 employment guarantee program?,” World Development, December 2019, 124.
Mukherjee, Anindita and Debraj Ray, “Labor tying,” Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics, 1995, 47 (2), 207–239.
Mukherji, Rahul and Himanshu Jha, “Bureaucratic Rationality, Political Will, and
 State Capacity,” Economic and Political Weekly, December 2017, LII (49), 53–60.
Muralidharan, Karthik and Paul Niehaus, “Experimentation at Scale,” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (4), 103–124.
 , Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, and Aakash Mohpal, “The fiscal cost of weak governance:
 Evidence from teacher absence in India,” Journal of Public Economics, January 2017, 145,
 116–135.
 , Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar, “Building State Capacity: Evidence from
 Biometric Smartcards in India,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 2895–2929.
 , , and , “Online Appendix for ‘General equilibrium effects of (improving) public
 employment programs: experimental evidence from India’,” https://econweb.ucsd.edu/
 ~pniehaus/papers/SmartcardsGE_appendix.pdf 2020.
Murgai, Rinku and Martin Ravallion, “Is a guaranteed living wage a good anti-poverty
 policy?,” Policy Research Working Paper Series 3640, The World Bank June 2005.
Murphy, Kevin M, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, “Why Is Rent-Seeking
 So Costly to Growth?,” American Economic Review, May 1993, 83 (2), 409–14.
Naidu, Suresh, Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang, “Monopsony Power in Migrant
 Labor Markets: Evidence from the United Arab Emirates,” Journal of Political Economy,
 2016, 124 (6), 1735–1792.
Niehaus, Paul and Sandip Sukhtankar, “Corruption Dynamics: The Golden Goose


                                           35
  Effect,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5.
   and , “The Marginal Rate of Corruption in Public Programs: Evidence from India,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 104, 52 – 64.
Olken, Benjamin A., “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
  Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2007, 115 (2), 200–249.
Pai, Sandeep, “Delayed NREGA payments drive workers to suicide,” Hindustan Times,
  December 29 2013.
Ravallion, Martin, “Market Responses to Anti-Hunger Policies: Effects on Wages, Prices,
  and Employment,” Technical Report November 1987. World Institute for Development
  Economics Research WP28.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson, “Local Capture: Evidence From a Central Gov-
  ernment Transfer Program in Uganda,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2004,
  119 (2), 678–704.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., “Rural Wages, Labor Supply, and Land Reform: A Theoretical
  and Empirical Analysis,” The American Economic Review, 1978, 68 (5), 847–861.
Rosenzweig, Mark R and Kenneth I Wolpin, “Credit market constraints, consumption
  smoothing, and the accumulation of durable production assets in low-income countries:
  Investments in bullocks in India,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (2), 223–244.
Subbarao, Kalanidhi, Carlo Del Ninno, Colin Andrews, and Claudia Rodrı́guez-
  Alas, Public works as a safety net: design, evidence, and implementation 2013.
Sukhtankar, Sandip, “India’s National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme: What Do
  We Really Know about the World’s Largest Workfare Program?,” India Policy Forum,
  2017.
Zimmermann, Laura, “Why Guarantee Employment? Evidence from a Large Indian
  Public-Works Program,” Working Paper, University of Georgia April 2015.




                                           36
                                                    Table 1: Income
                                                          (a) SECC data
                          Lowest bracket               Middle bracket            Highest bracket         Income bracket
                          (< Rs. 5,000)              (Rs. 5,000 - 10,000)        (> Rs. 10,000)              3 levels
                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)

  Treatment             -.041∗∗∗      -.039∗∗∗       .026∗∗          .025∗∗      .014∗∗       .012∗∗    -.041∗∗∗     -.039∗∗∗
                         (.014)        (.014)        (.011)          (.011)     (.0065)      (.0061)     (.014)       (.014)
                          [.005]        [.009]        [.022]          [.031]      [.029]       [.05]
  Control variables        No              Yes         No              Yes         No         Yes         No           Yes
  Control mean            .83               .83        .13              .13       .038        .038
  Adjusted R2             .01              .028       .014             .024       .015        .041        .008         .024
  Observations           1.8 M            1.8 M      1.8 M            1.8 M      1.8 M       1.8 M       1.8 M        1.8 M
                                                                                                        Ordered      Ordered
  Estimator              Logit            Logit      Logit            Logit      Logit       Logit
                                                                                                          logit        logit


                                                 (b) Survey data (Rs. per year)
                                                               Agricultural
                       Total income              NREGS                         Other labor      Farm      Business      Misc.
                                                                  labor
                       (1)          (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)
   Treatment          8761∗∗       9511∗∗          914           3276∗∗          3270∗∗         2166        -642        528
                      (3722)       (3723)         (588)          (1467)          (1305)        (2302)      (1325)      (2103)
   Baseline lag        Yes           No            No               No             No             No         No          No
   Control mean       69122        69122          4743            14798           9322          20361       6202       13695
   Adjusted R2         .04          .039          .015             .059           .058           .015      .0089        .012
   Observations       4874         4908           4907            4908            4908          4908        4908       4908




This table reports treatment effects on measures of household income. Panel (a) uses data from the Socio-
Economic and Caste Census (SECC), which reports income categories of the highest earner in the household
as indicated. Columns 1-6 report marginal effects using a logit model, and Columns 7-8 report effects on
the probability of being in the lowest bracket from an ordered logit regression. Control variables, when
included, are: age of the household head, an indicator for whether the head is illiterate, and an indicator
for whether the household belongs to a Scheduled Caste/Tribe. Panel (b) uses data on (annualized) income,
measured in Rupees, from our survey. “Total income” is total annualized household income. “NREGS” is
earnings from working on the NREGS. “Agricultural labor” and “Other labor” capture income from doing
agricultural and non-agricultural work for someone else. “Farm” combines income from a HH’s own land
and animal husbandry, while “Business” captures income from self-employment or a HH’s own business.
“Miscellaneous” is the sum of HH income not captured by the other categories. We truncate observations
that are in the top 0.5% percentile of total income in treatment and control; treatment effects are higher in
magnitude and remain statistically significant without truncation (available online, Table C.2). Baseline lag
is the village-level mean of the dependent variable at baseline. We did not measure income sub-categories at
baseline and so do not include their lags. All regressions (in both panels) include district fixed effects and
the first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Standard
errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses and statistical significance based on these is denoted
as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. p-values from randomization inference on 10,000 iterations are reported
in square brackets in panel (a).



                                                                37
                          Table 2: Employment and wage outcomes (June)

                                          Wage                                   Employment
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)                 (5)
                                 Wage         Reservation      Days idle     Days worked         Days worked
                               realization       wage          or unpaid      in NREGS         in private sector

 Adjusted TE                      13∗∗∗           6.9∗∗         -2.4∗∗∗          .92∗∗                1.4∗
                                  (4.3)           (3.2)          (.79)           (.42)                (.8)
                                  {3.9}            {3}           {.78}           {.37}               {.76}
      Naive ITT                   7.9∗∗            5.5∗          -1.2∗∗           .54                 .54
                                  (3.6)           (2.8)           (.58)          (.37)               (.56)
                                  {4.8}           {3.9}          {.55}           {.47}               {.61}
      Spillover onto control       5.1∗            1.4           -1.1∗∗           .37                .85∗
                                  (2.9)           (2.1)           (.51)          (.24)               (.49)
                                  {2.9}           {1.9}          {.53}           {.22}               {.5}

 βT                               8.8∗∗           5.8∗∗          -1.5∗∗           .61∗                .74
                                  (3.6)           (2.8)           (.59)          (.37)               (.57)
                                  {3.4}           {2.6}          {.58}           {.34}               {.54}
 βN                                11∗             3.1           -2.5∗∗           .83                 1.9∗
                                  (6.5)           (4.6)           (1.1)          (.54)               (1.1)
                                  {6.4}           {4.2}          {1.2}           {.49}               {1.1}
 Control mean                      123              96             18             3.2                7.1
 Adjusted R2                      .076             .054           .073            .04                .02
 Observations                     7016            12677          13951           17974              14278


This table reports treatment effects on employment and wage outcomes in the private labor market in June
2012 using survey data. βT and βN are the coefficients on a treatment indicator and the fraction of neighbors
treated, respectively. The Adjusted TE is constructed as βT + βN × ÑTRp , where ÑTR is the average share of
treated neighbors among treated GPs. The naive ITT estimate is the coefficient on treatment from a separate
regression that excludes this spatial exposure term. The spillover onto control is constructed as βN × ÑCR ,
         R is the average share of treated neighbors among control GPs. We estimate effects at radius R at
where ÑCp
20km and show in Table A.7 that results are not overly sensitive to this choice. “Wage realization” is the
average daily wage in Rupees an individual received while working for someone else. “Reservation wage”
is the daily wage at which an individual would have been willing to work for someone else, and is thus
defined for all respondents as opposed to only those that worked. “Days unpaid/idle” is the sum of days an
individual did unpaid work or stayed idle. “Days worked in NREGS” is the number of days an individual
worked in NREGS. “Days worked private sector” is the number of days an individual worked for somebody
else. We truncate wage observations that are in the top 0.5% percentile in treatment and control; results
are not sensitive to this (Online Appendix, Table C.5). Baseline lag is the village mean of the dependent
variable at baseline. All regressions include district fixed effects and the first principal component of a vector
of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are
in parentheses and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.
Standard errors calculated following (Conley, 2008) using a uniform kernel out to 10 km are in { brackets
}. Observation counts vary across columns due to differences in response rates; Table A.13 shows that these
were not differential by treatment status.




                                                          38
                                               Table 3: Prices

                                          Log of Price Index                           Log of Individual Prices
                                     (1)                          (2)                             (3)
                               Uniform goods                   All goods
 Treatment                         .0041                        .0048                            -.011
                                   (.066)                       (.025)                          (.011)
 Item FE                             No                           No                             Yes
 Level                             Village                      Village                   Item x Household
 Control mean                        11                           11
 Adjusted R2                        .98                            1                             .95
 Observations                        60                           60                            18242




This table reports impacts on prices using data from the 68th Round of the National Sample Survey. Columns
1 - 2 report impacts on the log of village-level price indices constructed using Equation 4. In Column 1 we
restrict attention to goods purchased at least once in every village in our sample, while in Column 2 we
include all available data. Column 3 reports impacts on the log price of individual commodities using all
available data. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses and statistical significance
based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. All regressions include district fixed effects and
the first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization.




                                                       39
                                 Table 4: Heterogeneous effects on employment outcomes by land concentration
                                                        (a) Absolute values of normalized Herfindahl index
                                                         Full sample                                               Restricted to above 1 acre
                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (6)
                                  Days unpaid          Days worked          Days worked in          Days unpaid          Days worked          Days worked in
                                    or idle             in NREGS             private sector           or idle             in NREGS             private sector
        Treatment                     -1.1∗                 .48                    .46                  -1.1∗                  .51                  .45
                                      (.62)                (.39)                  (.57)                 (.62)                (.39)                 (.57)
        H∗                             2.3                  1.1                  -4.7∗∗                  2.7                 1.9∗                  -6.2∗
                                      (3.6)                (.84)                  (2.1)                 (5.1)                (1.1)                 (3.2)
        Treatment × H ∗                -3.8                 .41                  4.6∗∗                   -2.8                 -1.2                 6.5∗
                                      (3.9)                (1.6)                  (2.3)                 (5.3)                (2.3)                 (3.4)
        Control Mean                   17                   3.6                    7.9                   17                   3.6                   7.9
        Adjusted R2                   .067                 .038                   .019                  .067                 .038                   .02
        Observations                 13482                17430                  13827                 13453                17378                  13798


                                                      (b) Standardized values of normalized Herfindahl index
40




                                                         Full sample                                               Restricted to above 1 acre
                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (6)
                                  Days unpaid          Days worked          Days worked in          Days unpaid          Days worked          Days worked in
                                    or idle             in NREGS             private sector           or idle             in NREGS             private sector
        Treatment                    -1.2∗∗                 .49                     .6                 -1.2∗∗                  .48                   .6
                                       (.6)                (.37)                  (.55)                  (.6)                (.38)                 (.55)
        H∗                             .28                  .13                  -.56∗∗                  .28                   .2∗                 -.63∗
                                      (.43)                 (.1)                  (.25)                 (.52)                (.12)                 (.33)
        Treatment × H ∗                -.43                .031                  .55∗∗                   -.29                 -.13                 .66∗
                                      (.46)                (.18)                  (.27)                 (.54)                (.22)                 (.34)
        Control Mean                   17                   3.6                    7.9                   17                   3.6                   7.9
        Adjusted R2                   .067                 .038                   .019                  .067                 .038                   .02
        Observations                 13482                17430                  13827                 13453                17378                  13798


     This table reports treatment effects on employment outcomes in June 2012 differentiated by measures “H ∗ ” of land ownership concentration. In
     Panel (a) the measure is the normalized Herfindahl index constructed at the village level, while in Panel (b) it is the normalized Herfindahl index
     standardized separately for treatment and control areas. “Days unpaid/idle” is the sum of days an individual did unpaid work or stayed idle. “Days
     worked on NREGS” is the number of days an individual worked on NREGS. “Days worked private sector” is the number of days an individual worked
     for somebody else. All regressions include (the village mean of) the baseline lag, district fixed effects, and the first principal component of a vector
     of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses and statistical significance
     based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.
                                  Table 5: Savings, loans and assets
                                     (a) Savings, loans and land ownership
                            Total savings (Rs.)                     Total loans (Rs.)                Owns land (%)
                           (1)                (2)                   (3)                (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                                          ∗∗                 ∗∗          ∗∗
   Treatment             1064             1120                   11210               11077        .056          .049∗∗
                         (859)            (877)                   (4741)              (4801)      (.024)        (.024)
   Baseline lag            No              Yes                       No               Yes           No           Yes
   Control Mean           2966             2966                    68108             68108          .59           .59
   Adjusted R2            .004             .004                    .0095               .01         .012          .032
   Observations           4916             4882                     4943              4909         4921          4887




                                                    (b) Livestock assets
                                                                                                              Backyard
                        Cattle      Buffaloes            Sheep             Goats         Pigs     Dogs
                                                                                                               Poultry
                         (1)            (2)                (3)                 (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)
                                           ∗∗
   Treatment            -1000         1815                -2468             905           58        161         2850
                        (986)          (784)             (2859)           (1035)         (91)     (101)        (2576)
                        [.152]         [.008]             [.194]           [.195]       [.341]     [.05]        [.12]
   Control mean         9689           8548              30527             9387           252      371         26167
   Adjusted R2           .41            .41               .47              .089          .019      .25          .12
   Observations         157            157                157               157           157      157          157


This table reports impacts on measures of assets and liabilities. Panel (a) uses data from our household
survey. “Total savings (Rs.)” in columns 1-2 is defined as the total amount of a household’s current cash
savings, including money kept in bank accounts or Self-Help Groups. “Total loans (Rs.)” in columns 3-4
is the total principal of the household’s five largest active loans. “Owns land (%)” in columns 5-6 is an
indicator for whether a household reports owning any land. Baseline lag refers to the village mean of the
dependent variable at baseline. Panel (b) uses mandal-level data from the 2012 Livestock Census, focusing
on animals with headcounts of at least 100 on average in control mandals. A Wald test of joint significance
rejects the null of no impacts (p = 0.04). All regressions (in both panels) include district fixed effects and
the first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the mandal level in Panel (a), and heteroskedasticity-robust in Panel
(b); statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. p-values from
randomization inference on 10,000 iterations are reported in square brackets in Panel (b).




                                                          41
                            Table 6: Number of enterprises and employees

                                                             Manufacturing            Wholesale
                       All sectors         Livestock                                                     Other
                                                            and construction          and retail
                           (1)                (2)                   (3)                   (4)              (5)
                                     Panel A: Effect on number of enterprises
 Treatment               883.6**              75.8               214.7                  312.6*           280.5*
                         (433.9)            (120.9)             (140.0)                 (168.4)          (165.8)
                          [.065]             [.281]              [.131]                  [.07]            [.123]
 Control mean             3816.5             1127.3               754.1                  739.3           1195.7
 Adjusted R2               0.29               0.58                0.22                   0.17             0.25
 Observations              157                157                  157                    157             157
                                     Panel B: Effect on number of employees
 Treatment              2375.7**             134.1              626.2*                  772.9*           842.6*
                        (1131.7)            (206.3)             (321.0)                 (405.2)          (449.4)
                         [.084]              [.295]              [.116]                  [.087]           [.144]
 Control mean             6796.7             1711.5               1439.9                1219.2           2426.1
 Adjusted R2               0.17               0.52                 0.17                  0.12             0.12
 Observations              157                157                  157                   157              157


This table reports treatment effects on the number of firms (Panel A) and employees (Panel B), as reported
in the Economic Census from 2012-13. Each column in each panel is a separate regression. The categories
(livestock, manufacturing and construction, wholesale and retail, and other) are consolidated from industrial
classifications in the census. Each regression includes aggregate baseline lags from the 2005 Economic Census
(i.e. all regressions in Panel A have the total number of enterprises as controls, and analogously in Panel B),
and the total working population in the mandal from the 2011 Census. Standard errors in parentheses are
heteroskedasticity-robust, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p <
.01. p-values from randomization inference on 10,000 iterations are reported in square brackets.




                                                       42
                               Figure 1: Timeline of endline survey reference periods

                                                                                                                                  Endline survey:
                                                                                                                              August – September 2012



                                                                1-year recall                                                                                    (a)

                                                                                                                               1-month                           (b)
                                                                                                                                recall

                                                                                                          June
                                                                                                           2012                                                  (c)
                                                                                                          recall


                                                                                                  Peak NREGS season                                              (d)

                                                                                         2011-12 Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC)


                                                                                                                                                        2012
                                                                                                                                                     Livestock
                                                                                                                                                      Census
                                                                                                                                                                 (e)
                                68th Round of the National Sample Survey (NSS)



                                                                                                     District Statistical Handbooks (DSH) data



    Aug 11   Sep 11   Oct 11    Nov 11    Dec 11    Jan 12    Feb 12     Mar 12       Apr 12   May 12     Jun 12     Jul 12     Aug 12      Sep 12     Oct 12




This figure illustrates the periods of time referenced by the various data sources we use. Rows labelled
(a)-(c) show the recall periods used in our endline survey, which we conducted between August and
September 2012. Those in dark blue are fixed with respect to the timing of the endline survey, while those
in light blue are variable. These include (a) one-year recall for questions about household earnings/income
and larger expenses, (b) one-month recall for questions on smaller expenses, (c) recall from June 2012 for
key labor market outcomes (wages and employment), and (d) recall of the specific 7-week period from
May 18 - July 14, 2012, which corresponds approximately to the typical season of peak activity on the
NREGS, for questions about NREGS work and leakage and is the reference period used to calculate leakage
in MNS. Rows labelled (e) show the coverage periods for independent data sources. Details on these
are as follows: the 2011-2012 Socio-Economic and Caste Census was conducted in rural AP during 2012
and contains household-level data on earnings (in the month prior to the date of the interview) and land
holdings (at time of the interview); the 2012 Livestock Census was conducted with October 15, 2012 as the
reference date and contains data on mandal-level livestock headcounts as of that date; the 68th Round of
the National Sample Survey was conducted in AP between July 2011 - June 2012 and contains data on
household-level expenditure and number of units purchased for a variety of goods (in the month prior to the
date of the interview); and the District Statistical Handbooks, which the Andhra Pradesh Directorate of
Economics publishes annually, contain data on land utilization and irrigation during April 2012 - March 2013.




                                                                                 43
       Figure 2: Conceptual framework for spillover adjustments on treatment effects



                                                                                 Treatment
                                                                                 Control




                              𝛽𝑁
           Outcome




                                                                               yITT           yTTE
                                                                                      yATE
                     𝛽𝑇

                                                                                ySP




                          0             ഥ𝐶
                                        𝑁            ഥ𝑇
                                                     𝑁                     1
                                              xITT
                                       Fraction of neighbors treated


This figure illustrates how an outcome (e.g. wages) may depend on both the treatment status of one’s
own village as well as the fraction of treated neighbors; it corresponds to Equation (3) in the text. βT
represents the effect of a village being treated when none of its neighbors are treated. Moving along the x-
axis corresponds to increasing the fraction of treated neighbors, and the corresponding changes in outcomes
are represented by light and dark blue solid lines. Vertical dotted lines represent mean exposure of treatment
(dark blue) and control (light blue) groups. The mean difference in the fraction of treated neighbors between
treatment and control villages is positive but less than 1. The gray bracket range labelled yIT T represents
the unadjusted treatment effect. The gray bracket range labelled ySP represents the spillover to control
areas. The brown bracket range, labelled yAT E , represents the spillover-adjusted treatment effect. The
black bracket range, labelled yT T E , represents the total treatment effect that a policy maker would care
about.




                                                      44
        Figure 3: Labor market equilibrium under monopsony and perfect competition


                                                         Marginal Cost
                                                           of Labor




              𝑀𝑃𝐿𝑀                                                             Labor Supply
              𝑀𝑃𝐿1

               𝑊𝐶
               𝑊1
               𝑊𝑀
      Wages




                                                                             Labor Demand
                                                                            (Marginal Product
                                                                                of Labor)




                                                𝐸𝑀 𝐸1      𝐸𝐶
                                                Employment




This figure illustrates the predicted effects of an increase in the value of workers’ outside option (e.g. NREGS
employment) on employment under competitive markets and under monopsony. In a competitive market,
the equilibrium wage and employment would be WC and EC respectively, and a binding increase in the value
of an outside option such as the NREGS would push wages above WC and employment below EC . However,
an employer with market power faces a steeper marginal cost of labor than the labor supply curve, and will
maximize profits by rationing employment levels below the competitive level, i.e. EM < EC ., resulting in
wages that are lower than the marginal product of labor, i.e. WM < M P LM . In such a setting, a binding
increase in the reservation wages from WM up to WC (such as to W1 ) will be associated with an increase in
wages but also with an increase in employment (such as from EM to E1 ).




                                                      45
A     Background on NREGS and Smartcards
This Appendix provides background information on the NREGS program, including the status quo
payments system, as well as the the changes introduced by Smartcards and resulting impacts on the
payments process and leakage.


A.1     Further details on NREGS
NREGS refers collectively to state-level employment schemes mandated by the National Rural Employ-
ment Guarantee Act (NREGA) of 2005. The Act guarantees one hundred days of paid employment
to any rural household in India, with no eligibility requirement for obtaining work. After beneficiaries
obtain a jobcard - a household level document that lists adult members, with pages assigned to record
details of work done, payment owed, dates of employment, etc - they are meant to approach local level
officials for employment, and work must be provided within two weeks and within a five kilometer radius
of the beneficiary’s residence. In practice, obtaining a jobcard is not a significant hurdle, and almost
anyone who might conceivably work on the program has a jobcard (49.5% of rural households in Andhra
Pradesh according to National Sample Survey data). The greater hurdle is obtaining employment, which
is available when there is a project working in the village, with greatest availability during the slack
labor seasons of April, May and June.
   Given the seasonality, the 100 day limit is rarely a binding constraint, particularly since practical
work-arounds (obtaining multiple jobcards per household) are possible. In 2009-10 the average number
of days worked was 38 (mean is 30), according to Imbert and Papp (2015), with participants moving
in and out of the program at high frequency. Altogether, this means that 32.1% of all households (and
64.8% of households with jobcards) in Andhra Pradesh worked on NREGS at some point during 2009.
This work involves (for the most part) manual labor paid at minimum wages that are set at the state
level. In Andhra Pradesh most wages are piece rates, set to allow workers to attain the daily minimum
wage with roughly a day’s worth of effort. Projects, chosen in advance via consultation with villagers at
a village-wide meeting (the “Gram Sabha”) and mandal and district officials, generally involve public
infrastructure such as road construction, clearing fields for agricultural use, and irrigation earthworks.
   Project management is delegated for the most part to local village officials, including elected village
chiefs (Sarpanch) and a variety of appointed officials (Field Assistants, Technical Assistants, NREGS
Village Workers, etc). These officials record attendance and output, creating paper “muster rolls” which
are digitized at the sub-district level. These digitized records upon approval trigger the release of funds
to pay workers.


A.2     Smartcard-introduced changes in payments
The Smartcards system was introduced in Andhra Pradesh in 2006, and while rollout in treatment areas
in our study districts began in 2010. The payments system was based on electronic benefit transfers
into special “no-frills” bank accounts tied to individual beneficiaries, and biometric authentication of
beneficiaries before withdrawing these transfers. Figure 1 of MNS shows the status quo payment system
and the changes introduced by Smartcards.
  In the status quo, money was transferred electronically from the State government to the district to
the mandal, and from there cash moved on to the local post-office. Beneficiaries either traveled to the
local post-office to get payments themselves, or, more commonly, simply handed over jobcards to local
NREGS officials (Sarpanch, Field Assistant) and collected money from them in the village (since most


                                                    46
post offices are far from local habitations). There was no formal authentication procedure required,
which allowed the informal practice to continue.
   In the Smartcards system, money was transferred electronically from the State government to private
and public sector banks; banks worked with Technology Service Providers (TSPs) to manage last-mile
delivery and authentication. Together, the bank and TSP received 2% of every transaction in villages in
which they handled the payment system. Bank/TSP pairings competitively bid to manage transactions
in every district. Last-mile delivery of cash was done by village level Customer Service Providers (CSPs),
who were hired by TSPs as per the criteria laid down by the government. CSPs typically authenticated
fingerprints and made payments locally at a central village location.
   Payments were deposited into no-frills accounts for beneficiaries who had enrolled for Smartcards.
These accounts were not maintained on the “core banking server”, but rather on small local Point-of-
Service (PoS) devices managed by the CSPs. Since there was no real-time connectivity on these devices
and no linkage with central bank servers, beneficiaries could only access their accounts through CSPs;
they had no ability to go to a bank branch or an ATM to access this account. Beneficiaries therefore
typically did not make deposits into accounts, and would not be able to even figure out whether there
was a balance without contacting the CSP. Although in theory they could simply not claim payment
if they wanted to leave a balance in the account, in practice only 0.3% of respondents claimed to leave
money in the account; moreover, only 29% of beneficiaries who experienced the system said that they
trusted the Smartcards system enough to deposit money into their Smartcard accounts if they could. In
Nalgonda district, where the winning bid was actually from the post office, there were no bank accounts
at all.
   Compared to other documents that the household would have had (e.g. jobcard that was required
in order to obtain Smartcard, voter ID card, etc), the Smartcard’s value as an identity document was
limited. Unlike the national Unique ID (Aadhaar ), Smartcards were not de-duplicated at the national
level, and were therefore not legally admissible as ID for purposes other than collecting NREGS/SSP
payments.48 A truly “smart” card was not required or always issued: one Bank chose to issue paper
cards with digital photographs and bar codes while storing biometric data in the PoS device (as opposed
to on the card). Smartcards were also not portable; while Aadhaar cards are linked to a central server
for authentication, Smartcards authentication was done offline. Thus while Aadhaar can be used across
states and platforms (both public and private), Smartcards could only be used to make payments for
NREGS and SSP beneficiaries within Andhra Pradesh.


A.3        Impacts of Smartcards on Payments Process and Leakage
Given changes in fund flow management as well as payments now being made by a CSP locally and
visibly in the village, the Smartcards system significantly improved the payments process. Payment
delays - the time between doing the actual work and getting paid - reduced significantly, by 10 days
(29%). Since the CSP predictably delivered payments on set dates, the variability in payment date was
also reduced (39%). Finally, the actual time taken to collect payment also went down, by 22 minutes
(20%).
   These improvements in the payment process were likely very important in making NREGS into
a viable outside option; previous press reports had highlighted the suffering caused by delays and
uncertainty in payments Pai (2013). Such payment process issues were mainly not relevant for SSP
beneficiaries; the time to collect payments fell, but not significantly given that the control group time
to collect was not as high as for NREGS beneficiaries. Meanwhile, we did not even collect data on SSP
 48
      Meanwhile an Aadhaar card can be legally used to verify identity in airports, banks, etc.


                                                            47
payment delays since such delays were not revealed to be an issue during our initial fieldwork, likely
because of the fixed timing of payment collection at the beginning of the month.
   In addition, the actual amount of payments received by households went up, while official disburse-
ments remained the same, thus indicating a substantial reduction in leakage. Survey reports of payments
received went up by Rs. 35, or 24% of control group mean, for NREGS beneficiaries. Other evidence
reveals that the increases in earnings were reflected in actual increases in work done by beneficiaries;
for example, our stealth audits of worksites reveals a commensurate increase in workers present at the
worksite The main margin of leakage reduction was thus via a reduction in “quasi-ghosts”: these are
over-reports of payments to existing workers. Together, these results point to an increase in actual
amount of work done under NREGS and hence an increase in assets created. Meanwhile, there were
also increases in SSP payments (and reductions in SSP leakage); however, these are small in actual
magnitude, with an extra Rs. 12/month received (5% of control mean, vs Rs. 35/week for NREGS).


B      Rural asset formation calculations
This Appendix examines whether increased asset formation under NREGS could plausibly generate the
increases in wages and employment we observe in the data in the context of a simple model of rural
production.
   To this end, consider an economy that produces a single good using land T , augmentable capital K,
and labor L according to Q = F (T, K, L) = T αT K αK LαL . This good is sold at a fixed price in regional
markets (i.e. we ignore the effects of localized income / demand shocks to focus on the productive effects
of a capital shock). The supply of land is fixed. The supply of capital is exogenous, i.e. private capital
supply is fixed and public capital is augmented by NREGS activity. Labor is supplied by atomistic
workers as a function of the market wage w according to the labor supply curve L = Ls (w). Labor
demand is perfectly competitive and given by
                                                              w
                                                     FL =                                                        (5)
                                                              p

Now suppose that increased NREGS activities raises the stock of capital K by an (unknown) proportion
%∆K; we will solve for the proportion required to explain the moments we observe. We have

                                     %∆w = αK · %∆K + (αL − 1) · %∆L                                             (6)

Re-arranging this, we see that to explain the effects we see we would need an increase in the capital
stock of
                                           1
                                %∆K =        (%∆w + (1 − αL )%∆L)                                 (7)
                                         αK
Using factor share estimates of αL = 0.3 and αK = 0.4 from Chatterjee (2019) and our observed ITT
values %∆L = 6.7% and %∆w = 6.5%, the implication is that we would need to have %∆K = 28%.49
  Intuitively, it seems implausible that increased NREGS activity led to a 28% increase in the size of
the overall capital stock. To examine this quantitatively, we assume that the rate of NREGS asset
  49
    Gollin (2002) has argued that factor share calculations often miss labor income of the self-employed and hence
underestimate labor shares. If correct, our calculations here if anything under-estimate the required increase in the
capital stock.



                                                         48
creation increased in proportion to the increase in payments received by workers (i.e. by 24%). We
estimate NREGS capital stock as a proportion of total capital stock as follows:
   • We obtain data on Gross Capital Formation in Agriculture and Allied sectors according to National
     Accounts data over the years 2002-03 through 2011-12, and apply a depreciation rate of 10% per
     year to the stock to obtain a total capital stock of Rs. 6.48 trillion (in 2004-05 prices).50
   • Total NREGS expenditure in the years of the experiment (2010-11 and 2011-12) was Rs. 0.47
     trillion (in 2004-05 prices).51
   • Assuming generously that 60% of NREGS expenditure went directly to gross capital formation,
     this would result in 2010-12 NREGS capital formation being 4% of all capital stock.
This yields %∆K = 24% ∗ 4% ' 1%, far short of the 28% needed to explain our results.




  50
   See http://planningcommission.nic.in/data/datatable/data_2312/DatabookDec2014%2043.pdf.
  51
   Data from Sukhtankar (2017). Note that we only count the experimental years, since anything before those years
would be equal in treatment and control areas.


                                                       49
                               Table A.1: Baseline balance in administrative data

                                             Treatment            Control           Difference                       p-value
                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)                     (4)
                                                        Numbers based on official records from GoAP in 2010
 % population working                                .53             .52                 .0062                           .47
 % male                                              .51             .51               .00023                            .82
 % literate                                          .45             .45                 .0043                           .65
 % SC                                                .19             .19                 .0025                           .81
 % ST                                                 .1             .12                  -.016                          .42
 Jobcards per capita                                 .54             .55                -.0098                           .63
 Pensions per capita                                 .12             .12                 .0015                           .69
 % old age pensions                                  .48             .49                  -.012                          .11
 % weaver pensions                                 .0088            .011                -.0018                           .63
 % disabled pensions                                  .1              .1                 .0012                           .72
 % widow pensions                                    .21              .2                   .013                         .039
                                                              Numbers based on 2011    census rural totals
 Population                                       45580          45758                 -221                              .91
 % population under age 6                           .11             .11            -.00075                               .65
 % agricultural laborers                            .23             .23              -.0049                              .59
 % female agricultural laborers                     .12             .12              -.0032                              .52
 % marginal agricultural laborers                  .071            .063               .0081                              .14
                                                           Numbers based on 2011 census village directory
 # primary schools per village                      3.2               3.6                   -.4                          .23
 % village with medical facility                    .52               .49                 .028                           .53
 % villages with tap water                          .87               .84                 .033                           .25
 % villages with banking facility                   .12               .15                -.036                          .025
 % villages with paved road access                  .95               .94               .0086                            .49
 Avg. village size in acres                        1374              1505                 -131                           .36


This table, reproduced from Muralidharan et al. (2016), compares official data on baseline characteristics across treatment
and control mandals. Column 3 reports the estimate for the treatment indicator from a simple regression of the outcome
with district fixed effects as the only controls; Column 4 reports the p-value for this estimate. A “jobcard” is a household
level official enrollment document for the NREGS program. “SC” (“ST”) refers to Scheduled Castes (Tribes). “Old age”,
“weaver”, “disabled” and “widow” are different eligibility groups within the SSP administration. “Working” is defined as
the participation in any economically productive activity with or without compensation, wages or profit. “Main” workers
are defined as those who engaged in any economically productive work for more than 183 days in a year. “Marginal”
workers are those for whom the period they engaged in economically productive work does not exceed 182 days. The
last set of variables is taken from 2011 census village directory which records information about various facilities within
a census village (the census level of observation). “# primary schools per village” and “Avg. village size in acres” are
simple mandal averages (others are simple percentages) of the respective variable. Sampling weights are not applicable
as all villages within a mandal are used.




                                                            50
                                   Table A.2: Baseline balance in survey data


                                                           Treatment           Control         Difference         p-value
                                                                 (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)
 Household members                                                 4.8             4.8                 .022           .89
 BPL                                                               .98             .98               .0042            .73
 Scheduled caste                                                   .22             .25                -.027           .35
 Scheduled tribe                                                   .12             .11               .0071            .81
 Literacy                                                          .42             .42               .0015            .93
 Annual income                                                 41,482           42,791              -1,290            .52
 Total annual expenditure                                     687,128          657,228             26,116             .37
 Short-term Expenditure                                        52,946           51,086               1,574            .45
 Longer-term Expenditure                                       51,947           44,390               7,162            .45
 Pay to work/enroll                                              .011            .0095             .00099             .82
 Pay to collect                                                  .058             .036                 .023           .13
 Ghost household                                                 .012            .0096               .0019            .75
 Time to collect                                                  156              169                  -7.5          .62
 Owns land                                                         .65              .6                 .058           .06
 Total savings                                                  5,863            5,620                   3.7         1.00
 Accessible (in 48h) savings                                      800              898                 -105           .68
 Total loans                                                   62,065           57,878               5,176            .32
 Owns business                                                     .21             .16                 .048           .02
 Number of vehicles                                                .11             .12                -.014           .49
 Average payment delay                                              28              23                 .036           .99
 Payment delay deviation                                            11             8.8                  -.52          .72
 Official amount                                                  172              162                    15          .45
 Survey amount                                                    177              189                   -10          .65
 Leakage                                                          -5.1             -27                    25          .15
 NREGS availability                                                .47             .56                    -.1         .02
 Household doing NREGS work                                        .43             .42               .0067            .85
 NREGS days worked, June                                           8.3               8                   .33          .65
 Private sector days worked, June                                  4.8             5.3                  -.49          .15
 Days unpaid/idle, June                                             22              22                   .29          .47
 Average daily wage private sector, June                            96              98                  -3.7          .34
 Daily reservation wage, June                                       70              76                  -6.8          .03
 NREGS hourly wage, June                                            13              14                  -1.3          .13
 NREGS overreporting                                               .15             .17                -.015           .55
 Additional days household wanted NREGS work                        15              16                    -.8         .67


This table compares baseline characteristics across treatment and control mandals from our survey data. Column 3
reports the estimate for the treatment indicator from a simple regression of the outcome with district fixed effects as the
only controls; Column 4 reports the p-value for this estimate. “BPL” is an indicator for households below the poverty
line. “Accessible (in 48h) savings” is the amount of savings a household could access within 48h. “NREGS availability”
is an indicator for whether a household believes that anybody in the village could get work on NREGS when they want
it. Standard errors are clustered at the mandal level.




                                                            51
                    Table A.3: Household characteristics by NREGS jobcard ownership



                                                     Households with    Households without
                                                                                               Difference    p-value
                                                        jobcard              jobcard
                                                           (1)                 (2)                (3)          (4)
   Household size                                                 4.1                    3.2           .88       .00
   Scheduled Caste                                                .25                    .18         .099        .06
   Scheduled Tribe                                                 .1                   .062         .032        .29
   Land owned in hectares                                          .7                    .82          -.16       .18
   Any HH member has post-office savings account                  .91                    .11           .79       .00
   Self-employed in non-agriculture                              .095                    .23          -.14       .00
   Self-employed in agriculture                                   .24                    .26          -.05       .28
   Main source of HH income is agricultural labor                 .54                    .19           .38       .00
   Main source of HH income is other labor                         .1                    .13        -.014        .57

This table reports statistics for household characteristics by jobcard ownership for rural areas in our study districts
estimated using NSS Round 66 data, which was collected in 2009-10 prior to the Smartcards intervention. Column
3 reports the estimate for an indicator of whether household owns a NREGS jobcard from a simple regression of the
outcome with district fixed effects as the only controls. Column 4 reports the p-value for this estimate.




                                                          52
                            Table A.4: Baseline balance with respect to exogeneous measure of treatment exposure (ÑpR )
                                                                            (a) Wage outcomes
                                                           Wage realization (Rs.)                             Reservation wage (Rs.)
                                                  (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)
                                                R = 10   R = 15    R = 20      R = 25   R = 30   R = 10     R = 15    R = 20    R = 25    R = 30
                     Control                       10       5.7      -1.9        -11      -27       5.3       4.9       1.4       -4.2      -13
                                                 (9.9)    (13)      (16)        (17)     (19)      (6.4)     (7.1)     (7.9)     (8.4)     (9.5)
                     Treatment                    .28      -.02       .24        2.6      9.8       .2        .65        2          5       12
                                                 (4.1)    (4.9)     (6.2)       (8.3)    (11)      (3.4)     (4.3)     (5.1)       (6)     (7.9)
                     Chi-sq test for equality    .88       .17       .016        .53      2.9        .5       .26      .0052      .79       4.2
                     p-value                     .35       .68        .90        .47      .09       .48       .61       .94       .37       .04

                                                                      (b) Employment outcomes
                                                         Days worked private sector                              Days unpaid/idle
                                                  (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)
                                                R = 10   R = 15    R = 20      R = 25   R = 30   R = 10     R = 15    R = 20    R = 25    R = 30
                     Control                      -.75     -.88       -1          -1      -.23      .98      .73        .73       .83       -.11
                                                 (.65)    (.84)     (1.1)       (1.3)    (1.4)     (.73)     (1)       (1.3)     (1.4)     (1.5)
53




                     Treatment                    -.11     -.34      -.27       -.029    .085       .31      .16        -.53       -1       -1.4
                                                 (.54)    (.71)     (.81)       (.99)    (1.1)     (.65)     (.9)      (1.5)     (2.1)     (2.4)
                     Chi-sq test for equality    .57       .24        .3         .37     .032       .47       .18       .41       .57       .22
                     p-value                     .45       .62       .58         .54      .86       .49       .67       .52       .45       .64


     This table examines the baseline balance of outcomes with respect to the share of neighbors in other mandals that were treated, i.e. ÑpR . Note that wave
     2 villages are included in the denominator for the purposes of this calculation. Each cell shows the coefficient from a separate regression; in rows labelled
     ‘Control’ (‘Treatment’) these are estimated within the control (treatment) group, respectively. Column group headings specify outcomes, and column
     headings specify the spatial radius R. “Wage realization (Rs.)” the average daily wage (in Rs.) an individual received while working for someone else in
     June 2012. “Reservation wage (Rs.)” is an individual’s reservation wage (in Rs.) at which he or she would have been willing to work for someone else. “Days
     worked private sector” is the number of days an individual worked for somebody else. “Days unpaid/idle” is the sum of days an individual did unpaid work
     or stayed idle. The entire village sample used in randomization is included. All regressions include district fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the
     mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.
                                                          Table A.5: Heterogeneous effects on income

                                                                                                    Total income (Rs.)
                                                           (1)                            (2)                                   (3)                       (4)
                                                          HH is                Most educated HH member                     HH fraction                Head of HH
                                                         ST or SC              has above median education                eligible for SSP              is widow
      Treatment                                           7830∗                            5951∗                              9671∗∗                    11541∗∗
                                                          (4606)                           (3322)                             (3921)                     (4782)
      Treatment × Covariate                                2941                             4996                               -6226                     -13994
                                                          (6427)                           (6170)                             (8083)                     (8767)
      Covariate                                           -9717∗                         28260∗∗∗                           -18345∗∗∗                  -36049∗∗∗
                                                          (5205)                          (5022)                              (6564)                     (6552)
      Treatment + Treatment × Covariate                   10771                            10947                               3445                       -2453
      Standard error                                      (5145)                           (5934)                             (8105)                     (6042)
      p-value                                              0.04                             0.07                               0.67                        0.69
      Control mean                                         69122                           69122                              69122                      69122
      Adjusted R2                                           .043                             .11                               .058                       .085
      Observations                                          4853                            4871                               4813                       4874
54




     This table examines heterogeneous effects on income using our survey data. We test for heterogeneity along dimensions unlikely to have been affected by
     treatment: caste, education, and pension eligibility. Column headings define the “Covariate” variable referred to in the row headings, which differs in each
     column. The outcome in all columns is total annualized HH income. “HH is ST or SC” is an indicator for whether the household belongs to a Scheduled
     Tribe/Caste. “Most educated HH member has above median education” is an indicator for whether the most educated member of the household has an
     above median number of years of education. “HH fraction eligible for SSP” is the fraction of household members who identify as eligible for SSP, though
     they may not actually receive pension. “Head of HH is widow” is an indicator for whether the head of household is a widow. We truncate observations that
     are in the top .5% percentile of total income in treatment and control groups. All regressions include the village mean of the dependent variable at baseline,
     district fixed effects and the first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Standard errors clustered at the
     mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.
                                         Table A.6: Testing for existence of spatial spillovers and equality of slopes
                                                                                        (a) Wage (June)
                                                          Wage realization (Rs.)                                                Reservation wage (Rs.)
                                  (1)           (2)                (3)                (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)              (8)               (9)       (10)
                                R = 10        R = 15             R = 20             R = 25       R = 30    R = 10     R = 15           R = 20            R = 25     R = 30
       Control                    5.7          18∗∗               19∗∗               19∗∗         25∗∗         5         7.2             7.6               5.8         .82
                                 (6.9)         (8.2)              (8.6)               (9)         (12)       (4.5)       (5)            (5.9)             (6.9)       (6.7)

       Treatment                 14∗∗∗         12∗∗                12                 12            13        3.4        3.3             3.3               3.8         4.3
                                 (4.4)          (6)                (8)               (9.6)         (12)      (3.2)      (4.3)           (5.6)             (6.9)       (8.4)

       Pooled                    10∗∗∗         12∗∗                11∗                12           15         3.2        3.6             3.1               2.7          2
                                 (3.7)          (5)               (6.5)              (7.5)        (9.3)      (2.9)      (3.6)           (4.6)             (5.5)       (6.3)
       F-test for equality        1.3           .39                .36                .37          .66       .16        .83              .66              .11         .25
       p-value                    .25           .53                .55                .54          .42       .69        .36              .42              .74         .62
       Observations              6494          6900               7016               7041         7055      11728      12475            12677            12715       12738
       % of pooled sample          92           97                  99                 99          100        92         98               99               99         100


                                                                               (b) Employment (June)
                                                       Days worked private sector                                               Days unpaid/idle
                                  (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)       (6)        (7)             (8)            (9)          (10)
55




                                R = 10        R = 15            R = 20         R = 25           R = 30    R = 10     R = 15          R = 20         R = 25        R = 30
       Control                    1.7           1.7               2.1               3.2∗         4.5∗∗      -1.2       -1.6            -1.4           -3.3         -5∗∗
                                 (1.1)         (1.2)             (1.5)              (1.8)        (2.2)     (1.1)      (1.4)           (1.9)          (2.1)         (2.3)

       Treatment                  .73           1.5               1.9                2.5         3.2∗     -1.5∗      -2.7∗∗          -3.2∗∗         -3.5∗∗        -4.2∗∗
                                 (.79)         (1.1)             (1.3)              (1.6)        (1.9)    (.81)       (1.1)           (1.3)          (1.5)         (1.8)

       Pooled                     1.1          1.6∗              1.9∗              2.5∗∗         3.3∗∗    -1.5∗∗     -2.2∗∗          -2.5∗∗         -3.3∗∗        -4.1∗∗∗
                                 (.69)         (.88)             (1.1)             (1.3)         (1.5)     (.7)       (.92)           (1.1)          (1.3)         (1.5)
       F-test for equality       1.3           .031               .045              .18          .48        .1        .89              1.5            .011         .18
       p-value                   .25            .86                .83              .67          .49       .75        .34              .22             .92         .67
       Observations             13178         14030              14278             14336        14356     12891      13716            13951          13990        14010
       % of pooled sample        91             97                 99                99           99        92         97               99             99          100



     This table reports tests for the existence of spillovers effects on wage (Panel (a)) and employment (Panel (b)) outcomes using survey data and for various
     radii. Each cell reports the coefficient obtained by regressing the outcome in the column group header on the treated share of neighboring Gram Panchayats
     in other mandals (ÑpR ) using the sample indicated in the row heading and the specification from Equation 2. Note that wave 2 villages are included in the
     denominator for the purposes of this exercise. At the bottom of each column we report the F -statistic and the p-value from an adjusted Wald test of equality
     between the coefficients in the control and treatment samples. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance
     based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. All regressions include village means of the outcomes at baseline, district fixed effects and the
     first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. “% of pooled sample” refers to the % of total observations
     for an outcome that are used in estimation; this is less than 100% because neighborhood variables are not defined for observations that have no neighbors
     within the given radius.
                                                  Table A.7: Treatment effect on key outcomes over a range of spillover radii
                                                                                      (a) Treatment effect on wage outcomes
                                                                         Wage realization (Rs.)                                                                   Reservation wage (Rs.)
                                             (1)                  (2)             (3)                 (4)           (5)                 (6)           (7)                  (8)               (9)               (10)
                                           R = 10               R = 15          R = 20              R = 25        R = 30              R = 10        R = 15               R = 20            R = 25             R = 30

        Adjusted TE                            13∗∗∗            13∗∗∗               13∗∗∗           13∗∗∗             14∗∗∗           6.5∗∗             7.3∗∗             6.9∗∗              6.7∗              6.3∗
                                                (3.8)           (3.9)               (4.3)           (4.7)             (5.1)           (2.9)             (2.9)             (3.2)              (3.4)             (3.7)
             Naive ITT                         8.3∗∗            7.8∗∗               7.9∗∗           7.8∗∗             7.7∗∗            5∗               5.5∗              5.5∗               5.5∗              5.4∗
                                                (3.4)           (3.6)               (3.6)           (3.6)             (3.6)           (2.9)             (2.8)             (2.8)              (2.8)             (2.8)
             Spillover onto control            4.9∗∗∗           5.5∗∗                5.1∗            5.1               6.2             1.5               1.7               1.4                1.2               .84
                                                (1.7)           (2.3)               (2.9)           (3.3)             (3.9)           (1.4)             (1.7)             (2.1)              (2.4)             (2.6)

        βT                                     9.3∗∗∗             9∗∗               8.8∗∗           8.5∗∗             8.4∗∗            5.3∗             5.9∗∗             5.8∗∗              5.7∗∗            5.6∗∗
                                                (3.4)            (3.5)              (3.6)           (3.6)             (3.6)            (2.8)            (2.7)             (2.8)              (2.8)            (2.8)
        βN                                     10∗∗∗             12∗∗                11∗             12                15               3.2              3.6               3.1                2.7               2
                                                (3.7)             (5)               (6.5)           (7.5)             (9.3)            (2.9)            (3.6)             (4.6)              (5.5)            (6.3)

        Control mean                           123                122                123              123              122              96                96                96               96                 96
        Adjusted R2                            .079              .077               .076             .075             .075             .05               .055              .054             .054               .054
        Observations                           6494              6900               7016             7041             7055            11728             12475             12677            12715              12738

                                                                               (b) Treatment effect on employment outcomes
56




                                                   Days worked in private sector                               Days worked in NREGS                                            Days idle/unpaid
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)      (7)          (8)         (9)     (10)         (11)         (12)       (13)         (14)         (15)
                                      R = 10       R = 15       R = 20     R = 25       R = 30      R = 10   R = 15       R = 20      R = 25   R = 30       R = 10       R = 15     R = 20       R = 25       R = 30

        Adjusted TE                     1.1             1.3∗     1.4∗       1.7∗             2∗∗     .76∗    .94∗∗            .92∗∗     1∗∗      1∗∗            -2∗∗∗    -2.3∗∗∗    -2.4∗∗∗      -2.7∗∗∗       -3∗∗∗
                                       (.69)            (.74)     (.8)      (.85)           (.91)     (.4)   (.42)            (.42)    (.43)    (.45)            (.68)     (.71)      (.79)        (.84)         (.9)
             Naive ITT                  .56              .51      .54        .54             .55      .56     .58              .54      .54      .53            -1.2∗∗    -1.2∗∗     -1.2∗∗       -1.2∗∗       -1.2∗∗
                                       (.59)            (.56)    (.56)      (.56)           (.56)    (.36)   (.37)            (.37)    (.37)    (.37)            (.61)     (.58)      (.58)        (.58)        (.58)
             Spillover onto control     .52             .73∗     .85∗       1.1∗∗           1.4∗∗      .2     .35              .37     .45∗      .49            -.69∗∗     -1∗∗      -1.1∗∗       -1.4∗∗      -1.7∗∗∗
                                       (.33)            (.41)    (.49)      (.56)           (.64)    (.17)   (.23)            (.24)    (.27)    (.31)            (.33)     (.43)      (.51)        (.57)        (.65)

        βT                              .68               .7      .74        .74             .73      .6∗     .66∗            .61∗     .61∗      .59            -1.4∗∗    -1.5∗∗    -1.5∗∗           -1.5∗∗    -1.4∗∗
                                       (.59)            (.57)    (.57)      (.57)           (.56)    (.36)    (.37)           (.37)    (.36)    (.36)            (.6)      (.58)     (.59)            (.58)     (.57)
        βN                              1.1             1.6∗     1.9∗       2.5∗∗           3.3∗∗     .43      .76             .83      1∗       1.2            -1.5∗∗    -2.2∗∗    -2.5∗∗           -3.3∗∗   -4.1∗∗∗
                                       (.69)            (.88)    (1.1)      (1.3)           (1.5)    (.36)    (.49)           (.54)    (.62)    (.75)            (.7)      (.92)     (1.1)            (1.3)     (1.5)

        Control mean                    7.4             7.2      7.1        6.8               6.5     3.4      3.2             3.2     3.1      3.1               18        18        18               19       19
        Adjusted R2                    .019            .019      .02        .02              .021    .043     .041             .04     .04      .04              .079      .074      .073             .074     .074
        Observations                  13178           14030     14278      14336            14356   16672    17683            17974   18043    18075            12891     13716     13951            13990    14010


     This table reports estimated effects on wage (Panel (a)) and employment (Panel (b)) outcomes for various radii, using the same specification and outcome variables as in Table 2 and
     the radius specified in the column header. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p <
     .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.
                   Table A.8: Spillover adjustments in treatment effects on income (SECC)

                                      Lowest bracket                 Middle bracket                    Highest bracket
                                      (< Rs. 5,000)                (Rs. 5,000 - 10,000)                (> Rs. 10,000)
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)

 Adjusted TE                       -.031∗         -.029∗           .025∗            .023            .0061            .005
                                   (.017)         (.017)          (.014)           (.014)          (.0062)         (.0057)
      Naive ITT                    -.03∗∗         -.03∗∗          .022∗∗           .022∗            .0083           .0081
                                   (.014)         (.014)          (.011)           (.011)          (.0055)         (.0054)
      Spillover onto control        .003          .0044          .00066           -.00025           -.0037          -.0041
                                   (.012)         (.011)         (.0085)          (.0085)          (.0052)          (.005)
 βT                                -.22∗∗         -.21∗∗           .2∗∗            .19∗              .21              .2
                                   (.096)         (.098)         (.099)             (.1)            (.13)           (.13)
 βN                                 .019            .03           .031             .023              -.15            -.16
                                    (.16)          (.16)          (.15)            (.15)            (.25)           (.24)
 Control variables                   No            Yes             No              Yes                No             Yes
 Adjusted R2                        .014           .031           .015             .024              .013             .04
 Control Mean                        .83            .83            .13              .13              .038            .038
 Observations                      1.7 M          1.7 M          1.7 M            1.7 M             1.7 M           1.7 M


This table reports estimated effects on income measures from the SECC data as in Columns 1-6 of Panel (a) of Table 1,
but adjusted for spillovers as in Table 2. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical
significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. Unlike in Table 2 we do not report standard
errors calculated using the method of Conley (2008), as doing so in a sample of 1.7 million observations is excessively
demanding on computation even using a supercomputer. Given clustered standard errors and Conley standard errors are
similar in all other specifications we do not expect they would differ here.




                                                            57
                                         Table A.9: Spillover adjustments in treatment effects on income (survey)

                                                                                Agricultural
                                                   Total income      NREGA                     Other labor     Farm     Business   Miscellaneous
                                                                                   labor
                                                   (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)        (7)           (8)

                   Adjusted TE                   9579∗∗    10634∗∗    1295        3537∗∗         4070∗∗        -1012      243           2502
                                                 (4539)     (4494)   (1061)       (1719)         (1686)       (2655)     (1622)        (2474)
                                                 {4156}    {4182}    {863}        {1541}         {1545}       {2484}     {1534}        {2309}
                        Naive ITT                8898∗∗    9621∗∗      941        3360∗∗         3266∗∗        2219       -677          512
                                                 (3725)    (3737)     (585)       (1471)         (1314)       (2313)     (1328)        (2108)
                                                 {4047}    {4493}     {717}       {1097}         {1233}       {1892}     {1069}        {2057}
                        Spillover onto control     663      1000       349           175           793         -3189      909           1964
                                                 (3199)    (3184)     (969)        (1004)        (1052)       (2034)     (854)         (2047)
                                                 {3060}    {3054}     {812}        {905}         {1003}       {2102}     {798}         {1958}

                   βT                            9030∗∗    9804∗∗∗    1005∗       3392∗∗         3412∗∗        1634       -511          872
                                                 (3670)     (3676)    (584)       (1468)         (1320)       (2250)     (1349)        (2018)
                                                 {3271}    {3301}     {530}       {1267}         {1175}       {1985}     {1312}        {1993}
                   βN                             1476      2228       776         389            1767         -7102      2024          4373
                                                 (7123)    (7090)    (2158)       (2236)         (2342)       (4530)     (1902)        (4559)
58




                                                 {6813}    {6800}    {1809}       {2014}         {2233}       {4682}     {1777}        {4360}
                   Baseline lag                    Yes        No        No           No              No          No        No             No
                   Control mean                  68459.3   68121.7   4394.8       14622.9         8529.1      23550.5    5293.2        11731.5
                   Adjusted R2                    .0386     .0371     .0151        .0583           .0588       .0158     .00925         .0129
                   Observations                    4823      4857      4856         4857            4857        4857      4857           4857

     This table reports estimated effects on income measures from our survey data as in Panel (b) of Table 1, but adjusted for spillovers as in Table 2. Standard
     errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. Standard
     errors calculated using the method of (Conley, 2008) and using a uniform kernel out to 10 km are in { brackets }.
                        Table A.10: Spillover adjustments in treatment effects on prices

                                                       Log of Price Index                        Log of Individual Prices
                                                (1)                            (2)                          (3)
                                          Uniform goods                     All goods

 Adjusted TE                                   -.055                         .0059                        -.0003
                                               (.13)                         (.045)                       (.016)
                                               {.11}                         {.04}                        {.014}
      Naive ITT                                .0078                          .0078                         -.01
                                              (.067)                         (.067)                        (.011)
                                              {.061}                         {.061}                        {.01}
      Spillover onto control                   -.067                         -.0019                        .0095
                                              (.081)                         (.027)                        (.01)
                                              {.071}                         {.023}                       {.0088}

 βT                                           -.0072                          .0072                       -.0071
                                              (.079)                         (.029)                       (.011)
                                              {.072}                         {.026}                       {.011}
 βN                                             -.14                          -.004                         .02
                                               (.17)                         (.055)                       (.021)
                                               {.15}                         {.049}                       {.018}
 Control mean                                  11.19                          10.69                        -3.098
 Adjusted R2                                    .982                           .998                         .951
 Observations                                    58                             58                         17651
 Item FE                                        No                             No                           Yes
 Level                                        Village                        Village                 Item x Household


This table reports estimated impacts on prices using National Sample Survey data as in Table 3, but adjusted for spillovers
as in Table 2. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance based on these
is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. Standard errors calculated using the method of (Conley, 2008) and using a
uniform kernel out to 10 km are in { brackets }.




                                                              59
                      Table A.11: Spillover adjustments in treatment effects on migration

                                                                                                    Migration common
                                  Did migrate?         Days migrated         Household size
                                                                                                         in May?
                                       (1)                   (2)                   (3)                      (4)

 Adjusted TE                          .038∗                  2.8                   .06                     .034
                                     (.022)                 (6.9)                 (.13)                   (.048)
                                     {.021}                  {7}                  {.13}                   {.043}
      Naive ITT                       .023                  .93                    .051                    .051
                                     (.018)                (5.1)                   (.1)                   (.037)
                                     {.014}                {4.5}                  {.17}                   {.034}
      Spillover onto control          .015                   1.8                   .008                    -.017
                                     (.012)                 (2.9)                 (.096)                  (.028)
                                     {.012}                  {3}                  {.094}                  {.025}

 βT                                   .026                  1.3                    .053                    .048
                                     (.018)                (5.4)                   (.1)                   (.038)
                                     {.016}                {5.3}                  {.097}                  {.035}
 βN                                   .034                  4.1                    .018                    -.037
                                     (.028)                (6.5)                  (.21)                   (.063)
                                     {.027}                {6.6}                  {.21}                   {.056}
 Control mean                          .06                   14                    4.2                      .22
 Adjusted R2                          .029                  .016                  .019                      .45
 Observations                         4822                  4858                  4858                      799
 Level                                Hhd                   Hhd                   Hhd                       GP


This table reports estimated impacts on measures of migration, adjusted for spillovers as in Table 2. Columns 1-3 use
data from our household survey, and Column 4 uses data from a separate survey of village elders. “Did migrate?” is
an indicator for whether any household member stayed away from home for the purpose of work during the last year.
“Days migrated” is the sum of all days any household member stayed away from home for work. “Household size”
is the number of household members. “Migration common in May?” is an indicator for whether it was common for
workers to migrate out of the village in search of work during the month of May since the implementation of NREGS.
Baseline lag is the village mean of the dependent variable at baseline, except in the case of column (4) where it is a
contemporaneously collected indicator for whether the same type of migration during the same time was common prior
to the start of NREGS. All regressions include baseline lags, district fixed effects and the first principal component of
a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in
parentheses, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. Standard errors
calculated using the method of (Conley, 2008) and using a uniform kernel out to 10 km are in { brackets }.




                                                           60
             Table A.12: Spillover adjustments in treatment effects on savings, loans and assets

                                         Total savings (Rs.)               Total loans (Rs.)               Owns land (%)
                                                 (1)                              (2)                            (3)

 Adjusted TE                                    1664∗                          18321∗∗∗                        .072∗∗
                                                (918)                           (6712)                         (.033)
                                                {940}                           {6561}                         {.038}
      Naive ITT                                  1139                          11145∗∗                         .053∗∗
                                                (880)                           (4836)                         (.024)
                                                {880}                          {4836}                          {.024}
      Spillover onto control                     507                             6915                           .019
                                                (436)                           (4710)                         (.021)
                                                {436}                           {4956}                         {.024}

 βT                                              1243                          12584∗∗                         .056∗∗
                                                (866)                           (4873)                         (.025)
                                                {871}                          {4819}                          {.029}
 βN                                              1129                           15399                           .042
                                                (971)                          (10489)                         (.047)
                                                {972}                          {11036}                         {.053}
 Control mean                                  2459.0                           61192.6                          .572
 Adjusted R2                                   .00397                            .0108                          .0311
 Observations                                   4832                              4858                           4836


This table reports estimated treatment effects on household assets and liabilities as in Panel (a) of Table 5a, but adjusted
for spillovers as in Table 2. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance
based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01. Standard errors calculated using the method of (Conley,
2008) and using a uniform kernel out to 10 km are in { brackets }




                                                            61
                                Table A.13: Response rates by treatment status
                                                        (a) Full sample
                                              Treatment             Control       Difference        p-value            N
                                                  (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)
 Wage realization (Rs.)                              .013              .011            .0018            .59         7370
 Reservation wage (Rs.)                                .4               .39            .0073            .64        21437
 Days worked private sector                           .33                .3             .031           .037        21437
 Days unpaid                                          .36               .34             .021            .11        21437
 Days idle                                            .35               .33              .02            .12        21437
 Days unpaid/idle                                     .34               .33             .019            .13        21437
 Days worked on NREGS                                 .15               .13             .027            .02        21437
 Days worked private sector > 0                       .52               .49             .028             .2        14514
 Wage realization ≥ reservation wage                  .98               .99           -.0029            .57         7287

                                             (b) People of working age (18-65)
                                                Treatment            Control       Difference        p-value               N
                                                    (1)                   (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)
  Wage realization (Rs.)                                .013               .012           .0014             .68       7055
  Reservation wage (Rs.)                                 .15                .15            -.002            .92      14425
  Days worked private sector                            .085               .082           .0034             .63      14425
  Days unpaid                                           .098               .097           .0016             .86      14425
  Days idle                                             .088               .088      -.000085               .99      14425
  Days unpaid/idle                                      .086               .087        -.00095              .89      14425
  Days worked in NREGS                                  .019               .017             .002             .6      14425
  Days worked private sector > 0                         .54                .52             .016            .44      13210
  Wage realization ≥ reservation wage                    .98                .99          -.0025             .62       6973


This table compares (non-)response rates to questions regarding labor market outcomes across treatment arms and for
both the full sample (Panel (a)) and for working age adults (Panel (b)). Columns 1-2 reports the proportion of missing
answers to the respective question in treatment and control. Column 3 reports the regression-adjusted treatment difference
between treatment and control from a linear regression which also includes district fixed effects and the first principal
component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization as control variables. Column 4 reports
the p-value of a test that the parameter estimated in Column 3 is zero. Column 5 reports the number of individuals from
whom answers were sought, which was the full sample except as noted below. “Wage realization (Rs.)” is the average
daily wage (Rs.) an individual received while working for someone else in June 2012. “Reservation wage (Rs.)” is an
individual’s reservation wage at which he or she would have been willing to work for someone else in June 2012. “Days
worked private sector” is the number of days an individual worked for somebody else in June 2012. “Days idle” and “Days
unpaid” is the number of days an individual stayed idle or did unpaid work in June 2012. “Days unpaid/idle” is the
sum of the latter two variables. Responses were sought from less than the full sample in the following cases: for “Wage
realization (Rs.)” we asked the set of individuals who reported a strictly positive number of days worked for someone else;
for “Wage realization ≥ Reservation wage” is the set of individuals that had non-missing values for both average daily
wages and reservation wage. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses.




                                                               62
                    Table A.14: Effects on household expenditure (survey and NSS data)

                           Short-term Expenditure                  Longer-term expenditure                Monthly Per
                              (Rs. per month)                          (Rs. per year)                  Capita Expenditure
                           (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)                       (5)
 Treatment                -108                -428                  -24              -646                       71
                         (1029)              (1033)               (3239)            (3227)                     (122)
 Baseline lag             No                 Yes                  No                 Yes                       No
 Recall period          1 month            1 month              1 year              1 year                   1 month
 Survey                 NREGA              NREGA               NREGA               NREGA                       NSS
 Control mean            18915               18915                38878              38878                     1894
 Adjusted R2              0.01                0.02                 0.01               0.01                     0.03
 Observations             4943                4909                 4943               4909                      478


This table reports estimated treatment effects on household expenditure using survey data (Columns 1-4) and data from
the 68th round of the NSS (Column 5). “Short-term expenditure” in Columns 1- 2 is the sum of spending on items
such as on food items, fuel, entertainment, personal care items or rent in the past month. “Longer-term expenditure” in
Columns 3-4 is the sum of spending on medical and social (e.g. weddings, funerals) expenses, tuition fees, and durable
goods in the past year. “Monthly Per Capita Expenditure” in column 5 is a measure of all household expenditure as well
as the imputed value of household production. Baseline lag is the village mean of the dependent variable at baseline. All
regressions include district fixed effects and those from our survey data include the first principal component of a vector of
mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses,
and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.




                                                             63
                                                   Table A.15: Effects on NREGS project counts & types

                                            Number of distinct projects                                            Number days spent working on
                        (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)       (6)      (7)         (8)            (9)           (10)        (11)     (12)
                                                               Land                                                                     Land
                       Total   Construction    Irrigation                   Roads    Other     Total   Construction     Irrigation                  Roads     Other
                                                            development                                                              development
      Treatment         -1.2        .11             .1           -1           .2∗      -.95      61         -10             25           -119        161       9.1
                       (2.9)       (.44)          (.31)         (2.7)        (.12)    (1.4)    (441)       (103)          (247)         (435)       (112)     (198)
      Baseline lag     Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes      Yes
      Control mean      32          2.8            1.8           16           .51       11     6539         492           1770          2606          329     1409
      Adjusted R2       .24         .17            .11            .2          .13      .11      .35          .3            .47           .24          .11     .073
      Observations     2837        2837           2837          2837         2837     2837     2899        2837           2837          2837         2837     2837




     This table reports estimated treatment effects on NREGS activity by project type using NREGS muster roll data. The outcomes in Columns 1-5 are counts
     by Gram panchayat of unique project identification numbers for which some work was reported during the endline study period (May 28 to July 15, 2012)
     in total (Column 1) and by type (Columns 2-6). In Columns 7-12 the outcome variable is the number of days worked by Gram panchayat during the endline
     study period and on projects of the given type. The baseline lag variables are constructed analogously but for the baseline study period (May 31 to July
     4, 2010). All regressions include district fixed effects and the first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization.
     Standard errors clustered at the mandal level are in parentheses, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.
64
                                                    Table A.16: Effects on land utilization and irrigation

                                                                                                     Non-agricultural                                     Net area
                               Irrigated land           Total land           Total fallows                                       Net area sown
                                                                                                           use                                            irrigated
                                    (1)                     (2)                   (3)                       (4)                        (5)                   (6)
      Treatment                     -.035                   -.13                  -.74                      -.83                       1.1                  .0018
                                   (.037)                  (.14)                 (1.2)                     (1.3)                      (1.6)                 (.01)
      Baseline lag                   No                     No                   Yes                       Yes                       Yes                    Yes
      Control mean                  7.2                     11                    11                        9.1                       28                     .18
      Adjusted R2                   0.02                   0.04                  0.62                      0.62                      0.88                   0.83
      Observations               1,820,629              1,820,303                154                       154                       154                    154
      Level                      Household              Household               Mandal                    Mandal                    Mandal                 Mandal
      Data source                  SECC                   SECC                   DSH                       DSH                       DSH                    DSH



     This table reports estimated treatment effects on measures of land utilization using data from the Socioeconomic and Caste Census (Columns 1-2) and from
     the annual District Statistical Handbooks (DSH) 2012-2013 (Columns 3-6). The DSH contains incomplete data for three mandals, leaving us with 154 out
     of our 157 study mandals. In Columns 1-2 the units are acres of land; “Irrigated land” is the amount in acres of land owned with assured irrigation for two
     crops, and “Total land” is the total amount of land owned, including both irrigated and unirrigated land. In Columns 3-6 the units are percentage of total
     mandal area. “Total fallows” is the total area which at one point was taken up or could be taken up for cultivation but is currently left fallow, and is equal
     to the sum of “current fallows” (cropped area which is kept fallow in the current year), “other fallows” (land which is has been left fallow for more than 1
65




     year but less than 5 years) and “culturable waste” (land available which has been left fallow for the more than 5 years but would be available for cultivation).
     “Non-agricultural use” is land occupied by buildings, roads, railways or under water. “Net area sown” is total area sown with crops and orchards. “Net
     area irrigated” is the total area irrigated through any source. All regressions include district fixed effects and the first principal component of a vector of
     mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization. Columns 1-2 also include household-level control variables (age of the household head, an indicator
     for whether the head is illiterate, and and indicator for whether the household belongs to a Scheduled Caste or Tribe), and Columns 3-6 also include the lag
     of the dependant variables from the 2009-2010 DSH. Standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust and in Columns 1-2 are clustered at the
     mandal level. Statistical significance based on these is denoted as: ∗ p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.
                                   Table A.17: Effects on loans, by type of lender


                                Total                     Formal              Semi-Formal                    Informal
                        (1)               (2)       (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)              (8)
 Treatment            11210∗            11077∗      2606        2982        -457         -534        8562∗           7710
                      (4741)            (4801)     (2398)      (2358)      (1001)       (1027)       (4144)         (4157)
 Constant            49155∗∗∗           47618∗∗∗   5734∗       5187∗       3053∗∗       3037∗∗      39564∗∗∗       37556∗∗∗
                      (7419)             (7647)    (2335)      (2352)      (1035)       (1062)       (6416)         (6611)
 District FE            Yes               Yes       Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
 Baseline lag           No                Yes        No         Yes          No          Yes            No            Yes
 Control mean         68108              68108     15358       15358        4970         4970         46832          46832
 Adjusted R2           0.01               0.01      0.01        0.02        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01
 Observations          4943              4909      4943        4909         4942         4908         4942           4908




This table reports impacts on borrowing as in Columns 3 and 4 of Panel (a) of Table 5a, but broken down by lender.
“Formal” loans are those issued by a commercial bank or a finance company. “Semi-Formal” loans are those issued by a
micro-finance institution, a self-help group, a cooperative or a “chit fund,” which is a communal savings scheme regulated
by the Chit Fund Act of 1982 in which members make periodic contributions to be paid out on a rotating basis at specified
points in time. Finally, “informal” loans are those issued by money lenders, clients, shopkeepers, friends, neighbors or
family members. The baseline lag is the village mean of the dependent variable at baseline. All regressions include
district fixed effects and the first principal component of a vector of mandal characteristics used to stratify randomization.
Standard errors clustered at the mandal level in parentheses, and statistical significance based on these is denoted as:
∗
  p < .10,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < .01.




                                                             66
                      Figure A.1: Study districts with treatment and control mandals




This map shows the 8 study districts - Adilabad, Anantapur, Kadapa, Khammam, Kurnool, Nalgonda, Nellore, and
Vizianagaram - and the assignment of mandals (sub-districts) within those districts to study arms. Mandals were randomly
assigned to one of three waves: 112 to wave 1 (treatment), 139 to wave 2, and 45 to wave 3 (control). Wave 2 was created
as a buffer to maximize the time between program rollout in treatment and control waves; we did not collect survey data
in these mandals. We did not assign “non-study” mandals to an arm because the Smartcards initiative had already started
in those mandals or in some cases (109 out of 405) because they were entirely urban and thus had no NREGS activity.
Randomization was stratified by district and by a principal component of mandal characteristics including population,
literacy, proportion of Scheduled Caste and Tribe, NREGS jobcards, NREGS peak employment rate, proportion of SSP
disability recipients, and proportion of other SSP pension recipients. The two mandals marked are examples of those
which by had chance had a high (low) proportion of their neighbors treated.




                                                          67
                     Figure A.2: Constructing measures of exposure to spatial spillovers




This figure illustrates the construction of measures of spatial exposure to treatment within radius R. Dark (light) blue
dots represent treatment (control) villages; black lines represent mandal borders. An illustrative pair of villages in
treatment (a) and control (b) mandals are denoted with the white X symbol. ÑpR is the fraction of villages within a radius
R of a given village p and within a different mandal (excluding villages in the same mandal from both the numerator and
denominator) which were assigned to treatment. In the figure above, these measures are ÑaR = 25 and ÑbR = 54 .




                                                            68
                                                                                           Figure A.3: Official disbursement trends in NREGS




                                            Average Amount Disbursed (in '0000 INR)
                                                                                                                                                   Control
                                                                                                                                                   Treatment
                                                                                      15




                                                                                      10




                                                                                       5




                                                                                       0
                                                                                                Mar−2012     May−2012    Jul−2012    Sep−2012   Nov−2012
                                                                                                                         Month


This figure (reproduced from Muralidharan et al. (2016)) shows official NREGS payments for all workers averaged at the
village-week level for treatment and control areas. The grey band denotes the endline study period, May 28 to July 15,
2012, on which our survey questions focus.



                                                                                               Figure A.4: Annualized per capita income

                                 1.00
            Cumulative density




                                 0.75



                                 0.50



                                 0.25



                                 0.00
                                        0                                                           20000                  40000                60000          80000
                                                                                                           Annualized Per Capita Income (in Rs.)

                                                                                                                     Control        Treatment
This figure plots the empirical cumulative distribution function of total annualized per capita income by household from
the endline survey separately for households in the treatment (dark blue) and control (light blue) groups. The vertical
line indicates the annualized official per capita poverty line (Rs. 860 per person per month or Rs. 10,320 per person per
year).




                                                                                                                        69
    Figure A.5: Changes in wages and availability of NREGS work by month and treatment status


                                                 60

                                                 50
    Wage (in Rs.)




                                                 40

                                                 30

                                                 20
    % of study villages with an active project




                                                 10


                                                 1
                                                 .8
                                                 .6
                                                 .4
                                                 .2
                                                 0
                                                      January   March   May            July      September   November
                                                                               Month

                                                                        Treatment      Control

The figure plots the average change in agricultural wages between baseline and endline (top series) and the proportion
of study villages with at least one active NREGS project (bottom series), both by month during 2012 and by treatment
status. We use measures of (changes in) agricultural wages from surveys of prominent figures in each village and weight
these by (inverse) village sampling probabilities. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors clustered at the mandal
level. We measure NREGS project activity using muster roll data from 2012 and define a village as having an active
project if any work was reported in that village during that month.




                                                                              70
