                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ARE CEOS DIFFERENT? CHARACTERISTICS OF TOP MANAGERS

                                        Steven N. Kaplan
                                        Morten Sorensen

                                       Working Paper 23832
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23832


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




We thank Geoff Smart, Randy Street, Alan Foster and Elena Botelho of ghSMART for providing
the data and for helpful discussions and comments. We thank Roland Benabou, Clifton Green,
John Graham, Dan Puchniak, Laura Starks and seminar participants at the 2017 AFA Meetings,
the 2016 Global Corporate Governance Colloquium, Cambridge Judge Business School,
Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, LBS, LSE, Nottingham University Business
School, Saïd Business School, Stockholm School of Economics, and Università Bocconi for
helpful comments. We also thank Donald Chi, Grace Duan, Fan Jiang, Arthur Klisz, Elaine
Tang, Elyse Wummer, Emily Xiao and Stephanie Xiao for able research assistance. This research
has been supported by the Fama-Miller Center, the Center for Research in Security Prices and the
Booth Initiative on Global Markets. Morten Sorensen gratefully acknowledges funding by the
Danish Council for Independent Research (“Det Frie Forskningsråd”) under the Sapere Aude
program through grant number: DFF–4003-00095. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23832.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Steven N. Kaplan and Morten Sorensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are CEOs Different? Characteristics of Top Managers
Steven N. Kaplan and Morten Sorensen
NBER Working Paper No. 23832
September 2017
JEL No. G34,J16,M12,M5,M51

                                         ABSTRACT

We use a dataset of over 2,600 executive assessments to study thirty individual characteristics of
candidates for top executive positions – CEO, CFO, COO and others. We classify the thirty
candidate characteristics with four primary factors: general ability, execution vs. interpersonal,
charisma vs. analytic, and strategic vs. managerial. CEO candidates tend to score higher on these
factors; CFO candidates score lower. Conditional on being a candidate, executives with greater
interpersonal skills are more likely to be hired, suggesting that such skills are important in the
selection process. Scores on the four factors also predict future career progression. Non-CEO
candidates who score higher on the four factors are subsequently more likely to become CEOs.
The patterns are qualitatively similar for public, private equity and venture capital owned
companies. We do not find economically large differences in the four factors for men and
women. Women, however, are subsequently less likely to become CEOs, holding the four factors
constant.


Steven N. Kaplan
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu

Morten Sorensen
Copenhagen Business School
Solbjerg Plads 3
2000 Frederiksberg
Denmark
mso.fi@cbs.dk
        Large management, popular and anecdotal literatures describe the traits, skills and

abilities that characterize CEOs and other leaders. These literatures imply that CEOs differ from

other executives. They implicitly, and often explicitly, suggest what types of activities aspiring

CEOs should undertake in order to increase their chances of becoming a CEO. For example,

Collins (2001) argues that great CEOs have unwavering resolve and are compellingly modest.

George et al. (2007) argues that leaders should “demonstrate a passion for their purpose, …

establish long-term, meaningful relationships and have the self-discipline to get results.”

Waldman and Yammarino (1999) argue that CEOs need to be charismatic. Ones and Dilchert

(2009) summarize the industrial psychology literature as finding that successful executives have

high cognitive ability, conscientiousness / achievement and extraversion / assertiveness. Pfeffer

(2015 and 2016), on the other hand, generally criticizes these kinds of suggestions as “leadership

BS,” not describing what leaders and CEOs actually are like, and he argues that “leadership is

not about winning popularity contests or being the most beloved person in a social organization.”

        Because it is difficult to obtain detailed systematic information on a meaningful sample

of CEOs, there are few empirical studies of this topic. The management literature generally

relies on publicly observable measures, such as job tenure, college attended and career path (see

Hambrick 2007) or studies smaller, specific samples of CEOs (e.g., 95 credit union CEOs in

Colbert et al. 2014, or 32 technology firms in O’Reilley et al. 2014).1

        Adams et al. (2016), Kaplan, Klebanov and Sorensen (2012) (henceforth “KKS”),

Palaiou and Furnham (2015) and Green et al. (2015) are recent exceptions. Adams et al. use

cognitive and non-cognitive test data measured at age 18 on a large sample of Swedish men.


1
 For other work Bandiera et al. (2015), Benmelech and Frydman (2015), Bennedsen et al. (2008), Bertrand and
Schoar (2003), Colbert et al. (2014), Falato et al. (forthcoming), Malmendier and Tate (2005 and 2009), Mintzberg
(2013), Ulrich et al. (2009), and Yammarino et al. (2005).

                                                        1
They find that CEOs score higher on the cognitive and particularly non-cognitive tests than other

high-caliber professionals – doctors and lawyers. Furthermore, larger companies hire the more

talented CEOs. KKS (2012) use detailed personality assessments to study 316 candidates for

CEO roles in venture capital and private equity-funded companies. Using this data, they classify

the candidates by two factors: the first factor captures each candidate’s general ability; the

second factor describes the candidate as being either more execution oriented or having greater

interpersonal skills. In their sample, they find that CEOs with greater general ability and,

particularly, more execution-oriented characteristics tend to be more successful CEOs. Palaiou

and Furnham (2015) study the (self-reported) personality scores of 138 CEOs and almost 8,000

other employees of UK companies administered by a psychological consulting firm. They find

that CEOs are more extraverted, more agreeable, and, particularly, less neurotic and more

conscientiousness than other employees. Green et al. (2015) use linguistic algorithms to measure

the extraversion of company executives during earnings conference calls. They find that

extraverted CFOs and CEOs earn higher salaries and extraverted CFOs are more likely to be

promoted to CEOs.

           This study extends KKS (2012) by expanding the dataset to more than 2,600 assessments,

including assessments for positions other than CEO. The assessments are based on four-hour

structured interviews performed by ghSMART.2 After each interview, ghSMART produces an

assessment report with a detailed description of the candidate’s background and characteristics,

including ratings of thirty specific characteristics and abilities (see Table A-1). Most of the

assessments were completed when the candidates were considered for CEO, COO, CFO or other

top executive positions. The firms requesting the assessments include companies governed


2
    Botelho et al. (forthcoming) also use the ghSMART data to study the determinants of CEO success.

                                                          2
under different ownership forms, including venture capital, private equity-owned (as in KKS),

other privately owned, and publicly traded companies. We also track the candidates’ subsequent

career paths, both to determine whether they were hired for the positions for which they were

assessed as well as whether they ultimately became top executives, particularly CEOs, of the

assessing companies or any other companies.

       The dataset allows us to investigate several questions. First, to identify the main

dimensions of variation in managerial characteristics, we use factor analysis — a traditional

empirical approach in studies of personality traits (see Fabrigar et al. 1999, and Borghans et al.

2008). We find four factors that have intuitive interpretations: general ability, execution vs.

interpersonal, charisma vs. analytic, and strategic vs. managerial details. The first two factors are

similar to those found in KKS (2012).

       The first factor loads positively on all assessed characteristics and appears to represent a

candidate’s overall talent. This factor can be interpreted as analogous to the general measure of

managerial talent and ability assumed by theorists such as Rosen (1981).

       The second factor loads positively on Respect, Open to Criticism, Listening Skills, and

Teamwork, which reflect communication and interpersonal abilities, and it loads negatively on

Fast, Efficiency, Aggressive, Persistence, and Proactive, which describe capabilities related to

resoluteness and execution skills. Thus, this factor classifies candidates as having either greater

interpersonal or greater execution skills.

       The third factor loads positively on Analytical Skills, Organization and Attention to

Detail. It loads negatively on Enthusiasm, Persuasion, Aggressive and Proactive. Hence, we

interpret this factor as classifying candidates as being either more analytical or having stronger

charisma.


                                                  3
           The fourth factor loads positively on Strategic Vision, Brainpower and Creative while

loading negatively on Attention to Detail, Holds People Accountable, and Organization. We

interpret this factor as classifying candidates as having a broader and more strategic perspective

versus focusing more narrowly on details pertaining to the organization and people management.

In short, the fourth factor describes candidates as either strategic or focused on managerial

details.

           Second, using the factor decomposition, we find that CEO candidates tend to have greater

general talent, greater execution ability, more charisma, and greater strategic ability. In contrast,

CFO candidates tend to have lower general talent, less charisma, and be more analytical and with

a focus on managerial details. In short, according to our classification, the characteristics of

CEO and CFO candidates are opposites.

           Third, we investigate who among the assessed candidates are hired. For each type of

position (CEO, CFO, etc.), hired candidates have greater interpersonal skills than the average

assessed candidates, suggesting that such skills are important in the selection process.

           Fourth, we pursue an out of sample analysis that considers who ultimately becomes a

CEO. To do this, we follow the executives who were considered for positions other than the

CEO position at the time of the assessment and see whether they subsequently become CEOs.

Among these non-CEO candidates, those who have greater general ability and more execution,

charisma, and strategic abilities are more likely to subsequently become CEOs. This result

provides external validity for our other findings. It confirms that the differences in personalities

across different positions continue to hold more generally for executive who are hired or

promoted without the involvement of ghSMART and for other companies than those in our

initial sample.


                                                   4
       Fifth, our results are qualitatively similar for candidates in the three primary types of

ownership structures – public, private equity and venture capital owned – suggesting that the

results in KKS (2012) generalize from private equity-funded companies.

       Sixth, we compare female and male executives. We find that there are no meaningful

differences in the four factors for men and women. Women, however, are subsequently less

likely to become CEOs, holding the four factors constant.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes our data and sample. Section II

explores the main dimensions of variation in the directly measured executive characteristics and

their relation to subjective classifications. Section III considers the relation of the executive

characteristics to the executive positions. We also measure how the candidates who were

actually hired differ from all of those who were interviewed. Section IV studies the relationship

between executive characteristics and subsequent career positions. Section V concludes with a

discussion of how our results relate to the economics, management and popular literatures.



I.     Data

A.     Assessments

       Like KKS (2012), we rely on a proprietary data set containing detailed assessments

performed by ghSMART, a consulting firm that focuses on assessing top management

candidates. Investors, company boards or company management teams engage ghSMART to

assess candidates both for new and existing roles. The majority of the executives are candidates

for management positions at companies funded by venture capital, growth equity, or buyout

firms. We combine growth equity and buyout funded companies into a group we call private

equity funded companies. The assessments in our sample (and interviews on which they are


                                                  5
based) were completed primarily between 2001 and 2011. With a few exceptions, the candidates

were employed and interviewing for positions in the United States and Canada.

       Unlike the sample of venture capital and private equity-backed firms in KKS (2012), this

sample also contains a large number of candidates for publicly-traded and other private

companies. More importantly, the sample includes candidates evaluated for non-CEO positions.

In most of the analysis, we focus on the candidates assessed for CEO, CFO, and COO positions,

although this constitutes only about half the sample. The other half contains candidates for a

number of other executive positions. We use CXO to denote CEO, CFO, or COO positions (i.e.,

the number of CXO candidates is the union of candidates assessed for CEO, CFO, and COO

positions). We use ALL to denote all the candidates in the sample, including candidates for

positions that are neither CEO, CFO, or COO positions. Some candidates are considered for

several positions (e.g., either CEO or CFO). These candidates are included in all the categories

they are interviewed for, so the sum of CEO, CFO, and COO candidates sometimes exceeds the

number of CXO candidates.

       ghSMART is not an executive recruiting firm and, therefore, does not suggest which

candidate(s) to interview for a given position. ghSMART only assesses the specific candidate(s)

under consideration. ghSMART does not receive a fee contingent on whether or not a candidate

is hired. It has no apparent incentives to deliver biased assessments. According to ghSMART,

its main objective is to provide accurate assessments to sustain its reputation and generate repeat

business. No candidate has ever refused to participate in an interview or suggested that it

presented an unreasonable burden or intrusion into the candidate’s privacy.

       ghSMART’s assessments are based on four-hour structured interviews. During the




                                                 6
interview, the interviewer3 asks for specific examples of the candidate’s actions and behavior at

every previous job and life stage, starting with the candidate’s childhood and progressing

through the candidate’s education and subsequent career path. The interviewer then summarizes

the candidate's history and behavior in a 20 to 40-page report. The report is effectively a mini-

biography of the candidate.

         In addition to the narrative, each report includes scores or ratings on thirty specific

characteristics in five general areas. These areas, defined by ghSMART, are Leadership,

Personal, Intellectual, Motivational, and Interpersonal. Table A-1 repeats Table I from KKS

(2012) and shows an excerpt from ghSMART’s internal guidelines that describe the thirty

characteristics along with the behaviors that determine their scoring.4

         The reports also include information about the candidates’ educational and family

backgrounds. Reports sometimes include scores of other characteristics that are specific to the

particular company or situation. Because these characteristics are not consistently and

systematically reported, we do not include them in our analyses.

         For each of the thirty characteristics, the report scores the candidate with a letter grade

from D (lowest) to A+ (highest), reflecting the extent to which the candidate’s past behavior

reflects the nature of the particular characteristic. We convert these letter grades to numerical

scores as follows. We code all grades of B or below as 1 (we combine these grades because there

are relatively few of them). We code grades of A and A+ as 4, as there are relatively few A+’s.

We code grades of B+ as 2 and grades of A- as 3. Our results are qualitatively similar under

different coding schemes.
3
  The ghSMART interviewers generally hold doctoral degrees or degrees from top MBA programs, and have
worked at consulting firms (such as McKinsey & Co., Bain, and Boston Consulting Group). ghSMART reports a
high degree of consistency of assessments across interviewers. When we include interviewer fixed effects, as
indicated in the tables, the magnitude and statistical significance of the main coefficients are largely unchanged.
4
  Smart and Street (2008) provide additional information and detail about ghSMART’s interviewing methodology.

                                                          7
         An important concern is whether it is possible for the candidates to “game” or “fake” the

interviews by providing answers that they believe will help them be hired, even if they do not

reflect their actual personalities. As discussed in KKS (2012), there are a number of reasons why

we believe the ghSMART analyses and ratings are reliable. The assessments are formed using

the best practices from organizational psychology, including using external interviewers not self-

assessments, and using extensive structured interviews rather than shorter questionnaires. In

organizational psychology, these practices have been found to produce valid assessments, which

are consistent across tests and robust to gaming and faking by the test subjects. ghSMART

charges at least $20,000 per assessment and has seen its business grow substantially, suggesting

that ghSMART customers find the assessments useful.5 Moreover, at the time the assessments

were conducted, ghSMART and the candidates would not have been aware of the factor structure

we document. Finally, it is difficult to reconcile the empirical results with significant faking. If

the assessments were uninformative, there would not be a relationship between the assessments

and subsequent career trajectory that we document in the out-of-sample analysis.

         For each candidate, we code several additional variables. We note whether the candidate

is an internal candidate or an outside candidate. We note the gender of the candidate. We

consider the industry of the company and the candidate’s previous experience in this industry.

When possible, we include the size of the company. Because many of the companies are private,

it is not possible to measure size precisely. Instead, we categorize companies as either start-up,

companies with sales below $100 million, with sales between $100 million and $1 billion, and

with sales above $1 billion.
5
  Additionally, albeit anecdotally, several PE firms told us that they do not make any investments without a CEO
assessment of the type ghSMART provides. While economic theory suggests that it may be rational for candidates
to attempt to misrepresent their types, economic theory also prescribes that it would be irrational for investors to rely
on such assessments if they were uninformative. Assessments also are costly: in addition to the fee charged by
ghSMART, assessments require at least four hours of a candidate’s time.

                                                           8
       Research assistants performed much of the coding of the assessments. The research

assistants read the assessments and transcribed the ratings directly from the reports. After

reading the assessments, we also asked the research assistants to provide their subjective ratings

of each candidate based on the description or mini-biography in the assessments. The research

assistants rated whether the candidate appeared to be a “nice person,” “a risk taker,” an

“outgoing person” (versus a reserved one), “good at sales,” and whether the candidate had a

“narrow or broad career path.” For these ratings, we did not provide the research assistants with

any more precise guidelines or definitions.



B.     Hiring Decisions and Subsequent Career Trajectory

       We code the candidate’s subsequent career path following the interview, including

whether the candidate was hired for the position for which he or she was assessed and the

candidate’s subsequent managerial positions. We determine the subsequent career path primarily

from public sources. We rely on LinkedIn, which has extremely good coverage of corporate

executives. We also use CapitalIQ, Zoominfo.com, LexisNexis, and general internet searches.

In a few cases, we use information from KKS (2012) obtained from surveying some of the

buyout and venture capital firms that engaged ghSMART to assess CEO candidates.



C.     Sample Descriptive Statistics

       Table 1 shows the distribution of candidates in the sample. Panel A shows that the

sample contains more than 2,600 assessments, taking place between 2000 and 2013, with over

2,400 occurring between 2001 and 2011.




                                                 9
       Panel B presents additional information about the candidates. About 10% of the

candidates are female. Roughly 5% of CEO candidates, 8% of CFO candidates, and 8% of COO

candidates are female.

       The average candidate has worked for his or her current company for an average of 4.9

years out of an average career of 23.5 years. Almost 60% of the candidates are outsiders, i.e.,

they did not work for the company for which they were being assessed. The average candidate

has worked for 4.6 companies during his or her career up to the time of the assessment. Almost

60% of the assessed candidates were subsequently hired for or retained the position for which

they were assessed.

       Table 2 presents more information on the assessed candidates. Panel A presents the

distribution of positions and types of ownership. The executives in our sample are assessed for

a diverse set of positions. Roughly half of the sample is assessed for CEO, CFO or COO

positions. About 31% of the candidates are assessed for CEO positions; 13% for CFO; and 6%

for COO. Almost 1,000 candidates were assessed for jobs that can be considered functional

level jobs. About 40% of these were financial jobs such as controller or vice president of

finance. Slightly more than 25% were in operations, while slightly fewer than 25% were in

marketing.

       The sample candidates were assessed for companies that had a range of ownership forms.

We characterize ownership status as VC-funded, growth equity-funded, buyout-funded, public,

other private and investor. Almost half of the sample comes from buyout and growth equity

funded companies (classified as private equity funded companies below). An additional 15%

come from venture capital funded companies. Unlike KKS (2012), this sample also includes

executives from publicly owned companies who constitute 11% of the sample.


                                                10
         Panel B presents the relationship of hiring outcomes to whether the candidate is an

insider, i.e., currently works for the company. In many cases, the insider is also the incumbent

for the position. Roughly 59% of the assessed executives are hired for the position. Insiders are

substantially more likely to be hired (or retained) than outsiders.

         Panel A of Table 3 reports the research assistants’ subjective assessments by position.

They rated 78% as nice persons, 58% as risk takers, 74% as having outgoing personalities, 65%

as being good at sales, and 35% as having broad past careers. These ratings provide background

and perspective for our interpretation of the factor scores, as discussed below. CEOs are

significantly more likely, and CFOs significantly less likely, to be perceived as risk takers, as

having outgoing personalities, and as being good at sales.

         Panel B of Table 3 reports the subjective assessments of all candidates by the ownership

status of the assessing company. VC-funded firms are more likely to assess risk takers while

public companies are less likely to assess outgoing candidates and candidates with broad career

paths.

         Panel C reports the subjective assessments of CEOs by the ownership status of the

assessing company. Perhaps surprisingly, private equity-owned firms seem less likely to

consider risk takers and more likely to consider nice persons for their CEO positions than are

public companies.

         These subjective ratings and comparisons are intended to be suggestive. In the next

section, we show how they relate to the factors we estimate in the data.




                                                 11
II.      Characteristics and the Four Factors of Managerial Personalities

         Table 4 presents the average scores for the thirty characteristics. The average scores for

each position are similar, with the exception of CFOs who score lower overall.

         The scores are highly correlated across characteristics, as also documented in KKS

(2012), making it difficult to infer the effects of individual characteristics. E.g., it is not feasible

to include all thirty characteristics as explanatory variables in a multivariate regression due to

multi-collinearity. Therefore, like KKS (2012), we use a factor analysis to isolate the main

dimensions of variation in the characteristics.

         For some executives, ratings for one of the thirty characteristics are missing. Rather than

discarding those executives from the sample, we augment the data by estimating the expected

value of the missing rating using an OLS regression with the other characteristics as explanatory

variables.



A.       Factor Scores

         Panels A and B of Table 5 show the results of the factor analysis.6 Panel B shows the

eigenvalues and the fraction of the total variation in the characteristics that are explained by the

first six factors. An eigenvalue exceeding one suggests that the factor is valid. Based on these

eigenvalues, we focus on the first four factors from the factor analysis that combined explain

51.2% of the total variation in the candidates’ characteristics.




6
  In the literature, the term factor analysis is used to describe a range of statistical procedures, including procedures
that are sometimes known as principal component analysis (PCA). Our estimates are produced using Stata’s “factor”
command with the “ml” and “altdivisor” options, and all presented factors are non-rotated. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin
measure of sampling adequacy is 0.94, suggesting that the data are very suited for factor analysis.

                                                           12
         For the four factors, the factor loadings for the individual characteristics are shown in

Panel A.7 All four factors have natural interpretations. The first two factors are similar to those

found in KKS (2012), which used a much smaller sample (of 316 CEOs), and therefore did not

have sufficient statistical power to recover factors three and four.

         Panel B of Table 5 shows that the first factor captures 32.2% of the total variation. Panel

A shows that this first factor has positive loadings on all the individual characteristics, ranging

from a loading of 0.29 on Integrity to a loading of 0.74 on Proactive. We therefore interpret this

factor as a measure of the candidates’ general ability.8 The structure of this first factor is

commonly encountered in factor analysis, and it reflects the general empirical tendency of

characteristics to all move together.

         The second factor explains 9.9% of the variation in the characteristics and has two

distinct sets of loadings. The more positive loadings, in decreasing order, are for the

characteristics: Respect, Open to Criticism, Listening Skills and Teamwork. These

characteristics appear to capture a candidate’s interpersonal skills, and they also arguably reflect

the Big Five personality trait of agreeableness. In contrast, the more negative loadings are on the

characteristics: Aggressive, Fast, Proactive, Holds People Accountable and Removes

Underperformers. These characteristics arguably reflect a candidate’s execution ability.

         The second factor, therefore, appears to sort candidates into those with better

interpersonal skills (and agreeableness) versus those with greater execution ability. It assigns

positive scores to candidates with greater interpersonal skills and negative scores to candidates

7
  Note that the sign and magnitude of factor loadings are unidentified and cannot be interpreted. Mathematically, a
factor is a vector that is only identified up to scale and sign. It classifies characteristics that tend to vary together and
defines a scale that measures this covariation, but the scale itself is arbitrary. If one were to, say, reverse the signs
and double the magnitudes of all the individual loadings of a factor, this would change the scale but the statistical
inference about the effects of all factors would remain unchanged.
8
  The pattern is also consistent with individual interviewers generally rating candidates higher or lower. The results
are largely unchanged when we include interviewer fixed effects.

                                                             13
with greater execution ability. The importance of this factor is consistent with the models in

Rotemberg and Saloner (1993) and Bolton, Brunnermeier, and Veldkamp (2013) that contrast

resoluteness and overconfidence with empathy and interpersonal skills in their models of CEO

types.

           The third factor explains 5.2% of the total variation in the characteristics. Panel A shows

that its more negative loadings are for: Enthusiasm, Persuasion, Aggressive, Proactive, and Fast.

These characteristics seem to describe more charismatic candidates. In contrast, the more

positive loadings are on: Analytical Skills, Attention to Detail, Organization and Brainpower,

characteristics that describe candidates with stronger analytical skills.

           We thus interpret the third factor as sorting candidates into those with more charismatic

personalities, who have a negative score on this factor, and candidates who have more analytical

skills, who have a positive score on this factor. This factor appears to be negatively related to the

Big Five personality trait of extraversion and positively related to the Big Five personality trait

of conscientiousness.9

           Finally, the fourth factor explains 3.9% of the variation in the characteristics. The more

positive loadings are on: Strategic Vision, Brainpower, Analytical Skills, and Creative; the more

negative loadings are on: Holds People Accountable, Efficiency, Attention to Detail, and

Organization. This factor appears to sort candidates into those who focus on the bigger picture

and have a more strategic focus versus those who have more managerial approach with a

narrower focus on details. The fourth factor thus sorts candidates into those with a big-picture

and strategic focus versus those with a narrower attention to managerial details.




9
    See also Gow et al. (2016) who use a cluster analysis on CEOs and relate them to the Big Five factors.

                                                           14
       Overall, the results are consistent with the factor analysis in KKS (2012) performed on a

smaller sample of 316 candidates for CEO positions. The first two factors are qualitatively

similar. The candidates vary in their general level of ability as well as in their tilt towards either

interpersonal or execution-related characteristics. The larger sample used here further allows us

to identify the third and fourth factors. Candidates vary in their level of charisma (versus

analytical) and their focus on strategic issues (versus managerial details).



B.     Factors Scores and Subjective Ratings

       Panel C of Table 5 shows pairwise correlations between the four factors, the five

subjective ratings, and gender. Candidates whom the research assistants subjectively rated as

nice persons score significantly higher on general ability (Factor 1), interpersonal (positive

Factor 2), and charisma (negative Factor 3). The relationship is particularly strong for Factor 2,

which is consistent with our interpretation of the factor as measuring interpersonal skills. The

concomitant implication, that candidates with stronger execution skills are less likely to be

perceived as nice persons, is also consistent with Pfeffer (2015).

       Executives perceived as greater risk-takers score significantly higher on general ability

(Factor 1), execution (negative Factor 2), charisma (negative Factor 3) and strategic focus

(positive Factor 4).

       Executives perceived as outgoing score significantly higher on general ability (Factor 1),

charisma (negative Factor 3) and strategic focus (positive Factor 4). The correlation with

(negative) Factor 3 is particularly strong, which is consistent with our interpretation of the factor

as measuring charisma.




                                                  15
        Executives perceived to be good at sales score higher on general ability (Factor 1),

execution (negative Factor 2) and charisma (negative Factor 3). The strongest correlations are

with the general ability and charisma factors.

        Finally, we note that the correlations between factor scores and gender are small, both

economically and statistically. None of the correlations between gender and the factor scores are

statistically significant.

        Overall, the correlations in Panel C of Table 5 indicate that the subjective evaluations of

the assessments by our research assistants are strongly consistent with our interpretation of the

factors generated by the factor analysis.



III.    Executive characteristics and executive positions

A.      Factor Scores for candidates for different positions

        Panel A of Table 6 reports the average factor scores across positions, and Figure 1

presents these data graphically. It is apparent that CEOs and CFOs receive diametrically

opposed scores. For each of the four factors, the average scores of CEO and CFO candidates

have opposite signs. CEO candidates score highest on general ability (Factor 1), execution

(negative Factor 2), charisma (negative Factor 3) and strategic focus (positive Factor 4). CFO

candidates, on the other hand, have lower scores on general ability, and score higher on

interpersonal (positive Factor 2), analytical (positive Factor 3), and focus on managerial details

(negative Factor 4). These patterns show in Figure 1, where CEOs are in the upper left quadrant

while CFOs are in the lower right quadrant.

        Panel A also lists factor scores for candidates for COO, CXO (either CEO, CFO or COO)

and ALL candidates in the sample. COO candidates tend to have factor scores between CEO


                                                 16
and CFO candidates (except for Factor 4, suggesting that COOs have a stronger focus on

managerial details). These results suggest that CEOs are substantially different from other

executives in intuitive ways.

       The results are consistent with those in Graham, Harvey and Puri (2013) who also find

that CEOs are different from CFOs. In their survey-based data, they find that CEOs are more

optimistic and more risk-tolerant than CFOs.

       Although not reported in the table, the sample also contains thirty-three founders. They

score extremely high on charisma (negative Factor 3). We believe that this, too, is consistent

with our interpretation and the validity of these measures.

       When interpreting the scores above, it is important to acknowledge that they are relative

scores within the sample. While the CFOs may score lower on some of these factors than CEOs,

that does not mean they are low relative to the average person. The results in Adams et al.

(2016) suggest that top executives as a group have above average ability. Moreover, when CEOs

are found to score higher than CFOs on general ability, execution, charisma, and strategic focus,

these scores should also be interpreted relative to the sample averages. Figure 1 shows that the

factor scores are constructed such that the average factor scores in the sample are mechanically

zero. It is thus important that a substantial part of the sample consists of Other candidates (i.e.,

non-CXO candidates). These Other candidates provide a control group that allows us to interpret

the factors scores of the CEO, CFO, and COO candidates relative to this control group. In

contrast, if the sample consisted of just CEO and CFO candidates, then mechanically for every

factor where CEOs were above zero, on average, CFOs would be below zero and vice versa.

       Panel B of Table 6 reports the average factor scores by company ownership – venture

capital, private equity and public. The relative factor scores of CEOs relative to other managers


                                                  17
are qualitatively similar across the different types of ownership. CEO candidates have greater

general ability, stronger execution skills, and a more strategic focus. For all three groups, CEOs

have more charisma than CFOs; only for public companies, do CEOs not have the most charisma

of any group. Across all three groups, CFOs are substantially more analytical than the other

candidates. Across all types of positions, public company candidates have substantially greater

general ability and are more analytical (Factor 3) than candidates for venture capital and private

equity. Finally, CEOs for venture capital-backed companies are substantially more charismatic

(as opposed to analytical) and have greater strategic focus (as opposed to focusing on managerial

detail) than other CEO candidates.



B.     Factor scores for candidates who are hired

       The average factor scores for candidates who are hired are shown in Panel C of Table 6

and illustrated by the arrows in Figure 1. Table 6 and Figure 1 show that hired candidates score

higher on general ability (Factor 1) than the average assessed candidate. In addition, hired

executives have better interpersonal skills and worse execution skills (Factor 2).

       Panel A of Table 7 presents probit estimates of these differences. The reported

coefficients are marginal effects. A coefficient of one means no effect. A coefficient above one

gives the increase in the marginal probability of being hired arising from a one standard

deviation-increase in this factor. The first set of regressions includes controls for industry and

year-fixed effects. The second set of regressions also includes controls for the number of years

the executive has worked in the assessing company’s industry, an indicator for whether the

executive is an insider, and an indicator for the candidate’s gender (female is coded as one).




                                                 18
        Panel A of Table 7 shows that, except for COOs, hired candidates score significantly

higher on general ability. The coefficient for COOs is also positive but not significant (COOs

have fewer observations and weaker statistical power). For example, the coefficients in

Specification 6 show that for candidates for CEO positions, a one standard deviation increase in

general ability is associated with a 24.8% increase in the likelihood that the candidate is hired.

        In most specifications, hired candidates also have significantly better interpersonal skills

(versus execution skills). Specification 6 indicates that a one standard deviation increase in

interpersonal is associated with a 17.9% increase in the probability of being hired, suggesting

that interpersonal skills are valued differently in the ultimate hiring decision than when

identifying the pool of considered candidates. This is particularly interesting for CEOs, because

CEO candidates are distinguished by their execution skills, and because KKS (2012) find that

execution skills are more strongly correlated with CEOs’ success.

        Candidates who are hired score significantly higher on charisma (negative Factor 3) than

the average candidate. When we include controls for the number of years in the industry,

insider, and gender, however, only the coefficient on COOs remains significant. This may be a

consequence of insiders tending to be perceived as more charismatic and less analytical than

outsiders.

        Generally, the coefficients on the fourth factor are insignificant and with varying signs,

suggesting that a strategic focus versus a focus on managerial details does not affect the hiring

decision. Alternatively, Factor 4 captures the smallest amount of variation in the candidates’

characteristics and the sample may not have sufficient statistical power to capture the effect of

this factor.




                                                 19
       The results indicate that greater ability and, particularly, greater interpersonal skills help

candidates land the jobs for which they are being considered. Consistent with this, in the

forthcoming book by two senior ghSMART executives, Botelho and Powell (2018) rely on this

result and their experiences with assessments to recommend that executives work hard to present

themselves as likeable when interviewing for a job.

       The estimates of the effects of two of the control variables are also interesting. First,

insider candidates are significantly more likely to be hired across all positions. Second, gender is

insignificant for all positions. However, while insignificant, the estimated coefficients on gender

imply that female CEO candidates are 28% less likely to be hired while female CFO candidates

are 42% more likely to be hired. The insignificant coefficients are likely a result of the low

number of female candidates in the sample and the resulting weak statistical power.

       Panel B of Table 7 shows estimates of the probit model after dividing the sample into

insiders and outsiders. The results are largely similar to those for the combined sample. One

difference between insiders and outsider is that talent appears to be more important for outside

candidates.

       Panel C of Table 7 further includes controls for the candidate’s number of years in the

industry and the subjective ratings: nice person, risk taker, personality, good at sales and career

path. The estimated coefficients remain qualitatively similar to those in Panel B. Like

interpersonal skills (positive Factor 2), the rating on nice person is associated with an increased

likelihood of being hired, although it is not always significant. CEO candidates, particularly

outside candidates, also are more likely to be hired when they are rated as greater risk-takers.

       Panel D of Table 7 repeats the analysis from Panel A for companies of different size.

Small companies are defined as companies with revenues less than $100 million; large


                                                 20
companies have revenues exceeding $1 billion; medium companies have revenues in between the

small and large cutoffs. (Note that the number of observations for the size subsamples do not add

up to the total number of observations because we could not obtain revenue estimates for all

companies.) Overall, the results are qualitatively similar for companies of all sizes.

       Finally, Panel E of Table 7 repeats the analysis for companies with different ownership

structures – venture capital backed, private equity backed, and public. For all three structures,

executives with greater general ability are significantly more likely to be hired. Executives with

greater interpersonal skills are significantly more likely to be hired by PE firms and more likely

to be hired by public companies (although this difference is not statistically significant). The

results are qualitatively similar for CEOs of private equity backed companies. We do not have

enough observations to estimate the regressions separately for public company CEOs.



IV.    Executive Characteristics And Subsequent Careers

       The previous results indicate that candidates for different positions have different

characteristics and skills. In this section, we consider whether those particular characteristics

and skills are predictive of the candidates’ future career progression.

       While this analysis is inherently interesting, it also provides an implicit “out-of-sample”

test of the previous results. The assessments and hiring decisions of the candidates in our sample

may not be representative of these decisions more generally. For example, ghSMART’s

interviewers might rate CEO candidates higher on certain characteristics, because they expect

CEO candidates to have these characteristics or because this bias is inherent in ghSMART’s

assessment methodology. Alternatively, the characteristics and factor scores may be specific to

ghSMART’s assessment methodology and lose their validity outside of this assessment setting.


                                                 21
        One way to assess the general validity of the assessments and factor structure is to see

whether they predict the candidates’ subsequent career progression. We are particularly

interested in whether the characteristics of non-CEO candidates, i.e. candidates that were

considered for a position other than a CEO position when assessed by ghSMART, can predict

whether these candidates subsequently become CEOs.

        Note that these subsequent promotions or job changes occur without the involvement of

ghSMART. They may involve other recruiting or assessment firms, or they may occur internally

in firms, following the firms’ HR practices. Either way, the finding that the assessments in our

data remain able to predict these career progressions would suggest that our results are not

specific to the particular setting involving ghSMART, and it would confirm that different

positions require candidates with different characteristics and skills.

        For each of the candidates in our sample, we used LinkedIn, CapitalIQ and other internet

searches to determine their subsequent career path and whether the candidate subsequently

becomes a CEO, COO or CFO. For each position, for a given title, Table 8 reports the fraction

of candidates who eventually end up with this title. For example, Panel A reports whether

candidates eventually become CEOs based on whether the candidates interviewed for a CEO

position in our sample. Over 78% of the candidates who interviewed for CEO jobs, ultimately

became CEOs. More importantly, slightly over 10% of the candidates who did not interview for

CEO positions in our sample eventually became CEOs. The other panels report similar results

for CFOs, COOs, and CFOs. Panel D shows that just 4.5% of CFO candidates ultimately become

CEOs.




                                                 22
A.         Average Factor Scores

           Panel A of Table 9 reports the average factor scores of candidates who eventually obtain

a management position, but did not interview for such a position. Candidates who were not

considered for a CEO position, but nevertheless ultimately become CEOs, have higher scores on

general ability, execution, charisma, and strategic focus. This pattern mirrors our earlier results

on different executive characteristics across different positions, and it supports our finding that

this pattern is specific to CEOs. More formally, in the next section, we use probit analyses to

estimate statistical significance and to control for other variables that might be driving these

results.



B.         Probit Analysis

           In the probit regressions in Panels B and C of Table 9, the dependent variable is an

indicator for whether the candidate eventually achieves the indicated executive position (CEO,

COO or CFO), and the explanatory variables include the candidate’s observed characteristics at

the time of the interview, including the factor scores. For each specification, the sample is

restricted to candidates who are assessed for positions other than the indicated executive position

eventually reached.

           Panel B of Table 9 shows results for the entire sample, with the first three specifications

containing industry and year fixed effects. Specification 1 in Panel B shows that the likelihood of

becoming a CEO is significantly related to the four factors in exactly the same direction as they

are related to CEO characteristics. The likelihood of an executive subsequently becoming a

CEO increases with general ability (Factor 1), execution (negative Factor 2), charisma (negative

Factor 3) and strategic focus (positive Factor 4). A one standard deviation change in these four


                                                    23
factors is associated, respectively, with a 19.8%, 16.5%, 13.5% and 16.7% increase in the

likelihood of becoming a CEO.

       Specification 2 suggests that candidates who are more analytical (and less charismatic)

are significantly more likely to become CFOs. Specification 3 indicates that candidates with

more general ability and more focus on managerial details are more likely to become COOs.

       Panel C repeats Specifications 1 to 3 for venture capital, private equity and publicly

owned companies. While the results are not always statistically significant, likely due to a

decline in the statistical power from the smaller sample sizes, the qualitative patterns remain

similar for all three groups for CEOs. Executives rated higher in general ability, execution,

charisma, and strategic focus are more likely to become CEOs for all three types of companies.

Across all three groups, the coefficients on execution and strategic focus are particularly large.

       Specifications 4 to 6 of Panel B of Table 9 include the three additional control variables:

years in industry, insider and female. The results are qualitatively similar to those in the first

three regressions.

       Specifications 7 to 9 of Panel B of Table 9 further include the five subjective ratings, and

the results are qualitatively similar to those in the previous specifications. For CEOs, the results

for the factors are similar, but only Factor 4 (strategic focus) remains statistically significant.

The reduced significance of Factor 2 is likely driven by its correlation with the rating for nice

person. Like executives with high scores on Factor 2 (low execution but high interpersonal),

executives with a higher rating on nice person are also less likely to become CEOs. Again, these

results support Pfeffer (2015) who says that CEOs cannot be particularly nice people. Similarly,

the reduced significance of Factor 3 (charisma) is likely driven by its correlation with being a

risk taker and good at sales, both of which are also significantly related to becoming a CEO.


                                                  24
These results also are strongly consistent with those in Green et al. (2015) that more extraverted

CFOs are more likely to become CEOs.

        Overall, these “out-of-sample” results support the validity of the assessments and our

earlier results about managerial characteristics. CEOs tend to be more talented, more execution-

oriented, more charismatic and with a greater strategic focus. Non-CEOs with those

characteristics are more likely to become CEOs than other non-CEOs. The different results for

CFOs (versus CEOs) provide additional support for the validity of the assessments. The results

strongly support the hypothesis that different characteristics and factors are important for

different managerial positions. The results are also predictive for which candidates are more

likely to ultimately become CEOs.

        Finally, the results on gender in Specifications 4 to 9 of Panel B in Table 9 are notable.

Holding talent and skills constant, female candidates are significantly less likely to become

CEOs and COOs. (They also appear to be less likely to become CFOs, but the coefficient is not

statistically significant).



V.      Summary and Discussion

        Using a data set containing more than 2,600 assessments of candidates for top managerial

positions – including CEOs, CFOs, and COOs – we can classify the candidate’s characteristics

by four factors: general ability, execution versus interpersonal, charisma versus analytical, and

having a strategic focus versus a focus on managerial details. The first two factors are similar to

the factors identified in a smaller sample of just CEO candidates in KKS (2012).

        CEO candidates typically have higher scores on general ability, execution, charisma, and

a strategic focus. CFOs, on the other hand, have lower scores on general ability, and tend to be


                                                 25
more interpersonal, analytical, and with a focus on managerial details. According to our

classification, these two types are diametrically opposite. These results are consistent with those

in Graham et al. (2013) who also find that CEOs differ from CFOs in being more optimistic and

less risk averse. In our data, risk taking is positively correlated with execution and charisma.

           We also find that candidates considered by public and larger companies score higher than

candidates from private and smaller companies. This is consistent with the results in Adams et

al. (2016) who find that CEOs are more (cognitively and non-cognitively) talented on average,

and that larger companies hire more talented CEOs.

           Scores on the four factors predict the candidates’ future career progression. Non-CEO

candidates who have more CEO-like personalities are more likely to subsequently become

CEOs. This “out-of-sample” test provides strong evidence that our assessments provide valid

measures of the candidates’ personalities. It also provides strong evidence that these

personalities and skills can be assessed, that they are persistent, and that the distribution of

personality across positions and hiring decisions documented here remain valid in other hiring

situations, including promotion and hiring situations that involve firms other than those in our

sample and do not rely on ghSMART.

           We do not find any substantial differences in the four factors for men and women. We do

find, however, that women are less likely to become CEOs and COOs, controlling for these

factors.

           Finally, hired candidates generally have greater interpersonal skills than the assessed

candidates. This suggests that interpersonal skills are valued differently when used in the hiring

decision than when used to identifying a pool of candidates. This is particularly interesting for

CEOs, given that CEO candidates are especially distinguished by their execution skills, that


                                                    26
executions skills predict whether candidates subsequently become CEOs, and that the result in

KKS (2012) show that execution skills are strongly correlated with success.

       We believe these results both complement existing academic research and are potentially

relevant for boards choosing CEOs as well as for candidates aspiring to become CEOs.

       First, our results are relevant to previous academic work. The finding that CEOs are

different from and more talented than other executives is consistent with the results in Adams et

al. (2016) and Graham et al. (2013). The strong CEO loadings on the execution factor (versus

interpersonal) and charisma are arguably consistent with Pfeffer (2016). The finding that CEOs

are strong in charisma is consistent with the findings in Green et al. (2015) and Palaiou and

Funrham (2015) that CEOs are more extraverted.

       Second, the results in this paper and KKS (2012), taken together, suggest that boards

should focus more on execution skills when choosing a CEO. While we do not consider

subsequent performance in this paper, KKS (2012) study the performance of a subset of our

sample and find that the execution factor is highly correlated with subsequent CEO success for

private-equity funded companies. The results in this paper complement those in KKS (2012) by

finding that the execution factor is important for distinguishing CEO candidates and for

determining whether an executive ultimately becomes a CEO. The fact that the results in this

paper are qualitatively similar for public company and private company CEOs suggests that the

results in KKS (2012) are not specific to private equity.

       Third, the result that hired CEO candidates score lower on execution skills (and higher on

interpersonal skills) than interviewed candidates on average makes it natural to think that boards

and shareholders overweight interpersonal skills in their hiring decisions. This seems possible,

given that interpersonal skills are correlated with our research assistants’ classification of


                                                  27
candidates as nice persons. This also is consistent with Barrick et al. (2012) who find that

interviewers’ first impressions and rapport with a candidate affects their evaluation of the

candidate. This seems to be a productive avenue for future research.

       Finally, the results potentially provide some guidance to those who aspire to be CEOs.

Executives who score higher on execution, charisma and have a strategic focus are more likely to

become CEOs. An important question is whether it is possible for a candidate to improve those

factors or skills. It seems plausible that executives can improve execution skills by being more

persistent, efficient and proactive. In fact, Drucker (1967) recommends precisely these actions to

become an effective executive. It is less clear whether executives can improve their charisma

and their strategic focus. This, too, is an interesting question for future research.




                                                  28
       References

Adams, Renee, Heitor Almeida, and Daniel Ferreira, 2005, Powerful CEOs and their impact on
corporate performance, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1403–1432.

Adams, R., Keloharju, M., and S. Knupfer, 2014, Match made at birth? What traits of a millions
Swedes tell us about CEOs. Working paper, University of New South Wales.

Bandiera, Oriana, Luigi Guiso, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun, 2014, Matching Firms,
Managers, and Incentives, Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Bandiera, Oriana, Stephen Hansen, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun, 2015, CEO Behavior and
Firm Performance, Working paper, LSE.

Barrick, M., Susan Dustin, Tamara Giluk, Greg Stewart, Jonathan Shaffer and Brian Swider,
2012, Candidate characteristics driving initial impressions during rapport building: Implications
for employment interview validity, Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 85,
330–352.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Campbell Harvey, and John Graham, 2008, Managerial overconfidence and
corporate policies, Working paper, Duke University.

Benmelech, Efraim and Carola Frydman, 2015, Military CEOs, Journal of Financial Economics,
117: 43-59.

Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Pérez-González, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2008, Do CEOs Matter?
Working paper, Columbia University.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of managers
on firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.

Bolton, Patrick, Markus Brunnermeier, and Laura Veldkamp, 2013, Leadership, Coordination
and Mission-Driven Management, Review of Economic Studies 80, 512-537.

Borghams, Lex, Angela L. Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Bas ter Weel, 2008, The
economics and psychology of personality traits, NBER Working paper 13810.

Botelho, Elena, Kim Powell, Stephen Kincaid and Dina Wang, 2017, What Sets Successful
CEOs Apart, Harvard Business Review, May-June.

Botelho, Elena and Kim Powell, 2018, The CEO Next Door: What It Takes to Get to the Top and
Succeed. Dickens Books.

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are some mutual fund managers better than others?
Cross-sectional patterns in behavior and performance, The Journal of Finance 54, 875–899.


                                                29
Colbert, Amy, Murray Barrick and Bret Bradley, 2014, Personality And Leadership Composition
In Top Management Teams: Implications For Organizational Effectiveness, Personnel
Psychology 67, 351–387

Collins, Jim, 2001, Good to great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap and Others Don’t
(Harper Business, New York).

Custodio, C., Ferreira, M.A., & Matos, P. 2013. Generalists vs. Specialists: Life time work
experience and chief executive officer pay. Journal of Financial Economics, 108: 471-
492

Drucker, Peter, 1967, The Effective Executive (Harper Collins, New York).

Fabrigar, Leandre, Duane Wegener, Robert MacCallum, and Erin Strahan, 1999, Evaluating the
use of exploratory factor analysis in psychological research, Psychological Methods 4, 272–299.

Falato, Antonio, Dan Li, and Todd Milbourn, forthcoming, Which Skills Matter in the Market
for CEOs? Evidence from Pay for CEO Credentials, Management Science

Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier, 2008, Why has CEO pay increased so much? Quarterly
Journal of Economics 123, 49–100.

George, Bill, 2003, Authentic Leadership, (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco).

Gervais, Simon, and Itay Goldstein, 2007, The positive effects of biased self-perceptions in
firms, Review of Finance 11, 453–496.

Gervais, Simon, J.B. Heaton, and Terrance Odean, 2009, Overconfidence, compensation
contracts, and labor markets, Working paper, Duke University.

Gow, Ian D., Steven N. Kaplan, David F. Larcker and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina, 2016, CEO
Personality and Firm Policies, working paper, Chicago Booth.

Graham, John R., Campbell Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2013, Managerial Attitudes and Corporate
Actions, Journal of Financial Economics 109(1), 103−121.

Green, T. Clifton, Russell E. Jame, and Brandon Lock, 2015, It Pays to be Extraverted:
Executive Personality and Career Outcomes, working paper, Emory University.

Hambrick, D.C., & Mason, P.A. 1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its top
managers. Academy of Management Review 9 (2): 193–206.

Hambrick, D.C. 2007.Upper echelons theory - An update. Academy of Management Review, 32
(2): 334-343



                                                30
Heaton, J. B. 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate finance, Financial Management 3, 33–
45.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up
firms: Empirical evidence, The Journal of Finance 57, 169–197.

Hochberg, Yael, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, 2007, Venture capital networks and
investment performance, Journal of Finance 62, 251–301.

Hough, Leaetta, Marvin Dunette, Newell Eaton, and John Kamp, 1990, Criterion-related
validities of personality constructs and the effect of response distortion on those validities,
Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 581-595.

Judge TA, Bono JE, Ilies R, Gerhardt MW, 2002, Personality and leadership: A qualitative and
quantitative review, Journal of Applied Psychology 87, 765–780.

Kaplan, Steven, Mark Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen, 2012, Which CEO Characteristics and
Abilities Matter? Journal of Finance 67(3), 973−1007.

Kaplan, Steven, Berk Sensoy, and Per Stromberg, 2009, What are firms? Evolution from early
business plans to public companies, The Journal of Finance 64, 75–115.

Khurana, Rakesh, 2002, Searching for a Corporate Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic
CEOs (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment,
The Journal of Finance 60, 2661–2700.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2009, Superstar CEOs, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124, 1593–1638.

Malmendier, U., Tate, G., & Yan, J. 2011. Overconfidence and early-life experiences: The
effects of managerial traits on corporate financial policies. Journal of Finance66: 1687-1733

McClelland, David C., 1998, Identifying competencies with behavioral event interviews,
Psychological Science 9, 331–339.

Mintzberg, Henry, 2013, Simply Managing, (Berrett-Koehler, San Francisco, CA).

Murphy, Kevin J., and Jan Zabojnik, 2004, CEO pay and turnover: A market-based explanation
for recent trends, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 192–196.

Ones, Deniz, and Chockalingam Viswesvaran, 1998, The effects of social desirability and faking
on personality and integrity assessment for personnel selection, Human Performance 11, 245–
269.


                                                  31
O’Reilly, C., Caldwell, D., Chatman, J., & Doerr, B., 2014, The promise and problems of
organizational culture: CEO personality, culture, and firm performance, Group and Organization
Management, 39 (6): 595–625.

Palaiou, K., Furnham, A., 2014. Are bosses unique? Personality facet differences between CEOs
and staff in five work sectors. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research 66 (3), 173.

Pfeffer, Jeffery, 2015, Leadership BS, (HarperBusiness).

Pfeffer, Jeffery, 2016, Getting beyond the BS of leadership literature, McKinsey Quarterly,
January.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1981, The Economics of superstars, American Economic Review 71, 845–858.

Rotermberg Julio, and Garth Saloner, 1993, Leadership style and incentives, Management
Science 39, 1299–1318.

Schoar, Antoinette and Luo Zuo, 2015, “Shaped by Booms and Busts: How the Economy
Impacts CEO Careers and Management Styles,” NBER Working Paper No. w17590.

Smart, Geoff and Randy Street, 2008, Who (Ballantine Books, New York).

Ulrich, Dave, Norm Smallwood, and Kate Sweetman, 2009, Leadership Code: Five Rules to
Lead By (Harvard Business School Press, Boston).

Waldman, DA and FJ Yammarino, 1999), “CEO charismatic leadership: Levels-of-management
and levels-of-analysis effects,” Academy of Management Review 24, 266–285.

Yammarino, Francis J., Shelley D. Dionne, Jae U. Chun, and Fred Dansereau, 2005, Leadership
and levels of analysis: A state-of-the-science review, Leadership Quarterly 16, 879–919.




                                               32
Figure 1: Interviewed versus Hired Panels A and B depict the average scores for ALL
candidates as well as candidates assessed for CEO, CFO and COO positions. Panel A shows
average scores on factors 1 (general ability) and 2 (execution versus interpersonal). Panel B
shows average scores on factors 3 (charisma vs. analytic) and 4 (strategic vs. managerial details).
An arrow’s starting point shows the average scores of all the candidates that are assessed for a
given position and the ending point shows the average scores of the hired candidates. Numerical
values are reported in Table 6.



Panel A: Factor 1 (General Ability) and Factor 2 (Execution vs. Interpersonal)

                                             0.2       General
                                                                                       Interview
                                                       Ability
                         MCEO                                                          Hired
                                             0.1
                                                        ALL
  Execution                                                       COO               Interpersonal
                                              0
  -0.2                   -0.1                      0                   0.1                     0.2

                                            -0.1


                                            -0.2

                                                                         CFO
                                            -0.3


                                            -0.4




                                                   33
Panel B: Factor 3 (Charisma vs. Analytic) and Factor 4 (Strategic Focus vs. Managerial Details)

                                    0.2       Strategic
                                                                                        Interview
                   CEO                        Focus
                                                                                        Hired
                                    0.1

 Charisma                                                                         Analytic
                                     0
  -0.4      -0.3     -0.2   -0.1          0        0.1     0.2   0.3     0.4      0.5           0.6
                                   ALL
                                   -0.1
                                                                                  CFO

                                   -0.2

                                               COO
                                   -0.3
                                              Managerial
                                              Details
                                   -0.4




                                                   34
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics Panel A shows the number of candidates that are assessed for
different position in each year. Panel B shows average values and number of observations for
some observed characteristics. CXO indicates the union of candidates assessed for CEO, CFO,
and CEO positions. ALL indicates all candidates in the sample. Some candidates are assessed for
multiple positions, so the sum of candidates assessed for CEO, CFO, and CEO may exceed the
number of candidates assessed for CXO positions.

Panel A: Candidates interviewed per year

 Year      CEO CFO COO CXO ALL
 2000         5   0   0     5     5
 2001        35  14  10    59    95
 2002        62  31  14   107   198
 2003        72  21  13   106   223
 2004        91  22  16   125   216
 2005        80  34  16   130   238
 2006        71  39  19   128   290
 2007        94  49  18   160   333
 2008        85  38  12   134   244
 2009        70  28   9   106   225
 2010        73  29  16   117   244
 2011        73  33  22   126   268
 2012         1   0   0     1     1
 2013         0   0   0     0     6
 N/A          5   0   0     5    17
 Total      817 338 165 1,309 2,603


Panel B: Averages and number of observations for some observed characteristics.

                    CEO              CFO               COO              CXO               ALL
                    Mean      N      Mean      N       Mean      N      Mean      N       Mean      N
Yrs. Working         24.8   (793)     23.5   (332)      23.8   (159)     24.4   (1274)     23.5   (2511)
Yrs. Current Co.      5.1   (770)      3.4   (322)       4.1   (155)      4.6   (1237)      4.9   (2449)
Number of Co's        4.7   (797)      4.9   (331)       4.8   (159)      4.8   (1277)      4.6   (2515)
Female              5.0%    (816)    8.3%    (338)     7.9%    (165)    6.3%    (1308)   10.1%    (2601)
Military           10.7%    (801)    5.4%    (332)    11.3%    (159)    9.5%    (1282)    9.3%    (2524)
Insider            44.8%    (801)   27.9%    (333)    52.5%    (162)   41.5%    (1286)   41.3%    (2562)
Hired              60.0%    (785)   54.3%    (328)    71.7%    (159)   59.9%    (1262)   59.5%    (2422)




                                                 35
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics Panel A the number of assessments by position across difrerent
ownership types. Panel B shows number of insider and outsider candidates that are subsequently
hired or not.


Panel A: Distribution of positions and ownership

                    CEO           CFO               COO         CXO          ALL
VC                  47%     188   11%        42      6%    22   63% 251       396
Growth Equity       31%      99   18%        57     13%    41   60% 194       324
Buyout              37%     432   16%       191      6%    73   58% 690     1,180
Public              12%      36    3%        10      4%    13   20%   59      289
Other Private       23%      48   13%        27      7%    14   42%   88      211
Investor             6%      12    6%        11      1%     2   13%   25      198
N/A                 40%       2    0%         0      0%     0   40%    2        5
Total               31%     817   13%       338      6%   165   50% 1309    2,603



Panel B: Insiders and outsiders versus hired

                Not
                          Hired    N/A         Total
               Hired
Outsider          795       607       103         1,505
Insider           175       815        67         1,057
N/A                12        18        11            41
Total             982     1,440       181         2,603




                                                  36
Table 3: Distribution of Subjective Ratings by Position For each job title, the tables shows the
subjective ratings of nice person (“yes” coded as one and “no” coded as zero), risk taker,
personality (“outgoing” coded as one and “reserved” coded as zero), good at sales, and career
path (“broad” coded as one and “narrow” coded as zero).

Panel A: Subjective Ratings by Title

                   CEO     CFO       COO    CXO       ALL
Nice Person         77%     76%       79%    77%      78%
Risk Taker          64%     49%       59%    60%      58%
Personality         79%     68%       73%    76%      74%
Good at Sales       79%     33%       62%    67%      65%
Career Path         40%     32%       38%    38%      35%


Panel B: Subjective Ratings by Ownership Type


                     VC        PE      Public        ALL
Nice Person          76%      80%       79%          78%
Risk Taker           64%      58%       55%          58%
Personality          72%      77%       64%          74%
Good at Sales        66%      66%       66%          65%
Career Path          44%      37%       26%          35%


Panel C: Subjective Ratings by Ownership Type of CEOs


                     VC         PE     Public        ALL
Nice Person          77%       79%      69%          77%
Risk Taker           70%       62%      72%          64%
Personality          76%       81%      77%          79%
Good at Sales        77%       79%      79%          79%
Career Path          46%       39%      32%          40%




                                                37
Table 4: Average Characteristics Across Positions

                             CEO       CFO         COO    CXO    ALL
Hires A Players              3.28      3.21        3.33   3.27   3.27
Develops People              3.32      3.24        3.34   3.30   3.30
Removes Underperformers      3.18      3.08        3.19   3.16   3.14
Respect                      3.54      3.54        3.58   3.54   3.56
Efficiency                   3.55      3.49        3.62   3.55   3.56
Network                      3.50      3.26        3.38   3.43   3.43
Flexible                     3.45      3.37        3.41   3.43   3.43
Integrity                    3.86      3.89        3.91   3.87   3.88
Organization                 3.52      3.60        3.65   3.55   3.55
Calm                         3.62      3.52        3.57   3.59   3.57
Aggressive                   3.62      3.35        3.52   3.54   3.52
Fast                         3.60      3.40        3.56   3.54   3.53
Commitments                  3.72      3.64        3.72   3.70   3.72
Brainpower                   3.60      3.55        3.57   3.58   3.57
Analytical Skills            3.51      3.60        3.51   3.53   3.51
Strategic Vision             3.42      3.15        3.18   3.33   3.29
Creative                     3.53      3.18        3.34   3.42   3.43
Attention to Detail          3.39      3.56        3.57   3.45   3.46
Enthusiasm                   3.60      3.28        3.52   3.51   3.51
Persistence                  3.77      3.59        3.72   3.71   3.72
Proactive                    3.72      3.45        3.66   3.65   3.63
Work Ethic                   3.84      3.73        3.87   3.81   3.81
High Standards               3.62      3.50        3.61   3.59   3.61
Listening Skill              3.45      3.41        3.50   3.44   3.47
Open to Criticism            3.31      3.38        3.41   3.34   3.37
Oral Communication           3.58      3.36        3.48   3.51   3.50
Teamwork                     3.49      3.45        3.52   3.48   3.49
Persuasion                   3.57      3.22        3.42   3.46   3.44
Holds People Accountable     3.46      3.34        3.43   3.43   3.41
Average                      3.54      3.43        3.52   3.51   3.51




                                              38
Table 5: Factor Loadings Panel A gives the factor loadings on the four first factors for all
interviewed candidates. Loadings less than 0.15 in absolute value are blank. Panel B gives the
eigenvalues and the proportion of variation that is explained by the four factors. Panel C shows
pairwise correlations across candidates between the loadings on the four factors, gender, as well
as the subjective ratings of nice person, risk taker, personality, good at sales and career path
(coded as described in Table 3). In Panel C, the four factors are orthogonal by construction, so
their individual correlations are omitted. Statistical significance at the 5% level is indicated with
a star.

Panel A: Factor loadings (loadings < 0.15 are blank)

                                Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3 Factor 4
Hires A Players                     0.59
Develops People                     0.56     0.25
Removes Underperformers             0.53    -0.18             -0.22
Respect                             0.32     0.73
Efficiency                          0.71                      -0.22
Network                             0.64
Flexible                            0.54     0.38
Integrity                           0.29     0.31
Organization                        0.50              0.44    -0.23
Calm                                0.44     0.33
Aggressive                          0.68    -0.43    -0.26
Fast                                0.69    -0.37    -0.18
Commitments                         0.70                      -0.21
Brainpower                          0.52              0.33     0.43
Analytical Skills                   0.54              0.56     0.25
Strategic Vision                    0.58    -0.17              0.46
Creative                            0.52                       0.39
Attention to Detail                 0.40              0.46    -0.27
Enthusiasm                          0.55     0.24    -0.44
Persistence                         0.66    -0.16
Proactive                           0.74    -0.26    -0.20
Work Ethic                          0.57
High Standards                      0.73    -0.17
Listening Skill                     0.39     0.62
Open to Criticism                   0.41     0.65
Oral Communication                  0.49     0.16    -0.16     0.19
Teamwork                            0.48     0.61
Persuasion                          0.60             -0.37     0.18
Holds People Accountable            0.66    -0.21             -0.27



                                                  39
Panel B: Eigenvalues and variance explained by first six factors

              Eigenvalue Proportion Cumulative
Factor 1            9.32     32.2%     32.2%
Factor 2            2.88      9.9%     42.1%
Factor 3            1.52      5.2%     47.3%
Factor 4            1.12      3.9%     51.2%
Factor 5            0.85      2.9%     54.1%
Factor 6            0.42      1.4%     55.5%



Panel C: Pair-wise correlation coefficients

                             Nice       Risk                    Good at   Career
                            Person      taker     Personality    Sales     Path     Female
Nice Person                 1.0000
Risk taker                 -0.1733*    1.0000
Personality                 0.0097     0.1511*     1.0000
Good at Sales               0.0409     0.1141*     0.1643*       1.0000
Career Path                -0.0481*    0.0995*     0.0396        0.0043   1.0000
Female                      0.0305    -0.0408*    -0.0282       -0.0664* -0.0052     1.0000
Factor 1 (+Ability)         0.1687*    0.1800*     0.1000*       0.2900* 0.0094      0.0222
Factor 2 (-Execution)       0.5470*   -0.2395*    -0.0184       -0.0511* -0.0492*    0.0289
Factor 3 (-Charisma)       -0.0568*   -0.1645*    -0.2055*      -0.2639* -0.0610*   -0.2200
Factor 4 (+Strategic)       0.0001     0.0692*     0.0516*       0.1206* 0.0377     -0.0775




                                                 40
Table 6: Factor Loadings by Position This table shows average factor scores for candidates
interviewed (Panel A), interviewed by type of ownership (Panel B), and hired (Panel C) for
indicated positions. The averages in Panels A and C are show graphically in Figure 1.

Panel A: Average factor scores for interviewed candidates

                           CEO       CFO      COO      CXO      ALL
Factor 1 (+Ability)         0.139    -0.317    0.042    0.011   0.000
Factor 2 (-Execution)      -0.130     0.090    0.055   -0.053   0.000
Factor 3 (-Charisma)       -0.214     0.493    0.087    0.002   0.000
Factor 4 (+Strategic)       0.187    -0.171   -0.239    0.047   0.000


Panel B: Average factor scores for interviewed candidates by ownership

1. Venture Capital         CEO       CFO      COO      CXO      ALL
Factor 1 (+Ability)         0.029    -0.301    0.004   -0.032   -0.025
Factor 2 (-Execution)      -0.202    -0.076    0.184   -0.152   -0.106
Factor 3 (-Charisma)       -0.338     0.642    0.250   -0.124   -0.138
Factor 4 (+Strategic)       0.441    -0.211   -0.236    0.271    0.185

2. Private Equity          CEO       CFO      COO      CXO      ALL
Factor 1 (+Ability)         0.178    -0.329    0.066    0.027   -0.046
Factor 2 (-Execution)      -0.079     0.112    0.092   -0.005    0.034
Factor 3 (-Charisma)       -0.217     0.464   -0.035   -0.009   -0.072
Factor 4 (+Strategic)       0.087    -0.186   -0.305   -0.031   -0.065

3. Public                  CEO       CFO      COO      CXO      ALL
Factor 1 (+Ability)         0.457     0.293    0.246    0.382    0.370
Factor 2 (-Execution)      -0.205     0.096   -0.075   -0.126   -0.017
Factor 3 (-Charisma)        0.384     0.677    0.264    0.407    0.301
Factor 4 (+Strategic)       0.061    -0.180   -0.250   -0.048   -0.079


Panel C: Average factor scores of hired candidates


                           CEO       CFO      COO      CXO      ALL
Factor 1 (+Ability)         0.185    -0.131    0.061    0.095    0.099
Factor 2 (-Execution)      -0.046     0.119    0.116    0.011    0.059
Factor 3 (-Charisma)       -0.285     0.451    0.009   -0.073   -0.049
Factor 4 (+Strategic)       0.186    -0.133   -0.226    0.055   -0.016



                                               41
Table 7: Probit Estimates of Hired for Position This table shows marginal effects from a probit model where the dependent
variable is an indicator for whether a given candidate is hired. Standard errors are in parentheses. Due to the low number of
observations relative to the number of explanatory variables, Panels B and C omit incumbent CFO and COOs due to a low number of
observations. Panel D defines company size according to revenue, with Small companies having less than $100m, Medium ones
having between $100m and $1b, and Large companies having more than $1m in annual revenue.

Panel A: Probit Estimates of Hiring

                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
                CEO         CFO         COO         CXO         ALL         CEO         CFO         COO         CXO         ALL
Factor 1      1.100*      1.246***     1.083      1.145***    1.195***    1.248***    1.503***    1.240       1.296***    1.333***
(+Ability)   (0.056)     (0.081)      (0.125)    (0.042)     (0.032)     (0.071)     (0.120)     (0.182)     (0.054)     (0.040)
Factor 2      1.160***    1.071        1.275**    1.122***    1.124***    1.179***    0.993       1.176       1.132***    1.134***
(-Exec.)     (0.059)     (0.081)      (0.155)    (0.043)     (0.031)     (0.067)     (0.088)     (0.180)     (0.049)     (0.035)
Factor 3      0.867***    0.914        0.724**    0.866***    0.910***    0.959       0.865       0.671**     0.965       1.000
(-Charis.)   (0.047)     (0.099)      (0.107)    (0.037)     (0.027)     (0.059)     (0.108)     (0.136)     (0.048)     (0.034)
Factor 4      1.018       1.089        1.005      1.022       0.993       0.954       1.045       0.935       0.942       0.927**
(+Strat.)    (0.059)     (0.109)      (0.144)    (0.046)     (0.031)     (0.063)     (0.122)     (0.166)     (0.048)     (0.032)
Yrs. in                                                                   1.004       1.012       0.991       1.004       1.005*
Ind.                                                                     (0.005)     (0.010)     (0.014)     (0.004)     (0.003)
Insider                                                                   3.342***    5.389***    7.935***    3.771***    3.406***
                                                                         (0.381)     (1.211)     (3.059)     (0.348)     (0.224)
Female                                                                    0.714       1.424       2.121       1.012       0.931
                                                                         (0.173)     (0.440)     (1.774)     (0.173)     (0.091)
Constant      1.141       1.086        1.924*     1.2         1.163**     0.615**     0.647*      0.384*      0.622***    0.688***
             (0.187)     (0.225)      (0.673)    (0.140)     (0.077)     (0.120)     (0.164)     (0.196)     (0.088)     (0.056)
Ind. FE         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Obs.            769         326          147       1,243       2,397        735         317         140        1,194       2,290
Panel B: Probit Estimates of Hiring

                (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)
                          Insider                                          Outsider
                CEO        CXO           ALL         CEO         CFO        COO         CXO          ALL
Factor 1      1.135       1.053        1.147***    1.309***    1.767***    2.041***    1.460***    1.504***
(+Ability)   (0.099)     (0.069)      (0.052)     (0.097)     (0.181)     (0.559)     (0.080)     (0.061)
Factor 2      1.211**     1.145**      1.114**     1.156*      1.002       1.628**     1.129**     1.148***
(-Exec.)     (0.096)     (0.072)      (0.050)     (0.092)     (0.103)     (0.376)     (0.066)     (0.048)
Factor 3      0.840**     0.910        1.007       1.008       0.994       0.424**     0.982       0.980
(-Charis.)   (0.072)     (0.063)      (0.047)     (0.087)     (0.153)     (0.154)     (0.066)     (0.046)
Factor 4      0.840*      0.880*       0.939       1.026       0.999       0.675       0.979       0.934
(+Strat.)    (0.075)     (0.065)      (0.046)     (0.095)     (0.136)     (0.172)     (0.067)     (0.044)
Constant      2.152***    2.600***     2.304***    0.650*      0.696       0.583       0.647***    0.740***
             (0.587)     (0.559)      (0.288)     (0.152)     (0.177)     (0.462)     (0.105)     (0.064)
Ind. FE         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Obs.            359         535         1,013        410         232          70         708        1,384




                                                                 43
Panel C: Probit Estimates of Hiring

                 (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)
                           Insider                                         Outsider
                CEO         CXO         ALL         CEO          CFO        COO         CXO         ALL
Factor 1        1.120      1.055       1.088       1.187**      2.012***    3.012**    1.440***    1.504***
(+Ability)     (0.120)    (0.085)     (0.062)     (0.103)      (0.280)     (1.293)    (0.096)     (0.074)
Factor 2        1.200*     1.196**     1.162**     1.204*       0.889       1.733*     1.092       1.078
(-Exec.)       (0.131)    (0.108)     (0.076)     (0.121)      (0.149)     (0.551)    (0.085)     (0.059)
Factor 3        0.875      0.907       1.005       1.031        0.897       0.278**    0.962       0.972
(-Charis.)     (0.091)    (0.078)     (0.059)     (0.103)      (0.178)     (0.144)    (0.077)     (0.054)
Factor 4        0.849      0.865*      0.883**     1.037        1.118       0.368**    1.011       0.942
(+Strat.)      (0.088)    (0.074)     (0.051)     (0.103)      (0.180)     (0.165)    (0.078)     (0.050)
Yrs in Ind      1.009      1.003       1.002       0.999        1.002       1.017      1.001       1.004
               (0.011)    (0.009)     (0.006)     (0.007)      (0.012)     (0.029)    (0.005)     (0.004)
Nice            1.410      1.144       1.010       1.219        1.041       1.240      1.183       1.257**
Person         (0.364)    (0.256)     (0.159)     (0.240)      (0.379)     (0.816)    (0.187)     (0.144)
Risk taker      1.122      0.974       1.081       1.396**      1.143       0.622      1.228*      1.087
               (0.222)    (0.161)     (0.127)     (0.216)      (0.282)     (0.330)    (0.145)     (0.092)
Personality     1.441*     1.204       1.148       1.013        1.243       0.715      1.050       1.088
               (0.292)    (0.203)     (0.139)     (0.178)      (0.309)     (0.443)    (0.137)     (0.101)
Good at         0.918      0.942       0.957       1.215        0.873       0.515      0.982       1.032
Sales          (0.207)    (0.166)     (0.120)     (0.245)      (0.208)     (0.309)    (0.127)     (0.094)
Career          1.049      0.947       0.870       0.964        1.154       2.659*     1.091       1.041
path           (0.198)    (0.150)     (0.099)     (0.142)      (0.284)     (1.534)    (0.126)     (0.088)
Constant        0.869      1.782       2.007***    0.427**      0.480       1.336      0.479***    0.545***
               (0.421)    (0.663)     (0.486)     (0.167)      (0.245)     (1.668)    (0.131)     (0.092)
Ind. FE         Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE         Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
Obs.             314         450         818        368           178         61         603        1,147




                                                          44
Panel D: Probit Estimates of Hiring (with company size)

                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
                ALL          ALL          ALL          ALL          CEO         CEO         CEO        CEO
                 All         Small      Medium         Large         All        Small     Medium       Large
Factor 1       1.333***     1.242***     1.207**      2.348***     1.248***    1.230**    0.956       2.694***
(+Ability)    (0.040)      (0.056)      (0.097)      (0.257)      (0.071)     (0.108)    (0.208)     (0.790)
Factor 2       1.134***     1.109**      1.168**      1.211**      1.179***    1.168*     1.709***    1.026
(-Exec.)      (0.035)      (0.053)      (0.090)      (0.116)      (0.067)     (0.099)    (0.351)     (0.297)
Factor 3       1.000        0.983        1.141        1.083        0.959       1.034      0.983       1.123
(-Charis.)    (0.034)      (0.051)      (0.100)      (0.115)      (0.059)     (0.100)    (0.206)     (0.285)
Factor 4       0.927**      0.930        0.960        0.882        0.954       0.975      0.990       0.943
(+Strat.)     (0.032)      (0.051)      (0.085)      (0.089)      (0.063)     (0.101)    (0.213)     (0.278)
Yrs Ind        1.005*       1.007        0.998        1.009        1.004       1.010      0.954***    1.042**
              (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.008)    (0.016)     (0.019)
Incumbent      3.406***     2.851***     4.691***     4.560***     3.342***    3.274***   3.577***    3.680***
              (0.224)      (0.303)      (0.861)      (0.869)      (0.381)     (0.589)    (1.652)     (1.665)
Female         0.931        1.181        0.651*       1.085        0.714       1.074      0.266       0.684
              (0.091)      (0.191)      (0.166)      (0.234)      (0.173)     (0.400)    (0.308)     (0.684)
Constant       0.688***     0.943        0.751        0.309***     0.615**     0.862    153.162       0.105***
              (0.056)      (0.159)      (0.204)      (0.071)      (0.120)     (0.312)   37,836.427   (0.069)
Ind. FE          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Time FE          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Obs.            2,290         886          393          399          735         318        104          75




                                                                 45
Panel E: Probit Estimates of Hiring (with ownership type)

                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)
               ALL          ALL          ALL          CEO            CEO
               VC            PE         Public        VC              PE

Factor 1      1.217**      1.294***     2.228***     0.897       1.290***
(+Ability)   (0.104)      (0.049)      (0.411)      (0.134)     (0.090)
Factor 2      0.991        1.192***     1.119        1.108       1.225***
(-Exec.)     (0.075)      (0.049)      (0.154)      (0.137)     (0.089)
Factor 3      0.935        1.028        1.167        1.113       0.938
(-Charis.)   (0.078)      (0.045)      (0.183)      (0.154)     (0.074)
Factor 4      0.941        0.909**      0.804        0.782       0.976
(+Strat.)    (0.079)      (0.042)      (0.110)      (0.123)     (0.079)
Yrs Ind       0.992        1.008**      0.986        0.992       1.006
             (0.008)      (0.004)      (0.011)      (0.013)     (0.006)
Insider       2.608***     3.229***     8.830***     2.510***    3.506***
             (0.417)      (0.281)      (2.707)      (0.631)     (0.506)
Female        0.859       (0.943)       1.270        0.838       0.584
             (0.253)      (0.130)      (0.391)      (0.384)     (0.201)
Constant      2.009*       0.636***     0.438**      2.302       0.555**
             (0.721)      (0.087)      (0.153)      (1.281)     (0.153)
Ind. FE         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Time FE         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Obs.            351         1341          237          167         492




                                                                46
Table 8: Descriptive statistics for career paths The four panels show the candidates divided by whether or not they are assessed
for a position with a given title, and by those who eventually obtain a position with this title.

Panel A:                                                             Panel B:
Interviews                                                           Interviews
  for CEO        Eventually becomes CEO                                for CFO        Eventually becomes CFO
 position      0                  1                Total              position                       0              1 Total
             0              1,584            184             1,768                0              2,198             36           2,234
                           89.6%          10.4%            100.0%                               98.4%           1.6%          100.0%
             1                629            173               802                1                290             46             336
                           78.4%          21.6%            100.0%                               86.3%          13.7%          100.0%
Total                       2,213            357             2,570   Total                       2,488             82           2,570
                           86.1%          13.9%            100.0%                               96.8%           3.2%          100.0%




Panel C:                                                             Panel D:
Interviews                                                           Interviews      Eventually becomes
  for COO        Eventually becomes COO                                for CFO      CEO
 position                       0              1 Total                position                      0               1 Total
             0              2,308            100             2,408                0             1,892             342           2,234
                           95.9%           4.2%            100.0%                              84.7%           15.3%          100.0%
             1                143             19               162                1               321              15             336
                           88.3%          11.7%            100.0%                              95.5%            4.5%          100.0%
Total                       2,451            119             2,570   Total                      2,213             357           2,570
                           95.4%           4.6%            100.0%                              86.1%           13.9%          100.0%




                                                                      47
Table 9: Who eventually become executives? Panel A shows average factor scores of candidates that are not assessed for the
indicated position but eventually obtain it. Panels B and C show estimated marginal effects using a probit model where the depending
variable is an indicator for whether the candidate eventually achieves an executive position as indicated (CEO, COO, or CFO),
depending on the candidate’s observed characteristics at the time of the interview. The sample is restricted to candidates with titles, at
the time of the interview, that are not the indicated executive position eventually reached. Standard errors are in parentheses.



Panel A: Average factor scores of candidates that are not interviewed for the indicated position but eventually obtain it

                CEO       CFO      COO
Factor 1
               0.160     0.006     0.117
(+Ability)
Factor 2
               -0.156    0.093    -0.056
(-Exec.)
Factor 3
               -0.090    0.364     0.002
(-Charis.)
Factor 4
               0.050    -0.049    -0.182
(+Strat.)




                                                                    48
Panel B:

                 (1)         (2)         (3) (4)         (5)         (6)
                CEO         CFO        COO  CEO         CFO         COO
Factor 1      1.198***    1.007       1.133**
                                          1.187***    0.990       1.138**
(+Ability)   (0.055)     (0.074)     (0.060)
                                         (0.057)     (0.077)     (0.063)
Factor 2      0.835***    0.928       0.935
                                          0.838***    0.908       0.939
(-Exec.)     (0.039)     (0.068)     (0.047)
                                         (0.040)     (0.070)     (0.049)
Factor 3      0.865***    1.274***    0.977
                                          0.864***    1.199**     0.942
(-Charis.)   (0.042)     (0.110)     (0.053)
                                         (0.043)     (0.109)     (0.054)
Factor 4      1.167***    0.903       0.906*
                                          1.171***    0.913       0.901*
(+Strat.)    (0.058)     (0.075)     (0.050)
                                         (0.060)     (0.082)     (0.053)
Yrs in Ind                                1.004       0.986*      0.985***
                                         (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.005)
Insider                                   0.937       0.774       0.970
                                         (0.091)     (0.131)     (0.104)
Female                                    0.684**     0.687       0.546**
                                         (0.109)     (0.207)     (0.130)
Constant      0.263*** 0.130*** 0.148*** 0.265***     0.178***    0.191***
             (0.026)   (0.020)  (0.019)  (0.031)     (0.032)     (0.027)
Ind. FE      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
Obs.         1,666     2,165    2,331    1,586       2,053       2,215




                                                      49
Panel B (cont.)
                     (7)         (8)         (9)
                    CEO         CFO         COO
Factor 1           1.089       1.065       1.125*
(+Ability)        (0.060)     (0.110)     (0.073)
Factor 2           0.915       0.841       0.952
(-Exec.)          (0.060)     (0.097)     (0.067)
Factor 3           0.906       1.074       0.916
(-Charis.)        (0.054)     (0.122)     (0.062)
Factor 4           1.137**     0.971       0.912
(+Strat.)         (0.066)     (0.103)     (0.058)
Yrs in Ind         1.007       0.994       0.981***
                  (0.005)     (0.010)     (0.006)
Insider            0.924       0.745       0.927
                  (0.099)     (0.147)     (0.108)
Female             0.742*      0.608       0.600**
                  (0.131)     (0.248)     (0.150)
Nice Person        0.860       0.941       1.080
                  (0.120)     (0.221)     (0.172)
Risk taker         1.229*      1.130       1.069
                  (0.131)     (0.218)     (0.124)
Personality        0.949       0.839       0.932
                  (0.106)     (0.159)     (0.114)
Good at Sales      1.239*      0.553***    0.931
                  (0.138)     (0.108)     (0.115)
Career path        1.104       1.052       0.986
                  (0.114)     (0.195)     (0.110)
Constant           0.220***    0.203***    0.197***
                  (0.046)     (0.072)     (0.047)
Ind. FE              Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE              Yes         Yes         Yes
Obs.                1,302       1,786       1,897


                                                      50
Panel C:
             (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
             VC         VC       VC         PE         PE         PE         Public     Public     Public
             CEO        CFO      COO        CEO        CFO        COO        CEO        CFO        COO
Factor 1     1.220      0.122    1.093      1.210***   1.009      1.110      1.023      1.007      2.348**
(+Ability)   0.170      0.236    0.160      0.073      0.113      0.073      0.193      0.283      0.960
Factor 2     0.663***   1.317    0.887      0.897*     0.887      0.905      0.762      1.070      0.967
(-Exec.)     0.087      0.816    0.116      0.057      0.101      0.059      0.131      0.300      0.232
Factor 3     0.831      6.412    1.358**    0.899*     1.414***   0.927      0.980      1.076      0.685
(-Charis.)   0.105      10.258   0.197      0.058      0.187      0.064      0.185      0.317      0.190
Factor 4     1.200      1.113    0.988      1.151**    0.826      0.920      1.745***   0.951      0.738
(+Strat.)    0.155      0.740    0.141      0.078      0.100      0.065      0.311      0.255      0.199
Constant     0.153***   0.001    0.123***   0.295***   0.080***   0.162***   0.244***   0.103***   0.098***
             0.100      0.529    0.065      0.049      0.031      0.033      0.081      0.054      0.056
Observations 185        67       332        902        977        1,286      216        256        233
Ind FE       Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes




                                                           51
Table A-1: Descriptions of Individual Characteristics Information from ghSMART internal guidelines.

Characteristics                               Description                            Behavior Associated with High Score            Behavior Associated with Low Score
Leadership
Hires A Players             Sources, recruits, and hires A Players.                Hires A Players 90% of the time.             Hires A Players 25% of the time.
                            Coaches people in their current roles to improve       Teams say that Candidate gives a lot of      Teams do not say on Candidate gives a lot of
Develops People             performance, and prepares them for future              coaching / development. Many team            coaching. Team members do not go on to do
                            roles.                                                 members go on to bigger roles.               better things.
                            Removes C Players within 180 days. Achieves
                                                                                   Removes C Players within 180 days of         May remove occasional C Player, but keeps
Removes Underperformers     this through coaching-out, redeployment,
                                                                                   taking a new role or hiring the person.      most of them, often for years.
                            demotion, or termination.
                                                                            Teams would say Candidate is fair and               Candidate is self-absorbed. Team members
                            Values others, treating them fairly and showing
Respect                                                                     respectful. Candidate describes                     might call Candidate abrasive, rough around
                            concern for their views and feelings.
                                                                            performance in terms of team efforts.               the edges.
                            Able to produce significant output with minimal Candidate gets a lot done in a short period         Candidate’s output is unimpressive. He is a
Efficiency
                            wasted effort.                                  of time.                                            “thinker” with poor execution.
                                                                            Candidate has a proven ability to build a           Candidate does not have big network and
Network                     Possesses a large network of talented people.
                                                                            network very quickly.                               shows limited ability to build one.
                                                                            Candidate is not bothered by new or
                            Adjusts quickly to changing priorities and                                                          Candidate bristles when changes take place,
Flexible                                                                    changing circumstances. Faces change in a
                            conditions. Copes with complexity and change.                                                       often blames others for not doing their jobs.
                                                                            matter-of-fact manner.
Personal
                            Does not cut corners ethically. Earns trust and                                                     Cuts corners, unaware of how actions are
Integrity                                                                          Takes pride in always doing what is right.
                            maintains confidences.                                                                              borderline unethical.
                            Plans, organizes, schedules, and budgets in an         Job accomplishments closely match goals.     Candidates’ accomplishments do not match
Organization
                            efficient, productive manner.                          Candidate sets priorities.                   goals, and individual meanders.
                            Maintains stable performance when under                Performs under a wide variety of             Overreacts to high pressure situations. Fails
Calm
                            heavy pressure or stress.                              circumstances, regardless of stress.         to accomplish goals under stress.
                            Moves quickly and takes a forceful stand               Candidate sticks neck out with words and     Candidate takes a wait-and-see attitude,
Aggressive
                            without being overly abrasive.                         actions, even if upsets others.              moving more slowly to minimize risk.
                            Takes action quickly without getting bogged            Candidate takes action and gets a lot done
Fast                                                                                                                            Candidate is slow to accomplish results.
                            down by obstacles.                                     in a short period of time.
                            Lives up to verbal and written agreements,                                                          Does not live up to verbal or written
Commitments                                                                        Gets the job done, no matter what.
                            regardless of personal cost.                                                                        agreements.
Intellectual
                            Learns quickly. Demonstrates ability to quickly High GPA and SAT scores, ability to pick- Low GPA and SAT scores. May remain in
Brainpower
                            understand and absorb new info.                 up new job details quickly.               same role for a long time.
Analytical Skills           Structures and processes qualitative or         Cites multiple examples of problem        Rarely solves problems through analysis.

                                                                              52
                           quantitative data and draws conclusions.               solving skills.                                Heavy reliance on gut.
                           Able to see and communicate the big picture in         Holds a big vision for current and future      Does not have a vision for current or future
Strategic Vision
                           an inspiring way.                                      roles. Inspires others’ vision.                roles. Does not value planning.
                           Generates new and innovative approaches to             Offers new and innovative solutions to
Creative                                                                                                                         Rarely offers creative solutions.
                           problems.                                              intractable problems many times.
                           Does not let important details slip through the        Makes time to review the details. Asks         Makes many mistakes because of ignoring
Attention to Detail
                           cracks or derail a project.                            penetrating questions.                         small, but important details.
Motivational
                           Exhibits passion and excitement over work. Has         Displays high energy and a passion for the     Displays low energy and limited passion for
Enthusiasm
                           a “can do” attitude.                                   work.                                          the work.
                           Demonstrates tenacity and willingness to go the        Never gives up. Sticks with assignments
Persistence                                                                                                                      Has a track record of giving up.
                           distance to get something done.                        until they are done.
                           Acts without being told what to do. Brings new         Regularly brings new ideas into an             Never brings in new ideas. Takes direction /
Proactive
                           ideas to company.                                      organization. Self directed.                   does not act until being told.
                           Possesses a strong willingness to work hard and        Works long, hard hours to get the job
Work Ethic                                                                                                                       Does just enough to get the job done.
                           long hours to get the job done.                        done.
                           Expects personal performance and team                  Expects top performance from himself and       Allows himself to do 80% of the job / lets
High Standards
                           performance to be the best.                            from others around him.                        poor performance from others slide.
Interpersonal
                           Lets others speak and seeks to understand their        Displays ability to listen to others to       Cuts people off, does not address questions,
Listening Skills
                           viewpoints.                                            understand meaning.                           misunderstands.
                           Often solicits feedback and reacts calmly to           Responds to criticism by finding ways to      Reacts to criticism by blaming others and
Open to Criticism
                           receiving criticism.                                   grow and become better.                       becoming bitter.
                           Writes clearly and articulately using correct          Demonstrates ability to write clearly in all  Does not offer any evidence of being a strong
Written Communication
                           grammar.                                               forms of communication.                       writer.
                           Speaks clearly and articulately without being                                                        Speaks too quickly or too slowly, mumbles,
Oral Communication                                                                Speaks clearly, articulately, and succinctly.
                           overly verbose or talkative.                                                                         uses a lot of jargon, etc.
                           Reaches out to peers and cooperates with               Recognizes the power of a strong team,        Prefers to operate in isolation. May not work
Teamwork
                           supervisors to establish relationship.                 and works collaboratively.                    harmoniously with others.
                           Able to convince others to pursue a course of          Convinces others to take a course of          Fails to or never tries to convince others to
Persuasion
                           action.                                                action, even if initially in opposition.      take a course of action.
                           Sets goals for team and follows-up to ensure           Sets goals, follows-up, and holds people      Does not set goals, follow-up, or hold people
Holds People Accountable
                           progress toward completion.                            accountable for shortfalls.                   accountable.




                                                                             53
