                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  MACRO NEEDS MICRO

                                        Fabio Ghironi

                                     Working Paper 23836
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23836


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




For helpful comments, I am grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Simon Cowan, Jean-Paul Tsasa, David
Vines, Samuel Wills, an anonymous referee, and other participants in the project to which this
paper contributes. All errors are my own. The views expressed in this paper are personal and do
not necessarily reflect the views of CEBRA, CEPR, the EABCN, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Fabio Ghironi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Macro Needs Micro
Fabio Ghironi
NBER Working Paper No. 23836
September 2017
JEL No. E10,E32,E52,F12,F23,F40

                                          ABSTRACT

An emerging consensus on the future of macroeconomics views the incorporation of a role for
financial intermediation, labor market frictions, and household heterogeneity in the presence of
uninsurable unemployment risk as key needed extensions to the benchmark macro framework. I
argue that this is welcome, but not sufficient for macro—and international macro—to tackle the
menu of issues that have been facing policymakers since the recent global crisis. For this purpose,
macro needs more micro than the benchmark setup has been incorporating so far. Specifically,
artificial separations between business cycle analysis, the study of stabilization policies, and
growth macro, as well as between international macroeconomics and international trade, must be
overcome. I review selected literature contributions that took steps in this direction; outline a
number of important, promising directions for future research; and discuss methodological issues
in the development of this agenda.


Fabio Ghironi
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Savery Hall, Box 353330
Seattle, WA 98195
and NBER
ghiro@uw.edu
1       Introduction

The global …nancial crisis (GFC) of 2008 and the Great Recession (GR) that followed have prompted
a re-examination of the toolkit for macroeconomic analysis that should be used as benchmark for
teaching, research, and policy advice.
        The emerging consensus is that the new benchmark should make it possible to explain why
the crisis happened, why the recovery was extremely slow, and the connection between cyclical
dynamics and longer-run growth. The consensus is also that benchmark macroeconomics can no
longer a¤ord to abstract from such features of reality as heterogeneity across agents, uninsurable
risk, and unemployment. The consensus points toward a framework that includes endogenous
capital formation, a role for the …nancial sector, and a merger of the HANK and SAM frameworks.1
        While I agree with the consensus and the promise of the HANK-SAM marriage, I think focusing
exclusively on introducing …nancial intermediation and heterogeneous-agent unemployment in the
benchmark macro framework is not su¢ cient.2 I believe that even those major changes to the
standard New Keynesian toolbox would leave it unable of capturing other mechanisms of …rst-
order importance for macroeconomics. The …eld would continue being perceived as incapable of
confronting reality (regardless of whether this perception is entirely fair or not).
        Speci…cally, it seems to me high time for macroeconomics to move beyond the representation of
…rm behavior in terms of production by a constant number of symmetric …rms that produce either
the same good under perfect competition or a …xed range of goods under monopolistic competition
between a continuum of …rms. Unemployment in the aftermath of the GFC happened also because
a large number of …rms failed and …rms that did not fail reduced the number of active production
lines. Credit market freezing was central to …rm failures and decisions to cut production lines.
Heterogeneous e¢ ciency across …rms implied that only the most e¢ cient producers were able to
survive, but their activity was slowed down by stagnant demand. Exposure to trade became the
culprit for job losses that were most often caused by technological advances and/or by labor market
rigidities that prevented e¤ective reallocation of labor across …rms, sectors, and geographical areas.3
Understanding the very slow speed of recovery since the crisis and the connection between a cyclical
    1
     HANK stands for Heterogeneous-Agent New Keynesian, as in Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2016), and SAM
stands for Search-And-Matching, as in the models of unemployment that build on Diamond (1982a,b) and Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994). Ravn and Sterk (2016) provide an example of tractable “marriage” of HANK and SAM.
   2
     This is independent of whether HANK-SAM and …nancial intermediation are included in closed- or open-economy
macro models.
   3
     The fact that only large …rms tended to survive made it easier to move toward a situation of monopsony in the
labor market, with …rms implementing contractual arrangements (such as non-compete clauses) that contributed to
increasing labor market rigidity.


                                                        1
phenomenon (such as the GR) and longer-term dynamics requires us to understand also the slow-
down of U.S. business dynamism that happened in the last several years. Less …rms are being
created, and …rms grow more slowly than they used to.4 Reduced …rm entry and creation of new
product lines along the recovery path generate hysteresis e¤ects with long-run output consequences.
In this light, it is no surprise that the U.S. and other economies have been struggling with low
productivity growth.
       I strongly believe that, if we want to provide students and young researchers with a set of macro
tools that can address the most important questions of the last decade— and those likely to arise
in the future— , macro needs micro (MNM— probably the sweetest acronym you will ever see in
macroeconomics): The standard toolkit for macroeconomic analysis of ‡uctuations and policy must
be extended to include producer-level dynamics of entry and exit, heterogeneity across …rms, and
the implications of these dynamics and heterogeneity for the macroeconomy.
       This does not require the creation of a completely new set of tools: endogenous producer entry
is a standard feature of endogenous growth models (for instance, Romer, 1990), …rm heterogeneity
and its implications for domestic versus foreign market entry and exit are standard features of trade
theory since Melitz (2003). What needs to be recognized is that market entry and exit do not matter
only for the long-run growth in the absence of uncertainty that growth economists usually focus
on; domestic and foreign market entry and exit by heterogeneous producers do not matter only
in the steady-state, balanced-trade environment most trade economists restrict their attention to.
Growth is the result of entry and exit decisions that are taken under uncertainty during the business
cycle. These decisions will contribute to shape the cycle, and longer-run growth will be a¤ected
by cyclical dynamics through hysteresis e¤ects. Heterogeneity will crucially a¤ect the allocation of
resources across producers and aggregate productivity. It will be among the determinants of what
the economy trades and how it responds to foreign competition.5
       If macroeconomics aims to address the dynamics of the last decade and the economic issues that
have been central to recent political outcomes, arti…cial separations between modeling of business
cycles and longer-term dynamics must be abandoned, and the same must happen to similarly
arti…cial separations between macroeconomic and trade modeling.6
   4
      See Economic Innovation Group (2017) and Sparshott (2016a,b,c).
   5
      Absence of entry and exit dynamics from the foundation of the basic New Keynesian framework is the result of
the fact that monopoly power, but not the free entry condition, was necessary as a stepping stone to introduce price
stickiness in the model. This contributed crucially to the separation between (New Keynesian) business cycle macro,
growth macro, and trade theory. According to Feenstra (2003), a constant number of …rms “violates the spirit of
monopolistic competition.”
    6
      I would argue that this should be true also from the perspective of trade research— i.e., that trade economists


                                                         2
    A growing literature has made signi…cant inroads into the development of the type of framework
I am suggesting and has built a strong case for its empirical relevance. Some results of this literature
have begun informing policy advice in important ways. I brie‡y review the state of the art in this
area below, focusing on selected contributions to model development. This literature provides the
foundation for extensions of the framework in a number of directions.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes what the literature has
already accomplished by brie‡y describing the main ingredients of some representative, existing
models and their key results. Section 3 describes what I consider the most important directions for
future research. Section 4 discusses methodological issues. Section 5 concludes.


2    The State of the Art

This section reviews selected contributions to the state of the art in macro and international macro
theory in which producer-level dynamics contribute to ‡uctuations. I focus on models that assume
monopolistic competition or other forms of monopoly power, as they lend themselves most directly
to providing the foundation for sticky-price extensions. The set of papers I mention is by no means
intended to be a complete survey of the existing literature, and it includes much of my own work. It
is the set of papers that allows me most transparently to describe how producer-level dynamics can
be integrated in models of ‡uctuations, and to connect this to present-day questions of interest.7


Closed Economy

Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012) provide a benchmark model of ‡uctuations with monopolistic
competition and endogenous producer entry subject to sunk costs. The model— referred to as
the BGM model below— assumes that consumers derive utility from having access to a larger set
of products, but the existence of entry costs implies that only a subset of the products consumers
would like to have access to is actually available at each point in time. The consumption aggregator
is not restricted to the familiar Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) speci…cation, but it takes a general homothetic
form. Di¤erent from earlier business cycle models with monopolistic competition and endogenous
entry that assume …xed entry costs and a free entry condition that implies zero pro…ts on a period-
should move beyond the …ction of balanced trade and the steady-state focus of their models, and they should recognize
that cyclical dynamics can have e¤ects that seal the fate of the most major trade policy decisions.
   7
     By focusing on models in which …rms have monopoly power, I completely omit the vast literature that
builds on Hopenhayn (1992). For more references and discussion than I can cover here, see the papers
I mention and references therein.      For the open economy case, an extensive reading list is available at
http://faculty.washington.edu/ghiro/ITMSyllabus.pdf.


                                                         3
by-period basis, the BGM model assumes sunk costs and a time-to-build lag: Entrants spend the
…rst period setting up their production lines, and they begin producing and generating pro…ts only
in the following period. Free entry then equates today’s sunk entry cost (which requires use of
labor) to the expected present discounted value (EPDV) of pro…ts from tomorrow to the in…nite
future, with discounting adjusted for an exogenous probability of …rm destruction. Formally, the
entry condition in the symmetric equilibrium of the BGM model is vt = (wt =Zt )fE;t , where vt is
the EPDV of pro…ts from t + 1 on, fE;t is the sunk entry cost (in units of e¤ective labor), wt is the
real wage (in units of consumption), and Zt is exogenous aggregate labor productivity.8
    Firms …nance their entry costs by issuing shares in the stock market, and this provides the
general equilibrium link between entry decisions and the optimizing behavior of the representative
household: In this model economy, investment takes the form of creation of new production lines,
…nanced by households with their savings. The price of investment is determined by the Euler
equation for share holdings. With separable, log-utility from consumption:

                                                         Ct
                                vt =    (1     ) Et             (vt+1 + dt+1 ) ;
                                                        Ct+1

where     2 (0; 1) is the familiar discount factor parameter,           2 (0; 1) is the exogenous probability
of …rm destruction that applies to all …rms (including new entrants) at the end of each period,
Ct is consumption, and dt denotes …rm pro…ts, distributed to households as dividends. Forward
iteration of this equation in the absence of bubbles returns the expression for the EPDV of pro…ts
in the free entry condition. Aggregate accounting implies the standard equality between aggregate
demand— the sum of consumption and investment (the price of shares times the number of new
entrants, NE;t )— and income (the sum of labor income and pro…ts generated by the number Nt of
producing …rms): Ct + vt NE;t = wt Lt + Nt dt , where Lt is the amount of labor employed by the
economy. The price of shares is the key, endogenously determined relative price that determines
the allocation of resources between consumption of existing products and creation of new ones.
    Even if the benchmark version of the model assumes that each good is produced using only labor
(in linear fashion, as in the most basic New Keynesian model), the number of active producers in
    8
      The presentation of the model assumes a one-to-one identi…cation between a producer, a product line, and
a …rm, and I will use these terms interchangeably below. This was to facilitate relating our model to the New
Keynesian literature, where individual producers in the usually assumed Dixit-Stiglitz continuum are referred to as
…rms. However, our preferred interpretation— consistent with relative empirical importance— is that every pro…t
maximizing unit should be interpreted as a product line at a possibly multi-product …rm whose boundaries we are
leaving unspeci…ed by exploiting continuity and the assumption that …rms remain of negligible size relative to the
size of the market.



                                                        4
any given period behaves very much like the capital stock in the simplest real business cycle (RBC)
model: Nt = (1         ) (Nt   1   + NE;t   1 ).   As this law of motion shows, the number of producing …rms
is predetermined and does not respond to shocks on impact, but it then adjust gradually in response
to stochastic disturbances to aggregate productivity.9
       The benchmark version of the model is simple enough that it can be literally solved with
pencil and paper in log-linearized form, even though the details of the solution are not included
in the published paper. There, Bilbiie, Melitz, and I use calibration to illustrate the properties
of the model numerically. We show that it does at least as well (or as poorly— beauty here is in
the eye of the beholder) as the basic RBC setup with respect to the familiar set of business cycle
moments these models are usually evaluated against, but, in addition, it replicates successfully data
properties such as the cyclicality of pro…ts and producer entry. With translog preferences (which
imply that products become more closely substitutable as their number increases), the model does
a remarkable job of matching the cyclicality of the labor-share-based measure of markups in the
U.S. economy used by Rotemberg and Woodford (1999).
       Bilbiie, Melitz, and I set up the model intentionally to keep it as simple and as clean as possible,
thus abstracting from many features of reality: For instance, we do not introduce heterogeneity
across producers, and we assume that exit happens only as a result of exogenous …rm destruction.10
Absence of heterogeneity and endogenous exit implies that the model does not feature hysteresis.
It also makes it possible to solve it reliably using log-linear approximation, thus obtaining results
that are transparent to most macroeconomists— and no, this does not mean that we are married
to log-linearization! In a nutshell, it is not unfair to characterize our model as Romer (1990) minus
long-run growth and plus uncertainty, with preferences that are not restricted to Dixit-Stiglitz.
       Since our paper was circulated and published, a large number of extensions and applications
have been written and published by many scholars, including explorations of the role of monetary
in the presence of endogenous producer dynamics in sticky-price versions of the model.11 Once one
introduces heterogeneity and endogenous exit, and assumes the appropriate externality in entry
costs, the framework can generate both hysteresis and endogenous growth, making it possible to
   9
      The paper also presents a version of the model in which production combines labor and physical capital.
  10
      There is no …xed cost in the model in addition to the initial sunk cost of entry. This implies that, once …rms
have entered, they would never exit, unless hit by the exogenous “death” shock. Endogenous exit would require
heterogeneity to avoid situations where all …rms would want to exit. We discuss in the paper the reasons why
properly calibrated exogenous exit is a reasonable approximation of reality for the purposes of our exercise.
   11
      An incomplete list of references includes Bergin and Corsetti (2008), Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2014),
Faia (2012), and Lewis (2013). On …scal policy, see Chugh and Ghironi (2015) and Colciago (2016). Some of
these contributions explore the consequences of strategic interactions among …rms of non-negligible size in models of
oligopolistic competition. I return to this topic below.


                                                            5
study the questions that are of so much interest nowadays.12;13
       We address normative issues in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2016), and I studied optimal …scal
policy in the BGM model in Chugh and Ghironi (2015), but I will focus next on work by Dhingra
and Morrow (2014) that— although not developed in a dynamic, stochastic environment— addresses
a very important question: What is the optimal amount of product variety in the presence of mo-
nopolistic competition and heterogeneous productivity across …rms? Does the market equilibrium
coincide with the solution to a social planning problem? Dhingra and Morrow study the conditions
under which this happens. Their analysis complements what Bilbiie, Melitz, and I did in our 2016
CEPR DP, which focused on the DSGE case without …rm heterogeneity.
       Now consider the following: Since the results of Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and work by others
on the consequences of resource misallocation across …rms (for instance, Restuccia and Rogerson,
2013, and Fattal Jaef, 2016), one of the mantras we have been hearing from the policy community is
that countries should implement structural reforms designed to facilitate reallocation of resources
to high-productivity …rms and exit by the low productivity ones. A problem that I see in that
discussion is that it is often completely disconnected from discussion of why those low productivity
…rms exist. If they do because they are kept alive (or in an undead, zombie state) by distorting an
otherwise e¢ cient outcome, yes, reforms should be implemented that “kill”those …rms and reallo-
cate resources to the more e¢ cient ones. But heterogeneous productivity— with low-productivity
…rms existing in equilibrium— may also be the e¢ cient outcome of consumer demand of di¤erenti-
ated products and endogenous entry of producers that satisfy that demand. Dhingra and Morrow’s
paper helps us understand when this might be the case, and the discussion of reallocation in the
policy debates should become very aware of their results. Then, if one combines BGM and Dhingra-
Morrow, it becomes possible to study the consequences of product market reforms that facilitate
entry and reallocate resources across heterogeneous …rms in a dynamic model environment that
makes it possible to trace the e¤ects of reforms from their short-run impact all the way to their
long-term outcomes. I will return to the topic of structural reforms below, but the events of the last
decade— and the prominent role that market reforms have taken in recommended policy menus—
underscore how important it has become to go beyond the static, long-run analysis of Blanchard
  12
     A technical challenge that should be tackled in the case of translog preferences would be how to ensure that
long-run growth would not imply a downward trend in the markup, which would be inconsistent with the evidence.
But the problem would not arise with standard Dixit-Stiglitz preferences.
  13
     Anzoategui et al. (2015) show how endogenous technology adoption and R&D extensive margin dynamics—
which, like BGM, share key features with Romer (1990)— can result in persistent business cycle ‡uctuations. Comin
and Gertler (2006) introduced the concept of medium-term business cycles and showed that a model with endogenous
R&D and entry can replicate these lower-frequency ‡uctuations.


                                                       6
and Giavazzi (2003) and understand the e¤ects of reforms in fully dynamic, stochastic settings.14
       Most of the work referenced above assumes monopolistic competition among a continuum of
…rms. It thus lends itself naturally to incorporation of sticky prices, as in some work I mentioned.
But this means it also lends itself naturally to exploration of the role of monetary policy (not to
mention …scal policy) in a¤ecting the dynamics triggered by exogenous shocks and other policies
(such as changes in market regulation) and potentially contributing to longer term e¤ects once
hysteresis is accounted for. Once …rm heterogeneity is included, one can study the implications
of macroeconomic policy for changes in characteristics of the distribution of productivity across
…rms— and this in average productivity and, if the model includes long-run growth, the long-
run growth rate of the economy. These analyses, if performed, would complement the focus on
the distributional e¤ects of monetary policy implied by household heterogeneity in the HANK
framework by focusing on the production side of the economy. The ongoing debate on “secular
stagnation,” low productivity growth, and hysteresis e¤ects suggests that these are exercises it
would be important to perform.
       Finally, it is important to note that the focus of BGM and the afore-mentioned literature
on monopolistic competition does not imply that attention should be restricted to this form of
interaction between producers. The New Keynesian macro literature and much trade literature
settled on monopolistic competition because, under assumption of continuity (or of a su¢ ciently
large number of producers), it makes it possible to accomplish basic goals (introducing sticky prices
or having welfare bene…ts from product variety) while avoiding the issue of strategic interactions
between …rms of non-negligible size. Once …rms that are not of negligible size relative to the size
of the market are included in the model, one needs to take a stand on their mode of competition,
on why they do or do not collude, etc. Peter Neary has been advocating for a long time that trade
theory should move beyond monopolistic competition and study other forms of market power.15
In macro, Federico Etro and coauthors have been developing very interesting versions of the BGM
model and of its extension to the sticky-price environment that explore the consequences of Bertrand
or Cournot competition. See, for instance, Colciago and Etro (2010), Etro and Colciago (2010),
and Etro and Rossi (2015a,b). The results of these papers and others in this area provide a starting
point for further exploration of the implications of strategic behavior by large …rms for the questions
  14
     Cacciatore and Fiori (2016) make an important contribution in this direction by using a version of BGM extended
to incorporate SAM frictions in the labor market.
  15
     See, for instance, Neary (2016) and Neary and Tharakan (2012). de Blas and Russ (2015) explore the consequences
of Bertrand competition in an extension of the widely used Ricardian model by Bernard et al. (2003).




                                                         7
facing policymakers today and, possibly, in the future.


Open Economy

In Ghironi and Melitz (2005— GM below), we made a start at bridging the gap between modern
international macroeconomics and trade theory by incorporating the Melitz (2003) trade model in a
DSGE model of international business cycles. In a nutshell, we developed a true dynamic, general
equilibrium Melitz model with uncertainty.16 The model shares several features with the BGM
model described above, with two major di¤erences: As in the original Melitz model, we assume
that entrants face uncertainty about their …rm-speci…c productivity at the time when they commit
to sunk entry decisions into their domestic economies. Upon entry, producer-speci…c productivity
is drawn from a continuous distribution (assumed to be Pareto when we solve the model). Firm-
speci…c productivity remains …xed thereafter, but production (which, as in the benchmark version
of BGM, uses only labor) is subject to aggregate, country-speci…c productivity shocks. In terms of
the BGM model details I presented above, the value of the …rm and …rm pro…ts in the symmetric
equilibrium, vt and dt , are replaced by average …rm value and pro…t, v~t and d~t , i.e., the …rm value
and pro…t evaluated at an appropriately de…ned, market-share-weighted average of …rm-speci…c
productivity.17
       The second key di¤erence relative to BGM is that GM develops a two-country model in which
producers decide endogenously whether to export output to the foreign market. Trade entails
two types of costs: standard iceberg costs and …xed costs. Because of these …xed costs, only
su¢ ciently productive …rms— those whose …rm-speci…c productivity is above an endogenously de-
termined cuto¤— export to the foreign country. Aggregate shocks cause the cuto¤ productivity
for exporting to ‡uctuate, and thus cause changes in the composition of the consumption baskets
across countries. (Average pro…ts, d~t , thus combine average pro…ts from domestic sales and average
export pro…ts.) As we show, the micro-level features of the model cause deviations from purchasing
power parity that would be absent without trade costs.18
  16
     While Melitz (2003) refers to the model as dynamic, general equilibrium, and characterized by behavior under
uncertainty, the extent to which it indeed has those characteristics is not what macroeconomists would have in mind:
Melitz (2003) focuses on a steady-state environment; the …nancing of sunk costs incurred by …rms upon entry is
not really modeled; and the only uncertainty is that on …rm-speci…c productivity that …rms face before entry in the
domestic economy. We address those limitations in GM by developing a fully dynamic model in which entry costs
are …nanced by households (as in BGM) and …rms are subject to stochastic, country-speci…c shocks to aggregate
productivity.
  17
     Once these changes are made, aggregate accounting implies the same equality between total demand and total
income as in BGM under assumption of …nancial autarky. When countries are allowed to trade bonds, aggregate
accounting implies a standard law of motion for net foreign bond holdings.
  18
     As in BGM, domestic entry is …nanced by households through purchases of shares in …rm equity. We assume


                                                         8
    We show that the model sheds new light on a classic issue in international macroeconomics:
the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson (HBS) e¤ect, or the evidence that richer countries are characterized
by higher prices and an appreciated real exchange rate. Textbook theory (for instance, Obstfeld
and Rogo¤, 1996) assumes that the e¤ect is caused by di¤erences in productivity growth between
traded and non-traded sectors. In our model, a completely aggregate increase in home productivity
causes real appreciation because of entry and endogenous non-tradedness.19 Thus, we provide a
new perspective on the HBS e¤ect that helps explain evidence and complements the traditional
theory. Because we intentionally set up the model to allow reliable solution by log-linearization,
we can delve deep into it with pencil and paper (even if, di¤erent from the basic BGM, we cannot
solve it fully), and we obtain analytical results that make intuitions very transparent. Numerical
examples then serve the purpose of illustrating those intuitions.
    In the second part of the paper, we show that the calibrated model (with a calibration that, if
anything, is chosen to match micro-level data) does at least as well (or as poorly) as the standard
international RBC (IRBC) model at replicating standard business cycle moments, and it does better
on some dimensions. In a follow-up paper (Ghironi and Melitz, 2007), we show that the calibrated
model sheds new light on the cyclicality of net and gross trade ‡ows while being less subject to
some problems of the IRBC setup concerning the cyclicality of the terms of trade.
    While Melitz and I were pleased to see the model perform at least as well as the IRBC framework
(and better in some dimension), from my perspective, the real contribution of our paper (and of
BGM) was to show how a mechanism that we thought important (and that evidence discussed in the
papers increasingly suggested important not just for long-run phenomena) could be embedded in a
macro setup without huge costs in terms of tractability and intuition, and that the exercise would
shed valuable light on important questions (the HBS e¤ect). In my opinion, BGM and GM were
much more about the mechanisms— endogenous entry in domestic and export markets— and their
implications than about the numbers generated by the speci…c calibrations per se. This emphasis
on mechanisms is something I will return to below.
    Since the publication of GM, a fast-growing literature has developed at the intersection of
international trade and international macroeconomics, with contributions covering a wide range of
theoretical and empirical issues. It is fair to say that this literature has done a lot to remove the
arti…cial separation of these two …elds that I mentioned in the Introduction, but more needs to be
that …rms are fully owned domestically (i.e., there is no international trade in equities) for simplicity. Hamano (2015)
studies the implications of international trade in equities in the GM model.
  19
     All goods are tradable in GM, but some of them are non-traded in equilibrium.



                                                           9
done, especially in recognizing that producer-level dynamics and …rm heterogeneity should become
part of our benchmark thinking and toolkit.
       With respect to issues that have become central in present-day policy discussions, very in-
teresting work has developed versions of the model suitable for studying the determinants and
consequences of o¤shoring in a DSGE environment. For instance, Zlate (2016) shows that a model
with endogenous o¤shoring can successfully replicate a number of empirical features of U.S.-Mexico
interdependence, including dynamics of …rm o¤shoring decisions that our standard international
macro models are silent about.20 Cacciatore (2014) develops a version of GM that incorporates
SAM frictions in the labor market and studies the consequences of trade integration in this frame-
work, tracing the dynamics triggered by trade integration from the impact e¤ect of the policy
change to the long-run consequences, and studying also how trade integration a¤ects the charac-
teristics of the international business cycle. Trade economists mostly focus on steady-state models
and the long-run gains from trade when debating the e¤ects of trade integration. But the devil
is in the dynamics! The world is never in steady state. As recent and ongoing events are making
painfully clear, it is the dynamics of adjustment (or the rigidities that interfere with adjustment)
that are determining electoral outcomes and the fate of proposed or existing policies (trade and
others). Trade economics should move past the …ction of steady state and balanced trade when
studying the e¤ects of trade integration. Cacciatore’s work is an important step in that direction.21
       Two important developments in the trade literature that I consider especially promising for their
spillovers for macro research are the study of granularity and that of global value chains (GVCs).
di Giovanni and Levchenko (2012) build on Gabaix (2011) to make an important contribution. As
Gabaix showed, under the appropriate assumptions about the distribution of …rm size, idiosyncratic
shocks across …rms do not wash out in the aggregate. If the economy is “granular,” i.e. it features
a fat tail of disproportionately large …rms, shocks to these …rms become a driver of the aggregate
business cycle. di Giovanni and Levchenko begin by showing that smaller, more open economies tend
to be more granular than large ones. They then develop a multi-country Melitz-type model with
granularity, and they show that trade integration tends to increase granularity. This is an intuitive
consequence of a key property of the Melitz model: The model implies that trade reallocates market
  20
     Zlate (2016) develops a model of vertical FDI, in which U.S. …rms decide to o¤shore production to Mexico in
order to produce output that is then imported back to the U.S. and sold to U.S. consumers. See Contessi (2015) for
a model in which …rms decide to o¤shore in order to serve the foreign market (horizontal FDI).
  21
     Alessandria and Choi (2014) and Alessandria, Choi, and Ruhl (2014) also study the consequences of trade
integration in DSGE models with endogenous entry and exit decisions. Their models incorporate additional features
of producer dynamics, but they abstracts from labor market frictions.



                                                       10
share toward the relatively more e¢ cient …rms, which become bigger (increased market share of
more e¢ cient …rms also results in an endogenous increase in average …rm productivity). In a
granular environment, large (more e¢ cient) …rms becoming larger implies more granularity. This
poses obvious questions for the debate on the consequences of trade integration, and also for the
ongoing discussions on structural reforms. It is a research area that macroeconomists should pay
much attention to.
   The same is true of GVCs. Fragmentation of production across borders has changed the na-
ture of trade, resulting in increasing importance of trade in value added rather than traditional
trade. Bems and Johnson (forthcoming) and Johnson and Noguera (2012) have given important
contributions to our understanding of the phenomenon, and Duval et al. (2016) have explored the
implications for international business cycles. GVCs have key implications for how we think about
competitiveness, because exchange rate changes no longer have only the standard e¤ect on trade
of making purely domestically produced goods cheaper (or more expensive) for foreigners. The
international macroeconomics of GVCs is only at its beginning, and it is an especially important
research area— also for a better understanding of what we would stand to lose with trade wars.
   Coming to interdependence between trade and macroeconomic policies, inroads have been made
by Bergin and Corsetti (2016) and Cacciatore and Ghironi (2012— CG below).22                    Bergin and
Corsetti (2016) show how accounting for extensive margin dynamics can reconcile the traditional
preference of policymakers for boosting manufacturing competitiveness with the incentive to ap-
preciate the terms of trade embedded in New Keynesian open economy models since Corsetti and
Pesenti (2001). In CG, we develop a version of the GM-Cacciatore model that incorporates sticky
wages and prices, and we study the consequences of changes in trade integration for the optimal
conduct of monetary policy, as well as the role of monetary policy in the dynamics triggered by
a possible return to past levels of tari¤s. Interdependence between trade and monetary policy is
all over the map in policy discussions and documents— just think of the role of the creation of the
Single Market in the run-up to the euro. The New Keynesian open economy literature has studied
the consequences of openness for optimal monetary policy and alternative exchange rate regimes in
models in which openness is characterized by changes in the degree of home bias in consumer pref-
erences or parameters of technology. But to the extent that openness is the outcome of trade policy
actions, proxying policy by varying a parameter of preferences may be very misleading: After all,
  22
     See also Cooke (2014, 2016). Hamano and Pappadà (2017) focus on the interaction between monetary policy,
producer dynamics, and external imbalances.




                                                     11
those are the famous structural parameters we would like to keep invariant to policy. Embedding
trade microfoundations in the international macro framework makes it possible to perform a deeper
analysis of the consequences of changes in trade policy for monetary policy. This is what we make
a start at doing in CG.23


3        What Next?

The discussion in the previous section hinted to a number of research directions that I consider
promising for the future. In addition to those, there are four directions that I view as espe-
cially relevant for future macro theory research. Two— …nancial intermediation and household
heterogeneity— have already become part of the emerging “consensus future” of macroeconomics.
I brie‡y discuss below how research in these areas would connect naturally to issues related to
producer dynamics and heterogeneity. Existing research already yielded results that could be used
to introduce these areas of ongoing work at the end of a …rst-year, Ph.D. macro sequence— at least,
that is what I would do if I taught the second semester (or the third quarter) of such sequence.
The other two research directions I focus on build and expand on themes I mentioned in Section 2.


Financial Intermediation

The work I reviewed in the previous section makes strong simplifying assumptions with respect to
the role of …nancial markets. Entrants …nance their sunk entry costs by issuing equity in frictionless
stock markets (except for an assumption of extreme home equity bias that prevents international
equity trading in most open economy models). There is no role for …nancial intermediation and
associated frictions. Reality reminded us brutally in the last decade of the possible consequences of
abstracting from these features. Moreover, empirical work had already documented the importance
of bank …nance— and the consequences of changes in the characteristics of banking markets— for the
dynamics of producer entry and exit already before the GFC (for instance, Cetorelli and Strahan,
2006).
         Stebunovs (2008) made a start at modeling the results of this empirical literature in a version
of BGM in which …rms must borrow from intermediaries with monopoly power that compete in
Cournot fashion over the number of loans they issue. He showed that balancing the portfolio
    23
    In Barattieri, Cacciatore, and Ghironi (2017), we use a small open economy version of CG to study the macro-
economic consequences of tari¤ shocks. We show that the model replicates empirical evidence on the responses to
such shocks, and we evaluate whether protectionism can be bene…cial by raising in‡ation when the economy is mired
in a liquidity trap. Our conclusion is negative.


                                                       12
expansion e¤ect of extending more loans with the pro…t destruction externality that producer
entry imposes on all producers results in intermediaries erecting a …nancial market barrier to entry
in the form of a mark-down in the bank’s valuation of an extra loan (i.e., an extra productive unit)
relative to the perfectly competitive benchmark.
    Formally, the Euler equation for …nancing of entry in the BGM model is replaced by an Euler
equation that determines the value of an additional producing …rm at time t + 1 in the portfolio of
loans extended by a …nancial intermediary:

                                          Ct              1
                          qt = Et                    1         dt+1 + (1      ) qt+1    ;
                                         Ct+1             H

where H is the number of …nancial intermediaries that compete in the market. The number H
plays a similar role to that of the elasticity of substitution across products ( ) in the familiar
continuous model of monopolistic competition: With endogenous output, the assumption                         > 1 is
necessary to ensure strictly positive output in equilibrium. The case             ! 1 corresponds to perfect
competition. Here, H > 1 is necessary to ensure that intermediaries …nance a positive number of
entrants: If H = 1 (absolute monopoly in the banking market), the Euler equation above implies
qt = 0, and the economy is starved of entry and, eventually, production. If H ! 1, the banking
market becomes perfectly competitive, and the Euler equation that determines qt becomes that of
perfectly competitive …nance, as in BGM (except for the di¤erence that qt is the value of a …rm
producing with certainty at t + 1, and thus (1            ) multiplies only qt+1 ). As long as H is …nite, the
Euler equation implies a mark-down of qt relative to the perfectly competitive scenario.24
    The entry condition vt = (w_ t =Zt )fE;t of BGM is replaced by qt = fw_ t = [(1             ) Zt ]g fE;t . A re-
form that increases competition in local banking markets (such as the scenario explored empirically
by Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006) causes H to rise and boosts entry of non-…nancial establishments
by narrowing the gap between qt and its value under perfect competition.
    Notz (2012) shows that Stebunovs’results hold also in a model in which the …nancial contract is
a more standard debt contract and does not assume that intermediaries extract all the pro…ts of the
…rms they …nance in repayment of their loans. More recently, Bergin, Feng, and Lin (2014— BFL)
develop a version of BGM that builds on Jermann and Quadrini’s (2012) to incorporate …nancing
constraints and a mix of equity versus bond …nance. BFL show that their model replicates several
  24
     This is akin to Hayashi’s (1982) result that monopoly power results in a mark-down of the marginal valuation
of capital relative to its average valuation in capital accumulation decisions by …rms. See Cacciatore, Ghironi, and
Stebunovs (2015) for an open economy extension of Stebunovs’analysis.



                                                         13
features of data in response to …nancial shocks.
   These examples illustrate how …nance can be embedded in models with producer dynamics,
but much more work in this area is needed, especially to address the implications of borrower het-
erogeneity (here, heterogeneity across producers), asymmetric information, and the open economy
dimension. We still lack a consensus model of producer heterogeneity and …nancial frictions that
would allow us to address the role of …nancial intermediation for misallocation of resources across
producers with market power. Manova (2013) built on Melitz (2003) to develop a benchmark model
of …nancial frictions and trade with heterogeneous …rms. She highlighted how …nancing require-
ments associated with trade can result in trade participation by a smaller set of …rms in the presence
of frictions, and her work provided the theoretical foundation for the explanation of the “Great
Trade Collapse”of 2008-09 that highlighted the drying up of trade …nance as the key source of the
collapse. However, we still do not have a consensus framework that embeds …nancial frictions and
a role for intermediation in a dynamic international macro model with uncertainty. More research
in this area is needed in order to address a number of interesting positive and normative questions.


Heterogeneous Households

Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2016) introduce uninsurable employment risk in the New Keynesian
model to address the inability of the framework to study the distributional consequences of mon-
etary policy. Ravn and Sterk (2016) show how the framework can be tractably combined with
search-and-matching frictions in the labor market. The SAM model has been incorporated in a
number of international macro and macro papers with producer dynamics, some of which I reviewed
above. However, to the best of my knowledge, these models abstract from uninsurable employment
risk, with implications for their results and the range of questions they can address. Introducing
meaningful household heterogeneity in models with producer dynamics will make it possible to
study the connection between distributional issues and …rm dynamics.
   For instance, evidence shows that, on average, exporting …rms are larger and more productive
than …rms that serve only the domestic market. The evidence also shows that, on average, exporters
pay higher wages than non-exporters. How do changes in trade policy that a¤ect job creation and
destruction by exporters and non-exporters a¤ect the distribution of income on impact and along
the dynamics toward the new long-run steady state? How does this interact with macro policy and
the exchange rate? How do uninsurable employment risk and household asset accumulation shape
the e¤ects of large policy shocks such as the possible dismantling of NAFTA or the withdrawal of


                                                   14
the Federal Reserve from international …nancial regulation arrangements? And what is the e¤ect
(if any) of limited household participation in …nancial markets (a possible interpretation of market
incompleteness) on the dynamics of …rm entry and exit? IN BGM and GM, …rms …nance their
entry costs by issuing equity purchased by the representative household on the stock market. The
extent to which households participate in the stock market may have implications for the extent
to which di¤erent …rms rely on alternative sources of …nance, and it may importantly a¤ect the
consequences of shocks and macro policy actions for both the distribution of household income and
the distribution of activity across …rms. In the light of ongoing events and policy discussions, these
are interesting, important questions that our macroeconomic framework should address.25
       In addition to these two research areas, I view two directions of study as especially important
to build an overall framework of analysis suited to tackle present-day (and future) positive and
normative issues: One is the consequences of granularity, networks, and strategic interactions
between …rms; the other is interdependence across policies, within and across countries, and policy-
regime change. However, I would reserve covering work in these areas for second-year, …eld Ph.D.
courses.


Granularity, Strategic Interactions, and Networks

The benchmark macro model with monopolistic competition assumes a continuum of measure-zero
producers that interact with each other in non-strategic fashion. Producers respond to aggregates
but not to individual competitors. This is true even in models with heterogeneous producers,
such as frameworks that allow for heterogeneous productivity across …rms. But the research by
Gabaix (2011) in a closed-economy environment and its extension by di Giovanni and Levchenko
(2012) to the consequences of international trade highlight the importance of allowing di¤erences in
…rm size to have meaningful implications for the consequences of idiosyncratic shocks across …rms.
Moreover, once we begin entertaining the idea that …rms in our macro models should no longer be
measure-zero entities, the assumption of non-strategic monopolistic competition becomes less and
less tenable. In small open economies, policymakers pay attention to the decisions of individual
large …rms that represent a disproportionate portion of the economy in taking their decisions. Even
in large economies, expansions or contractions of industry giants at the center of large networks
of transactions, and interactions between such key …rms, have ripple e¤ects that can propagate to
  25
    Research should also address the extent to which SAM is a satisfactory model of unemployment for the purpose
of addressing these and other questions, or whether Michaillat’s (2012) version with rationing unemployment should
be preferred.


                                                       15
aggregate consequences and non-negligible spillovers abroad.
       Integrating these mechanisms in macro models will be important to answer a number of ques-
tions. For instance, as I discuss below, structural reforms designed to increase product market
‡exibility have become part of the policy menu invoked by policymakers to improve economic per-
formance in a number of countries. But how do reforms impact economies (domestic and foreign)
in the presence of granularity, networks, and strategic interdependence between large …rms (and,
sometimes, between these …rms and the policymakers themselves)? Although there is a growing
literature on granularity, networks, and strategic interactions (some of which I brie‡y mentioned
above), we simply do not know enough in this area, and we need to know more.26
       Similarly, we do not know enough about the implications of GVCs for macroeconomic policy,
structural reforms, or even the dynamic consequences of changes in trade policy. The establishment
of GVCs has resulted in fragmentation of production into networks that cross multiple country
borders, with product components or un…nished products often crossing a given border repeatedly
before the …nished product is available to consumers in its …nal destination. As hinted above,
this implies that the standard notion of the competitiveness e¤ect of exchange rate changes is
no longer valid. We need a dynamic model of roundabout production across country borders to
begin understanding the consequences of di¤erent macro policies and exchange rate arrangements
in this environment, and we need dynamic models of GVC formation— say, a dynamic, stochastic
version of Antràs and Chor (2013)— to study these questions more deeply and to understand the
consequences of market reforms and changes in trade policy. The threat that established GVCs
may unravel if protectionist pressures led to trade wars makes the need for this research all the
more urgent.


Policy Interdependence and the Dynamics of Policy-Regime Change

The di¢ culties facing policymaking since 2008 have highlighted the importance of multi-pronged
approaches to tackling crises and persistent recessions. Calls for policy packages have become a
mantra for policymakers at the highest level.27 In many instances, calls for multi-pronged policy-
making are combined with exhortations (or promises) to engage in stronger international coordi-
nation of economic policies (for instance, see G20, 2016, and Lagarde, 2016a,b).28 The menu of
  26
      On granularity, see also Carvalho and Grassi (2017) and di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Mejean (2014, 2017). The
literature on networks includes Acemo¼   glu et al. (2012), Baqaee (2016), Carvalho (2010), and Grassi (2016).
   27
      For recent examples of calls for appropriately designed policy packages, see Draghi (2016a), G20 (2016), Lagarde
(2016a,b), and Praet (2016).
   28
      Draghi (2016b) contains an explicit call for research on “interdependence in interdependence.”


                                                         16
this multi-pronged approach usually includes monetary policy, …scal policy, and structural reforms,
where, depending on the situations, the latter include reforms of …nancial, labor, and product
markets. Macro-prudential policy is also often added to the menu.
   This rich menu of policies, and their interdependence within and across countries, raises ques-
tions about how these policies interact with each other— again, within and across countries. Evalu-
ating the possible bene…ts of coordinating policies across countries— or across policymakers within a
given country— requires attention to specifying policymaker objectives, strategy spaces, and asym-
metries across countries (or policymakers) that can impinge on the possible gains from coordinating
policies. I discuss below some recent work on the interaction of monetary policy and structural re-
forms to which I contributed. Although this work yielded valuable insights, the analysis of product
and labor market reforms that it performs is based on assuming that characteristics of market reg-
ulation in reforming economies (think of euro area countries) are exogenously (and fully credibly)
adjusted to U.S. levels, taking the United States as a benchmark for ‡exibility. No stand is taken on
whether this is optimal for the countries involved, and not even on whether existing levels of regula-
tion are optimal for the United States. The topic of optimal structural reforms (like that of optimal
trade policy in a dynamic general equilibrium setting under uncertainty) is a major open area for
research. When one recognizes that reforms interact with macroeconomic policy (as Draghi, 2015,
and other policymakers clari…ed in unequivocal terms), one needs to address the implications of
strategic interactions between governments (in charge of regulation) and central banks. And when
one recognizes that policies have spillover e¤ects across country borders, it becomes clear that we
need to understand international interdependence within and across policy areas, and within and
across borders. This is an area where we have barely begun scratching the surface. Past theoretical
literature explored interdependence between monetary and …scal policies within and across coun-
tries (Dixit and Lambertini, 2003; Eichengreen and Ghironi, 2002; or Beetsma and Jensen, 2005,
in a New Keynesian framework) and between monetary and trade policy (Basevi, Denicolo’, and
Delbono, 1990), but much more work needs to be done to yield results that can provide a more
reliable road map for the understanding of positive and normative issues in this area.
   The same is true of policy-regime transition: Theoretical macro analysis (or international macro
analysis) most often compares di¤erent policy regimes “in a vacuum,”without addressing the actual
issue of how the economy transitions from one regime to the other, and what policymakers should do
to ensure an orderly transition. In international macro, we have a vast literature on exchange rate
crises and a more recent literature on sudden stops as the result of occasionally binding constraints,


                                                 17
but we do not really have a consensus way of modeling orderly versus disorderly regime transition.
While I could rattle o¤ a bunch of consensus references on crises, I cannot come up with a consensus
reference for modeling no-crisis endogenous regime transition, and what ensures that the transition
would indeed be a no-crisis one. I think this should be an important area for future research,
and I think this is the area where we may need the most signi…cant departures from existing
methodologies for macro modeling.
         I am optimistic that developments in theoretical and computational tools have put us in a
position to make signi…cant progress in the near future along all four research directions I described,
and I think we should encourage our Ph.D. students to pursue them.29 A better understanding of the
economy and formulation of better policy advice will follow from a deeper understanding of producer
dynamics, of the interaction of these dynamics with …nance and the behavior of heterogeneous
households, and of how strategic decisions of large …rms shape policymaker responses and/or are
shaped by them.


4        Methodological Issues

From a methodological standpoint, I believe that the path to progress lies in not being dogmatic and
in recognizing that di¤erent types of models can be useful for di¤erent purposes, as Blanchard (2017)
argued. Within such ‡exible, non-dogmatic approach, DSGE models can serve very important
purposes for theoretical analysis and the application of theory to questions of positive and normative
nature, including policy evaluation exercises.
         To return to a theme I mentioned above, analysis of policy packages (be it positive or normative)
requires models to include all the features that are key to disentangling and understanding the
e¤ects of di¤erent policies, and how they interact with each other.30 DSGE models have the
potential to ful…ll this task successfully. By building on the appropriate level of microfoundation,
    29
      The four research areas I focused on are by no means the only ones I consider important for the future development
of macroeconomic theory. An example of another new area of research that I consider very important and that I
think we should mention in second-year …eld teaching is immigration. Given recent events and evidence, I believe it
is important that international macroeconomists start moving beyond the assumption of immobile labor we usually
make and start exploring the implications of labor mobility. Dmitriev and Hoddenbagh (2012) and Farhi and Werning
(2014) made a start at this in their models of monetary unions, connecting the literature that employs the basic New
Keynesian setup to Mundell’s (1961) seminal work on optimum currency areas. Mandelman and Zlate (2012) went
one step further in their modeling of immigration, treating it as an entry decision subject to sunk costs. They
embedded this mechanism in a model of U.S.-Mexico interdependence and showed that the model does a remarkable
job of replicating cyclical patterns of immigration from Mexico into the United States and of remittances from the
latter back to Mexico. Mandelman and Zlate (2016) extend the model to incorporate task trade and skill upgrading
to study the role of o¤shoring and immigration dynamics in shaping observed U.S. labor market polarization. Much
more work in this area is needed.
   30
      Some of the material in this and the next paragraph repeats points I made in Ghironi (2017b).


                                                          18
they stand the best chance of disentangling the various channels through which the policies that
are called for are transmitted and interact with each other. By being dynamic, the models can help
us understand the di¤erences between short- and long-run e¤ects of di¤erent policy actions— and
how di¤erent parts of policy packages can complement or substitute for each other over time. By
being stochastic, the models recognize that policy operates in an uncertain environment, where
consumers, …rms, and policymakers take their decisions without perfect knowledge of the future;
that the e¤ects of reforms can depend on business cycle conditions, and reforms themselves can
alter the characteristics of the business cycle. Finally, general equilibrium implies that prices and
quantities are jointly determined by the constraints and optimality conditions of the model, with
no imposition of a-priori assumptions on how policy should a¤ect any price or quantity.
      Importantly, the de…ning characteristics of DSGE modeling that I just mentioned (microfoundation—
even if, strictly speaking, there is no M in DSGE— , dynamics, uncertainty, and joint determination
of prices and quantities by the model’s constraints and optimality conditions) do not necessarily
include rational expectations and reliance on exogenous productivity shocks as the sole source— or
even as a source— of cyclical ‡uctuations. DSGE analysis does not require the most standard Euler
equation that ties expected growth in the marginal utility of consumption to the ex-ante real inter-
est rate, nor does it require all those ingredients (or solution techniques) for which DSGE research
has become the object of a barrage of criticism from academics, bloggers, and journalists. We may
want to use some or all of those ingredients and techniques because, after all, models are never
meant to be photographs of reality, and it is useful to establish benchmark, transparent results in
simpli…ed frameworks that can then guide our understanding of the implications of working with
more realistic assumptions. But nothing in the DSGE approach constrains us to using any of those
ingredients. Even the level of microfoundation we want to embed in our models is ultimately a
decision that must be taken based on the balance between complication, clarity, and empirical
plausibility of assumptions and results. Related to this point, I am not advocating in this paper
that all models in macro and international macro from now on should include all the building blocs
I discussed above (producer entry, …rm heterogeneity, openness of the economy, …nancial interme-
diation, HANK, and SAM). The choice of what to include in any given model should still be guided
by the questions we want to address: Our framework and approach— and our teaching— should
be ‡exible enough that building blocs can be added or subtracted depending on the question of
interest and the goal of our analysis— whether it is purely theoretical or more applied.31
 31
      I most strongly reject the criticism that DSGE models are designed based on “cherry picking” the facts to be



                                                        19
    As I pointed out above, my view on the balance of micro and macro that we should incorporate
in DSGE analysis is that macro needs (more) micro than the established benchmark has been
incorporating, with a focus on producer dynamics and interactions to supplement the increasing
attention to …nancial and labor markets. Note that this is important not just for the sake of
microfoundations and elegance: It is important for the models to address key features of real world
dynamics, to …t the narrative of policymakers, and to avoid potentially misleading results.
    Interdependence across policies is an excellent example of what I have in mind: As ECB Pres-
ident Mario Draghi began his campaign in favor of structural reforms designed to increase the
‡exibility of product and labor market in the euro area, macroeconomists became naturally inter-
ested in the question whether implementing such reforms during a recession and when the central
bank is constrained by the zero lower bound (ZLB) on interest rates can be especially costly. The
question was initially addressed by Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Ra¤o (2014— EFR below) in a paper
where they use the o¤-the-shelf basic New Keynesian framework and model reforms essentially as
exogenous cuts to price and wage markups. EFR concluded that reforms boost external competi-
tiveness and improve the external balance, but they can be very costly at the ZLB because of their
de‡ationary e¤ect. The EFR article was an important starting point for discussion of the e¤ects
of reforms during recessions and at the ZLB, and it received a lot of attention in the media, in
the policy community, and among academics. Economists at policy institutions started using their
much richer DSGE models to simulate the e¤ects of reforms modeled in the same way. But this
modeling approach completely abstracts from any of the product and labor market dynamics that
policymakers have in mind when talking about structural reforms. It is su¢ cient to read the open-
ing statements to Draghi’s press conferences or his speeches to pick up countless references to entry
barriers, product market competition, job creation and destruction, and features of micro-level
behavior that the EFR modeling approach abstracts from.
    Is it important to include such features in the model? The answer from the work I did with
Cacciatore and Fiori (Cacciatore, Fiori, and Ghironi, 2016— CFG below) and with these authors
and Duval (Cacciatore et al., 2016a,b) is a strong yes. In this work, which provided the model
foundation for the discussion of structural reforms in the April 2016 issue of the IMF’s World
Economic Outlook and for the advice the IMF has been giving since, we show that incorporating
matched, and the implication that other modeling approaches would be superior by not being subject to this problem.
Every model will only explain the behavior of the variables it incorporates. Every model-builder, within each modeling
approach, is engaging in cherry picking, and every model will fail on some empirical dimensions that some of us may
…nd very relevant. The only model that avoids this problem is called reality.




                                                         20
micro-level dynamics has important consequences for results, and that the ZLB should not in itself
be a reason to delay reforms, at least of some types. In CFG, we show that implementing reforms in
an environment of exceptional macro policy expansion is a way not only to smooth short-run costs
of reforms, but also to bring long-run bene…ts closer to the present, as Draghi (2015) argued. Of
course, our models abstract from many relevant micro-level features, and they make assumptions
that the anti-DSGE crowd views as mortal sins. But I view the type of nuanced policy advice our
models helped the IMF give since last April as a clear success of this DSGE work, and many other
successes are out there that the critics fail (or simply refuse) to acknowledge.32
    So, yes to DSGE, and yes to micro.
    Within this approach, I believe the most productive way to proceed, especially for teaching and
academic research, should be to focus on mechanisms rather than ad hoc tweaks to the mathe-
matical speci…cations of preferences and technologies or adjustment costs. Failures of models to
address important features of what we aim to explain should be studied by asking ourselves what
mechanisms are missing from the framework for it to succeed— and by mechanisms I mean deeper
features than most tweaks to preferences, technology, and/or the introduction of adjustment costs.
The same argument applies to shocks: When a model fails to explain a set of data I am inter-
ested in given a set of shocks on which I (more or less) believe the empirical literature has told
me what I should expect, my preferred approach is to ask what deep mechanism(s) is the model
missing rather than adding shocks all over the model in order to “force”it to …t the data. It is this
deep-mechanism-driven approach that led me to develop the agenda with Melitz and those with
Cacciatore and others based on the incorporation of producer dynamics. By focusing on mech-
anisms and keeping the framework as simple and “clean” as we could, we were able to develop
models such that, even if analytical solution is not feasible, one can go deep enough into the model
with pencil and paper that the intuitions for results become quite transparent.33
    Of course, this is not to deny that there is a role for tweaks and adjustment costs. We used
adjustment costs ourselves in Cacciatore et al. (2016a,b) because of the IMF’s interest in a quanti-
tative model (and we used an ad hoc shock to the Euler equation for bond holdings in Cacciatore et
al., 2016b, to push the economy against the ZLB), but, in academic research and for teaching pur-
  32
     For an interesting contribution to the debate on structural reforms that accounts for …rm heterogeneity and
endogenous producer exit, see Hamano and Zanetti (2017).
  33
     Put di¤erently, one can incorporate micro-level dynamics into macro models without necessarily turning them
into black boxes or “kitchen sinks.” The same was accomplished by much DSGE literature by many scholars in other
areas. This literature therefore is not subject to Blanchard’s (2017) criticism of existing DSGE research, and it has
already been doing what Blanchard recommends DSGE modelers should be doing. See Ghironi (2017a) for more
discussion of this point.


                                                         21
poses, the cleaner framework should be preferred, with numerical results (which are qualitatively
the same as in the more quantitative model) intended more for illustration than for close empirical
relevance.
         Thus, even taking as given this preference for cleaner models that may miss several features
of the data, there should be no dogmatic preclusion against the use of model tweaks in both
academic and (especially) policy research, and there should be no preclusion against the use of
what Wren-Lewis (2017) refers to as SEMs (structural econometric models), or of “toy” models
(in the language of Kocherlakota, 2016), be they microfounded or not.34 If a SEM or a toy model
make it possible to address the question of interest, my view is that we only stand to learn from
comparing their results to those of di¤erent types of DSGE models (the “clean” variety I prefer
and the more quantitative setups that have become predominantly associated with the DSGE label
since Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005, and Smets and Wouters, 2007). When results are
similar, we will perhaps feel more comfortable about them, and when they di¤er, we will have new
research questions to ponder.35
         So, macro needs micro to talk about phenomena that are very relevant to explain reality and
address policy questions, but, just as important, we should teach our students to be ‡exible and
non-dogmatic, and we should equip them with the tools to tailor the modeling approach and the
speci…c models they use as researchers to the purposes of their research.36


5        Conclusion

Over twenty years ago, Paul Krugman wrote: “I would like to know how the macroeconomic model
that I more or less believe can be reconciled with the trade models that I also more or less believe.
[...] What we need to know is how to evaluate the microeconomics of international monetary
systems. Until we can do that, we are making policy advice by the seat of our pants” (Krugman,
1995). Answering that call for research at the intersection of international trade and international
macroeconomics is as important now as it was then. In fact, this paper essentially argued that the
scope of Krugman’s call and the answer to it must include also research that does not focus on the
    34
      Baldwin and Krugman (1989) is a great example of how to use non–explicitly-microfounded toy modeling to
incorporate producer dynamics in the analysis of classic international macro questions. Mehra and Prescott (1985)
is an excellent example of a DSGE, microfounded, toy model that yielded very important insights.
   35
      Agent-based modeling is another research area that should receive more attention. Hommes and Iori (2015)
presents a collection of recent applications of this approach. See also Assenza and Delli Gatti (2013).
   36
      This also requires avoiding the “Don’t read, just write” approach to dissertation research that some pursue. As
a …eld, we will be less likely of locking ourselves into any box if our students have been exposed to and encouraged
to read on a “variety of boxes” (and how to manipulate them) on the way to their job market papers.


                                                         22
open economy dimension of macroeconomics. Macro— whether international or not— needs micro:
MNM!
   This paper has summarized several existing contributions to answering this call, it has outlined
key next steps in this program, and it has discussed methodological issues for this agenda. Contrary
to the doom-and-gloom view of macroeconomics that dominates newspaper articles and popular
blogs, and that has been put forth also by some very notable scholars, I believe that macroeconomics
did not regress in the last 30 years; that it did commit mistakes, but it also delivered a number
of important, valuable results; and that there is a bright future for the …eld if we can avoid being
dogmatic— and if the sociology of the journal publication business does not stymie many promising
e¤orts.


References

  [1] Acemo¼
           glu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012): “The Network
      Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica 80: 1977-2016.

  [2] Alessandria, G., and H. Choi (2014): “Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter Dynamics, and
      the E¤ects of Trade Liberalization,” Journal of International Economics 94: 207-223.

  [3] Alessandria, G., H. Choi, and K. Ruhl (2014): “Trade Adjustment Dynamics and the Welfare
      Gains from Trade,” NBER WP 20663.

  [4] Antràs, P., and D. Chor (2013): “Organizing the Global Value Chain,” Econometrica 81:
      2127-2204.

  [5] Anzoategui, D., D. Comin, M. Gertler, and J. Martinez (2015): “Endogenous Technology
      Adoption and R&D as Sources of Business Cycle Persistence,” mimeo, New York University
      and Dartmouth College.

  [6] Assenza, T., and D. Delli Gatti (2013): “E Pluribus Unum: Macroeconomic Modelling for
      Multi-Agent Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37: 1659-1682.

  [7] Baqaee, D. R. (2016): “Cascading Failures in Production Networks,”mimeo, London School
      of Economics.

  [8] Baldwin, R., and P. R. Krugman (1989): “Persistent Trade E¤ects of Large Exchange Rate
      Shocks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104: 635-654.

                                                23
 [9] Barattieri, A., M. Cacciatore, and F. Ghironi (2017): “Protectionism and the Business Cycle,”
    mimeo, Université du Québec à Montréal, HEC Montréal, and University of Washington.

[10] Basevi, G., V. Denicolo’, and F. Delbono (1990): “International Monetary Cooperation under
    Tari¤ Threats,” Journal of International Economics 28: 1-23.

[11] Beetsma, R. M. W. J., and H. Jensen (2005): “Monetary and Fiscal Policy Interactions
    in a Micro-Founded Model of a Monetary Union,” Journal of International Economics 67:
    320-352.

[12] Bems, R., and R. C. Johnson (forthcoming): “Demand for Value Added and Value-Added
    Exchange Rates,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

[13] Bergin, P. R., and G. Corsetti (2008): “The Extensive Margin and Monetary Policy,”Journal
    of Monetary Economics 55: 1222-1237.

[14] Bergin, P. R., and G. Corsetti (2016): “Beyond Competitive Devaluations: The Monetary Di-
    mensions of Comparative Advantage,”mimeo, University of California, Davis, and University
    of Cambridge.

[15] Bergin, P. R., L. Feng, and C.-Y. Lin (2014): “Financial Frictions and Firm Dynamics,”
    NBER WP 20099.

[16] Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): “Plants and Productivity in
    International Trade,” American Economic Review 93: 1268-1290.

[17] Bilbiie, F. O., I. Fujiwara, and F. Ghironi (2014): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Endogenous
    Entry and Product Variety,” Journal of Monetary Economics 64: 1-20.

[18] Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2012): “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety and
    Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 120: 304-345.

[19] Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2016): "Monopoly Power and Endogenous
    Product Variety: Distortions and Remedies,” CEPR DP 11294.

[20] Blanchard, O. J. (2017): “The Need for Di¤erent Classes of Macroeconomic Models,”Peterson
    Institute for International Economics, January 12.




                                              24
[21] Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003): “Macroeconomic E¤ects of Regulation and Deregu-
    lation in Goods and Labor Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 879–907.

[22] Cacciatore, M. (2014): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Labor Mar-
    ket Frictions,” Journal of International Economics 93: 17-30.

[23] Cacciatore, M., R. Duval, G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016a): “Market Reforms in the Time of
    Imbalance,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 72: 69-93.

[24] Cacciatore, M., R. Duval, G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016b): “Market Reforms at the Zero
    Lower Bound,” mimeo, HEC Montréal, International Monetary Fund, North Carolina State
    University, and University of Washington.

[25] Cacciatore, M., and G. Fiori (2016): “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Goods and Labor Mar-
    kets Deregulation,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 20: 1-24.

[26] Cacciatore, M., G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016): “Market Deregulation and Optimal Monetary
    Policy in a Monetary Union,” Journal of International Economics 99: 120-137.

[27] Cacciatore, M., and F. Ghironi (2012): “Trade, Unemployment, and Monetary Policy,”
    mimeo, HEC Montréal and University of Washington.

[28] Cacciatore, M., F. Ghironi, and V. Stebunovs (2015): “The Domestic and International
    E¤ects of Interstate U.S. Banking,” Journal of International Economics 95: 171-187.

[29] Carvalho, V. M. (2010): “Aggregate Fluctuations and the Network Structure of Intersectoral
    Trade,” mimeo, University of Cambridge.

[30] Carvalho, V. M., and B. Grassi (2017): “Large Firm Dynamics and the Business Cycle,”
    mimeo, University of Cambridge and University of Oxford.

[31] Cetorelli, N., and P. E. Strahan (2016): “Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank Competition
    and Industry Structure in Local U.S. Markets,” Journal of Finance 61: 437-461.

[32] Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
    Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113: 1-45.

[33] Chugh, S. K., and F. Ghironi (2015): “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Endogenous Product
    Variety,” CEPR DP 10674.

                                                25
[34] Colciago, A. (2016): “Endogenous Market Structures and Optimal Taxation,” Economic
    Journal 126: 1441-1483.

[35] Colciago, A., and F. Etro (2010): “Real Business Cycles with Cournot Competition and
    Endogenous Entry,” Journal of Macroeconomics 32: 1101-1117.

[36] Comin, D., and M. Gertler (2016): “Medium-Term Business Cycles,” American Economic
    Review 96: 523-551.

[37] Contessi, S. (2015): “Multinational Firms’Entry and Productivity: Some Aggregate Impli-
    cations of Firm Level Heterogeneity, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 61: 61-80.

[38] Cooke, D. (2014): “Monetary Shocks, Exchange Rates, and the Extensive Margin of Exports,”
    Journal of International Money and Finance 41: 128-145.

[39] Cooke, D. (2016): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Endogenous Export Participation,”Review
    of Economic Dynamics 21: 72-88.

[40] Corsetti, G., and P. Pesenti (2001): “Welfare and Macroeconomic Interdependence,” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 116: 421-446.

[41] de Blas, B., and K. N. Russ (2015): “Understanding Markups in the Open Economy,”Amer-
    ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7: 157-180.

[42] Dhingra, S., and J. Morrow (2014): “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Di-
    versity under Firm Heterogeneity,” mimeo, London School of Economics.

[43] Diamond, P. A. (1982a): “Wage Determination and E¢ ciency in Search Equilibrium,”Review
    of Economic Studies 49: 217-227.

[44] Diamond, P. A. (1982b): “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal
    of Political Economy 90: 881-894.

[45] di Giovanni, J., and A. A. Levchenko (2012): “Country Size, International Trade, and Ag-
    gregate Fluctuations in Granular Economies,”Journal of Political Economy 120: 1083-1132.

[46] di Giovanni, J., A. A. Levchenko, and I. Mejean (2014): "Firms, Destinations, and Aggregate
    Fluctuations,” Econometrica 82: 1303-1340.



                                               26
[47] di Giovanni, J., A. A. Levchenko, and I. Mejean (2017): "Large Firms and International
    Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 107:
    598-602.

[48] Dixit, A., and L. Lambertini (2003): “Symbiosis of Monetary and Fiscal Policies in a Mone-
    tary Union,” Journal of International Economics 60: 235-247.

[49] Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
    Diversity,” American Economic Review 67: 297-308.

[50] Dmitriev, M., and J. Hoddenbagh (2012): “The Optimal Design of a Fiscal Union,” mimeo,
    Florida State University and Johns Hopkins University.

[51] Draghi, M. (2015): “Structural Reforms, In‡ation and Monetary Policy,” Introductory
    Speech, ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, May 22.

[52] Draghi, M. (2016a): “Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary A¤airs of the
    European Parliament,” Brussels, September 26.

[53] Draghi, M. (2016b): “Researching the Macroeconomic Policies of the Future,” Frankfurt am
    Main, September 28.

[54] Duval, R., N. Li, R. Saraf, and D. Seneviratne (2016): “Value-Added Trade and Business
    Cycle Synchronization,” Journal of International Economics 99: 251-262.

[55] Economic Innovation Group (2017): “Dynamism in Retreat: Consequences for Regions, Mar-
    kets, and Workers,” Economic Innovation Group Report, February.

[56] Eggertsson, G., A. Ferrero, and A. Ra¤o (2014): “Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 61: 2-22.

[57] Eichengreen, B., and F. Ghironi (2002): “Transatlantic Trade-O¤s in the Age of Balanced
    Budgets and European Monetary Union,” Open Economies Review 13: 381-411.

[58] Etro, F., and A. Colciago (2010): “Endogenous Market Structures and the Business Cycle,”
    Economic Journal 120: 1201-1234.

[59] Etro, F., and L. Rossi (2015a): “New Keynesian Phillips Curve with Bertrand Competition
    and Endogenous Entry,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 51: 318-340.

                                              27
[60] Etro, F., and L. Rossi (2015b): “Optimal Monetary Policy under Calvo Pricing with Bertrand
    Competition,” Journal of Macroeconomics 45: 423-440.

[61] Faia, E. (2012): “Oligopolistic Competition and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Journal of Eco-
    nomic Dynamics and Control 36: 1760-1774.

[62] Farhi, E., and I. Werning (2014): “Labor Mobility within Currency Unions,”mimeo, Harvard
    University and MIT.

[63] Fattal Jaef, R. N. (2016): “Entry, Exit, and Misallocation Frictions,” mimeo, World Bank.

[64] Feenstra, R. C. (2003): “ A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Mod-
    els, without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economics Letters 78: 79-86.

[65] G20 (2016): “G20 Leaders’Communiqué Hangzhou Summit,” September 4-5.

[66] Gabaix, X. (2011): “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica 79:
    733- 772.

[67] Ghironi, F. (2017a): “Not All DSGEs Are Created Equal,” blog post, January 26.

[68] Ghironi, F. (2017b): “Policy Packages: Challenge and Opportunity for DSGE Research,”
    in Gürkaynak, R. S., and C. Tille (eds.), DSGE Models in the Conduct of Policy: Use As
    Intended, VoxEU.org eBook, CEPR Press, pp. 61-69.

[69] Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melitz (2005): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics
    with Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 865-915.

[70] Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melitz (2007): “Trade Flow Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms,”
    American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 97: 356-361.

[71] Grassi, B. (2016): “IO in I-O: Competition and Volatility in Input-Output Networks,”mimeo,
    University of Oxford.

[72] Hamano, M. (2015): “International Equity and Bond Positions in a DSGE Model with Variety
    Risk in Consumption,” Journal of International Economics: 96: 212-226.

[73] Hamano, M., and F. Pappadà (2017): “Monetary Policy, External Imbalances, and Firm
    Dynamics,” mimeo, Waseda University and Banque de France.


                                              28
[74] Hamano, M., and F. Zanetti (2017): “Endogenous Product Turnover and Macroeconomic
    Dynamics,” Review of Economic Dynamics, forthcoming.

[75] Hayashi, F. (1982): “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,”
    Econometrica 50: 213-224.

[76] Hommes, C., and G. Iori, eds. (2015): “Crisis and Complexity,” Journal of Economic Dy-
    namics and Control 50: January.

[77] Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992): “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long-Run Equilibrium,”
    Econometrica 60: 1127-1150.

[78] Hsieh, C.-T., and P. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
    India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124: 1403-1448.

[79] IMF (2016): “Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic E¤ects of Labor and Product
    Market Reforms in Advanced Economies,” World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, April.

[80] Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic E¤ects of Financial Shocks,” Amer-
    ican Economic Review 102: 238-271.

[81] Johnson, R. C., and G. Noguera (2012): “Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing
    and Trade in Value Added,” Journal of International Economics 86: 224-236.

[82] Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2016): “Monetary Policy According to HANK,”
    mimeo, University of Chicago, Princeton University, and New York University.

[83] Kocherlakota, N. (2016): “Methodology Speci…cs for Better Macro,” blog post, September
    19.

[84] Krugman, P. R. (1995): “What Do We Need to Know about the International Monetary
    System?” in Kenen, P. B., ed., Understanding Interdependence, Princeton University Press,
    Princeton, NJ.

[85] Lagarde, C. (2016a): “Making Globalization Work for All,” Sylvia Ostry Lecture, Toronto,
    September 13.

[86] Lagarde, C. (2016b): “Getting Growth Right: The Managing Director’s Global Policy
    Agenda,” IMF-World Bank Annual Meetings, October 6.

                                            29
[87] Lewis, V. (2013): “Optimal Monetary Policy and Firm Entry,”Macroeconomic Dynamics 17:
    1687-1710.

[88] Mandelman, F. S., and A. Zlate (2012): “Immigration, Remittances and Business Cycles,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 59: 196-213.

[89] Mandelman, F. S., and A. Zlate (2016): “O¤shoring, Low-Skilled Immigration and Labor
    Market Polarization,”mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and Federal Reserve Bank of
    Boston.

[90] Manova, K. (2013): “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade,”
    Review of Economic Studies 80: 711-744.

[91] Mehra, R., and E. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics 15: 145-161.

[92] Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.

[93] Michaillat, P. (2012): “Do Matching Frictions Explain Unemployment? Not in Bad Times,”
    American Economic Review 102: 1721-1750.

[94] Mortensen, D. T., and C. A. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
    Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies 61: 397-415.

[95] Mundell, R. A. (1961): “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,”American Economic Review
    51: 657-665.

[96] Neary, P. (2016): “International Trade in General Oligopolistic Equilibrium,” Review of In-
    ternational Economics 24: 669-698.

[97] Neary, P., and J. Tharakan (2012): “International Trade with Endogenous Mode of Compe-
    tition in General Equilibrium,” Journal of International Economics 86: 118-132.

[98] Notz, S. (2012): “Macroeconomic Implications of U.S. Banking Liberalisation,”mimeo, Uni-
    versity of Zurich.

[99] Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogo¤ (1996): Foundations of International Macroeconomics, Cam-
    bridge, MA: MIT Press.

                                              30
[100] Praet, P. (2016): “Beyond Monetary Policy: On the Importance of a Proper Alignment of
     Economic Policies in EMU,” speech, October 7.

[101] Ravn, M. O., and V. Sterk (2016): “Macroeconomic Fluctuations with HANK and SAM: An
     Analytical Approach,” CEPR DP 11696.

[102] Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2013): “Misallocation and Productivity,”Review of Economic
     Dynamics 16: 1-10.

[103] Romer, P. (1990): “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy 98:
     71-102.

[104] Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1999): “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs,”
     in Taylor, J. B., and M. Woodford, Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1B, pp. 1051-1135,
     Amsterdam: Elsevier.

[105] Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian
     DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97: 586-606.

[106] Sparshott, J. (2016a): “Sputtering Startups Weigh on U.S. Economic Growth,” Wall Street
     Journal, October 23.

[107] Sparshott, J. (2016b): “Small Businesses Are Living Longer— But also Staying Smaller,”
     Wall Street Journal, November 17.

[108] Sparshott, J. (2016c): “Big Growth in Tiny Businesses,” Wall Street Journal, December 28.

[109] Stebunovs, V. (2008): “Finance as a Barrier to Entry: U.S. Bank Deregulation and Business
     Cycle,” mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

[110] Wren-Lewis, S. (2017): “Ending the Microfoundations Hegemony,”mimeo, Oxford University.

[111] Zlate, A. (2016): “O¤shore Production and Business Cycle Dynamics with Heterogeneous
     Firms,” Journal of International Economics 100: 34-49.




                                               31
