NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CENTRAL BANKS: EVOLUTION AND INNOVATION IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Michael D. Bordo
Pierre L. Siklos
Working Paper 23847
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23847

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

The authors are grateful to Maria Sole Pagliari for research assistance in collecting the data for
this study. Comments on earlier drafts by the late Allan Meltzer, our discussant, Jan-Egbert
Sturm, the Editors, and participants at the April 2017 Riksbank Conference, are gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23847.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Central Banks: Evolution and Innovation in Historical Perspective
Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos
NBER Working Paper No. 23847
September 2017
JEL No. E02,E31,E32,E42,E58
ABSTRACT
Central banks have evolved for close to four centuries. This paper argues that for two centuries
central banks caught up to the strategies followed by the leading central banks of the era; the
Bank of England in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and the Federal Reserve in the
twentieth century. It also argues that, by the late 20th century, small open economies were more
prone to adopt a new policy regime when the old one no longer served its purpose whereas large,
less open, and systemically important economies were more reluctant to embrace new approaches
to monetary policy. Our study blends the quantitative with narrative explanations of the
evolution of central banks. We begin by providing an overview of the evolution of monetary
policy regimes taking note of the changing role of financial stability over time. We then provide
some background to an analysis that aims, via econometric means, to quantify the similarities and
idiosyncrasies of the ten central banks and the extent to which they represent a network of sorts
where, in effect, some central banks learn from others.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Pierre L. Siklos
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Ave
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3C5
psiklos@wlu.ca

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23847

1. Introduction
Central banks have evolved for close to four centuries. Their evolution was initially
tied up with meeting the fiscal needs of nascent states to finance government
expenditures in wars and to market the government’s debt. This was certainly true
of the Riksbank, originally named the Bank of the Estates of the Realm and created in
1668 and often referred to as the first central bank1, and even the Bank of England
created in 1694, in the midst of King William III’s war with France.2
They were not initially called central banks but rather banks of issue. The term central
bank only came into use in the late nineteenth century. Henry Thornton (1802) was
arguably one of the first to lay down concepts of central banking, including the role of
autonomy. 3 Later in the nineteenth century central banks played a key role in
managing the gold standard (i.e. following the “rules of the game”).
The era of the Gold Standard, which in one form or another was to last until the 1920s,
also saw the publication of Bagehot’s Lombard Street (1873) which suggested that a
central bank should be seen as a guarantor of financial stability by being a lender of
last resort.4
The definition of financial stability has changed significantly over time. In the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries it meant avoiding or managing banking panics,
that is, serving as a lender of last resort to the banking system and the payments

1 The Riksbank was formed as a successor to its predecessor Stockholm Banco. It didn’t immediately
fund the government but did so later. See ( Fregert (2017).
2 As Bagehot (1873) famously remarked: “It was founded by a Whig government because it was in
desperate need of money, …”.
3 “To suffer the solicitations of merchants or the wishes of government to determine the measure of
bank issues is unquestionably to adopt a very false principle of conduct.” (Thornton 1802).
4 Perhaps best captured by Bagehot’s view that “money would not manage itself”.

1

system. This changed in the twentieth century with the adoption of the real bills
doctrine, followed by the Federal Reserve in its early years. The real bills doctrine
urged a central bank to head off an asset price boom because it would lead to inflation,
then depression and deflation (Meltzer 2003, chapter 1). More recently, financial
stability encompasses both being a lender of last resort and preventing imbalances
that will lead to asset price booms and busts. Also the role of lender of last resort has
expanded to include the entire financial system not just the banking system.
The pace of central bank creation intensified in the nineteenth century reflecting a
number of forces including the fiscal motive, the maintenance of specie convertibility
and managing financial crises, especially towards the end of the century. The Banks
founded included the Banque de France (1800), the Norges Bank (1816)5, the First
and Second Banks of the United States (1791 and 1816), the Bank of Japan (1882),
the Banca d’Italia (1893), and eventually the US Federal Reserve (1913). A few other
central banks (e.g., the Reichsbank (1873), and the Swiss National Bank (1907))
reflected attempts to centralize the currency issue and facilitate financial
transactions.
Central banks, because of their special status of having government charters and
because of their size, evolved into bankers’ banks and later into lenders of last resort.
The Bank of England is generally viewed as the first central bank to successfully
develop as a lender of last resort as is discussed in the Narrative Appendix in the
NBER Working Paper version of this chapter. However, other early central banks such

A political element played a role here as well because of the failed finances of Denmark which at the
time had jurisdiction over Norway. See, for example, Qvigstad (2016).
5

2

as the Riksbank, and the Banque de France, engaged in rescue operations in the
nineteenth century. Indeed, the Banque de France in 1889 arranged a lifeboat
operation of the Comptoir D’ Escompte involving other commercial banks to provide
the resources to keep the bank afloat before a recapitalization could be arranged. The
Banque used very little of its own resources in the rescue but guaranteed the
participants in the event of losses (Hautcoeur, Riva, and White 2014). According to
the authors, the idea for the famous lifeboat rescue by the Bank of England of Barings
bank in 1890 in London came from the French operation the year before. In the late
twentieth century the Federal Reserve adopted the Too Big to Fail doctrine (Bordo
2014) but its first use goes back to several big bailouts in Germany in 1931 (Bordo
and James 2015). Thus, as we show below, with the LLR function as with other central
bank functions there was considerable learning among the central banking
community. Indeed, we provide some suggestive evidence of a relationship among
ten central banks that has all the markings of a network of a kind. In addition, along
with the lender of last resort function, they evolved as both providers and protectors
of the payments system.
In the twentieth century central banks took on the role of stabilizing the
macroeconomy (i.e., maintaining price stability), stabilizing the business cycle and
maintaining full employment. Since the 2007‐2008 crisis central banks have also
been given responsibility for financial stability, namely defusing financial imbalances
and asset price booms before they destabilize the economy. In so doing central banks
have only reprised a variant of a role that explains why many were created in the first
place (e.g., see De Kock 1974).
3

The dual requirements of a monetary policy geared towards stable economic
outcomes and a financial stability remit have always created challenges and this is
nowhere more evident than in recent years with central banks greatly expanding
their interventions in the financial system while struggling to meet inflation
objectives.
We consider the role of central banks in designing economic policy strategy and
regime choices. Table 1 from Siklos (2002, Table 1.2) lists the year of origin and the
primary motivation for the creation of 21 central banks in what are now referred to
as advanced economies (AE). That Table is updated to provide a few more details
about the 10 central banks that are the focus of the present study. If we exclude the
European Central Bank (ECB), we find that the gap between the first central bank
created (Sweden in 1668) and the last one (Canada in 1934) is 266 years. As noted
above, in most cases, there was a fiscal motivation (e.g., war finance) or an attempt to
stem the incidence of financial crises, that is, a financial stability imperative that
largely explains the creation of several central banks. The lender of last resort
function, often thought of as the raison d’être of central banking, grew in importance
in the late nineteenth and twentieth century.
Our study blends the quantitative with narrative explanations of the evolution of
central banks. Our quantitative analysis covers the period from 1870 to 2015. The
chosen sample reflects data limitations as well as the fact that central banks before
that period did not resemble the institutions we know today. Nevertheless, where
appropriate, we also examine data since the 17th century.

4

We begin in section 2 by providing an overview of the evolution of monetary policy
regimes taking note of the changing role of different meanings of financial stability
over time. In section 3, we then provide some background to an analysis that aims,
via econometric means, to quantify the similarities and idiosyncrasies of the ten
central banks and the extent to which they represent a network of sorts where, in
effect, some central banks learn from others. The empirical evidence is presented in
section 4. We examine a wide variety of evidence focusing on the behavior of inflation
differentials of various kinds, their determinants in a panel setting. We also consider
some counterfactuals that ask what inflation and real GDP performance might have
looked like in select economies in our data set had central banks appeared on the
scene earlier than was actually the case. Additional counterfactuals also consider how
inflation and economic growth might have evolved had inflation targeting not been
introduced in some of the countries that eventually adopted this monetary policy
strategy.
Small open economies are especially useful harbingers of reform and change in
central banking, most clearly during the second half of the twentieth century,
particularly in the aftermath of the Bretton Woods system which arguably represents
the last gasp of large economies dictating the monetary policy strategy of smaller and
more open economies. The small open economies evince greater responsiveness to
shocks emanating from the global and dominant economies over time. They also often
experience crises whose duration is less persistent but happen frequently enough to
prompt changes in how monetary policy is carried out. The combination of these two
findings suggests a greater willingness to change course when it is needed.
5

Overall, however, the economies considered remain crisis prone in spite of the
introduction and greater sophistication of monetary policy and central banking.
Financial crises impose considerable economic costs even if these may have declined
with improvements in central banking. Also, because of, or in spite of, exchange rate
systems the influence of central banks is global. Finally, section 5 concludes by
summarizing lessons learned and the current prospects for central banks.
In spite of notable developments in our understanding of how macroeconomies
function and how they respond to shocks, policy makers continue to search for
common features and hence a basis for cooperation across the many financial crises
that have plagued the global economy over the centuries. Unfortunately, this kind of
strategy does not bode well for the future of central banking for at least four reasons.
First, financial crises are not alike except in so far as they all, to a greater or lesser
extent, create significant to severe economic costs. Second, the central bank remains
a critical institution within government. Autonomy or independence cannot prevent
governments from eventually getting the monetary policy they want. Third, unless
the pendulum swings back to greater sharing of sovereignty across countries, an
unlikely scenario as this is written, domestic imperatives will ultimately dictate
central banks behavior. As a result, they will cooperate but only if it is beneficial for
them to do so. Finally, even if financial crises of the kind experienced in 2007‐8 (GFC)
and 2010‐12 (Eurozone sovereign debt crisis) are a thing of the past, political
economy considerations are unlikely to relegate to history booms and busts in
financial and business cycles.

6

As the current recovery in the real economy continues and the stance of monetary
policy tightens the likelihood that central banks will face a litmus test rises. And it is
quite possible that the next time will be different and central banks will lose their
prominence among the institutions responsible for carrying out stabilization policies.
Early indications are that this is already happening (e.g., see Geithner 2016).
2. The Ebb and Flow of Policy Regimes
As is the case with many other institutions that evolve over time certain features
come to dominate before receding into the background as other more important
forces emerge. The same is true of central banks. While the supporting role in the
fiscal realm dominated the early history of many central banks this receded into the
background as financial crises and real shocks led to larger and more volatile business
cycle movements than governments were willing to tolerate. To be sure there were
fiscal implications from a change in the role of the central bank but the shift implied
that monetary authorities would henceforth stand squarely between financial
markets and other major economic stakeholders.
Business cycle volatility combined with the ever present desire to maintain some
form of price stability have also played a critical role in the evolution of central
banking. As Paul Volcker, former FOMC Chairman, once pointed out: “No doubt
several factors have contributed to enhancing the reputation of central banks.
However, given the responsibility for monetary policy, shifting perceptions with
respect to the importance of price stability must have been the most important.”
(Volcker 1990)

7

Once governments began to intervene more heavily to reduce the amplitude of
business cycle movements central banks moved from being subservient in the face of
fiscal demands to eventually becoming a bulwark against fiscal pressures for
monetary accommodation that would threaten to spill over into intolerably high
inflation rates. Of course, recent successes in limiting excessive inflation need not
imply that a permanent solution has been found, as we shall see. Indeed, any conquest
of inflation must be weighed against the current fashion in government at
maintaining a stable and sustainable fiscal policy. Were this view to change it is
difficult, again based on the historical experience, to see how central banks can stand
in the way of eventually accommodating the fiscal stance the politicians want.6
Beginning approximately in the 1950s, and culminating in the 1990s, central banks
around the world became more autonomous. After World War II many countries
adopted a full employment objective or nationalized their central banks so that they
could serve as a tool of macroeconomic policy (e.g., the US in 1945). This significantly
changed the mandate of central banks. Some, like the Fed, were required by
legislation to follow a dual mandate –to maintain both price stability and full
employment. In the US in the 1950s the Fed, under its chairman William McChesney
Martin, attached primary importance to price stability. He believed that price stability
would encourage economic growth and high employment (e.g., see Bremner 2004).

6 Even the German Bundesbank, celebrated as the model of central bank autonomy, was, as article 12
of the 1957 Law states (since replaced when the Bundesbank joined the European System of Central
Banks): “The Deutsche Bundesbank shall be bound, in so far as is consistent with its functions, to
support the general economic policy of the Federal government.” (Deutsche Bundesbank 1957, pg.
120). Needless to say, when the government’s and the central bank’s policies are inconsistent
conflicts emerge and the Bundesbank is no stranger to these.

8

By the mid‐1960s, however, with the ascent of Keynesian thinking in the economics
profession in the US administration and inside the Federal Reserve, the goal of price
stability was made subservient to that of full employment. Similar shifts in thinking
occurred in the UK, Canada and the continent of Europe (with Germany and
Switzerland notable exceptions). Many argue that the belief in the ability to exploit
the Phillips Curve tradeoff was a key force leading to the Great Inflation from 1965 to
1983. Other factors such as political pressure (e.g., in the US to finance the Vietnam
war and the Great Society), accommodating two oil price shocks, the consistent
misreading of economic activity, and faulty analytics about what drives business cycle
activity, also contributed to the Great Inflation (see Bordo and Orphanides 2013). The
Great Inflation ended in the period 1979 to 1982 thanks to the pursuit of credible
anti‐inflation policies, especially by Paul Volcker in the US and Margaret Thatcher in
the UK, with similar actions in other countries later in the decade. This helped cement
the importance of central bank independence and facilitated the wave of legislative
changes that gave the monetary authorities the authority to carry out their policies
according to their assigned mandate. However, this strategy needed to be balanced
with the requirement of democratic accountability which, simultaneously, created
the pressure to promote greater transparency.
Moreover, independence never meant that the central banks were free to engage in a
monetary policy strategy of their own choosing. Rather, the monetary authorities, at
least in advanced economies, were given or negotiated a remit received from the
political authorities. Within the limitations of the tasks set out in legislation they were
free to choose the manner in which that remit was carried out. This is the principle
9

that came to be called instrument independence as distinct from goal independence.
The latter is normally set by the government (see Debelle and Fischer 1994).7
These developments since the mid‐1980s represented a sea change in the conduct of
monetary policy as central banks had previously been proudly secretive. Indeed,
central banks in the advanced world began a race to determine which one was most
transparent or could provide the clearest forward guidance. This is the so‐called
“…long march toward greater transparency…” (Blinder et. al. 2008, pg. 911) that
defines central banking since the early 1990s.8
The global financial crisis of 2007‐2009 saw a reversal in all of these developments.
Central banks were seen as less independent of government and more willing to
provide fiscal support even if only indirectly. Some also saw some advantage in
becoming more ‘artful’ and less forthcoming about their plans and policies. The days
of the monetary authority standing by unless inflation and real economic activity
showed signs of being excessively high or low quickly vanished. Central banks would
do “whatever it takes” and intervene heavily and across a wide spectrum of economic
activity.
Central bank governance has also evolved over time although, along this dimension,
there are few indications today of any momentous reversals in the offing. This is
surprising since the global financial crisis has revealed a number of flaws in the
decision‐making strategy adopted by some central banks and the reliability of their
economic outlook.

The one notable modern exception being the European Central Bank.
This development is reflected in indicators of central bank transparency. See Siklos (2002, 2011,
2017), and Dincer and Eichengreen (2014).
7
8

10

Early in their history most central banks were dominated by a single decision‐maker.
While staff no doubt provide support to the Governor, central banking was seen as a
top‐down institution with extraordinary authority vested in the Governor. Even if
Governors largely remain primus inter pares there is now recognition and perhaps
even an expectation that decisions cannot be taken without the advice of a committee
of experts whose accountability to the government varies. Moreover, it is now de
rigueur to see central banks with technical and research support as a further
indication of the professionalization of the central banking profession (e.g., see
Adolph 2013). Paralleling this development has been the growth in the number of
academics and economists as central bankers that have increasingly replaced the
bankers and bureaucrats who originally ran most central banks. Moreover, in recent
years, there is an impression that Central Bank Governors are once again playing a
seemingly outsized role in public policy discussions. The media hangs on their every
word. Meanwhile, political pressure on central banks is also on the rise. Surprisingly
perhaps, there have been fewer indications of policy makers questioning whether
there is sufficient diversity of opinions represented in policy making committees.
Indeed, using the U.S. case as an example, the slightest indication of greater Fed
dissent attracts the immediate attention of financial markets.9 To the extent there
exists dissent it is reflected in monetary policy committee members’ economic
outlook. A recent example, of course, is the so‐called Fed ‘dot plot’.10

9 Thornton and Wheelock (2014) review the history of dissents inside the FOMC. These peaked under
Volcker and declined under Greenspan only to rise under Bernanke and Yellen’s chairmanship.
10 These are found in the projections contained in the Monetary Policy Reports of the U.S. Federal
Reserve. See https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/mpr_default.htm.

11

One area of central banking that has been left untouched by fads or fashion is the
virtual elimination of a private sector ownership role in central banks. With a few
notable exceptions (e.g., Switzerland) central banks were eventually nationalized and
there is no hint that this phenomenon will ever be reversed. Indeed, whereas private
ownership was part and parcel of the oldest central banks, after World War II, the
central bank became an institution entirely within government.
At this juncture in monetary and economic history what has come to dominate the
current debate is the policy strategy of central banking. Indeed, in order to
understand where we might go from here there is a need to re‐examine the evolution
of monetary strategies since their creation in Sweden almost three and a half
centuries ago.
From about the early 1990s until around 2007 monetary policy was increasingly
viewed in narrow terms as concerned with inflation control. Prior to the most recent
era, however, there was a never ending struggle between central banks and
governments that were thought to behave in a manner captured by the famous time‐
inconsistency hypothesis of Kydland and Prescott (1977). The hypothesis suggests
that central bank independence (or ‘conservatism’ in the language of Barro and
Gordon (1983) and Rogoff (1985)) is a mechanism that can avoid inflation rising
above what is deemed socially optimal by pushing back against the desire of the
political authorities to exploit the Phillips curve trade‐off. By implication, this implies
that the central bank can protect or even enhance its reputation by committing itself
to a policy that is successful at preventing the discretion that may originate from
political pressure on the monetary authorities.
12

Finally, a successful monetary policy requires only a single instrument, an interest
rate, to ensure low and stable inflation. Indeed, ever since central banks became a tool
for macroeconomic stabilization, especially after World War II, until the late 1980s
and early 1990s, the strategy that consisted of aiming for adequate economic growth
while limiting inflation (captured in the famous Taylor Principle) came to dominate
the consensus about how best to conduct monetary policy. Moreover, these
developments took place in parallel with acceptance that fiscal discipline is essential
to allow the central bank to meet its objective.
The foregoing sentiments were also given credence by central bankers. As Mervyn
King, former Governor of the Bank of England, once said (King 1995): “Central banks
are often accused of being obsessed with inflation. This is untrue. If they are obsessed
with anything, it is with fiscal policy.” Although this is arguably an exaggeration it
does highlight the potential threat of fiscal dominance.
Events in recent years have not changed the consensus. Indeed, most governments
and their central banks have not changed their numerical targets at all since the 2007‐
9 global financial crisis. An outside observer would be hard‐pressed to conclude that
monetary policy changed as a result of the momentous events of the past few years.
Yet, the strategy of monetary policy has changed and many central banks now have
to balance the need to maintain financial system stability defined as preventing
imbalances, in addition to achieving an inflation objective. The resort to a multiplicity

13

of instruments to carry out a strategy that has yet to be made clear also suggests a
regime shift in monetary policy.11
Equally important, the turmoil in global financial markets since 2007, followed by the
admittedly slow return to a state that approaches pre‐crisis conditions, led more
central banks to invoke ‘data dependence’ as a guide to monetary policy. The problem
is that, even in the heyday of the Great Moderation, when central banks were fond of
saying that they looked at everything before setting the stance of monetary policy,
post‐crisis this was seen by some as an inability, if not unwillingness, to return to
more rule‐like behavior (e.g., see Siklos 2017).
Other than the breadth and scope of the interventions by central banks in recent
years, there is some irony in that central banks are being encouraged, implicitly or
explicitly, to adopt a strategy that defined the mandate of some of the oldest central
banks, namely a concern about preventing financial instability together with
allowances for the possibility of fiscal dominance. Finally, the continued resort to
various forms of quantitative easing (QE) type policies in systemically important
economies over an extended period of time also creates the possibility of a return of
fiscal dominance through a back door.
Unlike our pre‐crisis understanding of inflation, central bankers are not yet able to
convince the public that their forays into financial market intervention are as effective
as they have claimed or have consequences that they fully understand. Part of the
problem is that so‐called Unconventional Monetary Policies (UMP) are intended to

We define a monetary policy strategy in terms of the goals of monetary policy. In contrast, a
monetary policy regime is characterized by the instruments used to achieve the stated strategy.
11

14

deal with short‐term difficulties in the financial system. Not surprisingly, much of the
recent literature focuses on how QE affects asset prices. Demonstrating that UMP can
help boost economic growth, return inflation to a normal level, or even convincing the
public that output growth would have been even lower without it (a counterfactual)
is much more difficult.
No wonder then, when faced with ‘pushing on a string’, the response of central banks
is to ‘push harder’ but without a convincing reason to persist with such a strategy. A
look back at the history of central banking, however, suggests that policy makers are
attempting to define a new monetary policy strategy but one which has yet to be fully
debated let alone well understood.
Central banks, it is sometimes forgotten, are creatures of sovereign states. As a result,
while they are geared towards domestic objectives these are rarely removed from
international concerns. Obviously, the prime symbol of the transmission of
international shocks is via the exchange rate.
Other than flexible inflation targeting there have been three other monetary policy
regimes that have, in one way or another, implicitly or explicitly taken a stand on the
behavior of the exchange rate. Stated differently, declaring a policy regime aimed at
some price stability objective, especially when this is combined with other goals (e.g.,
employment, another economic or political objective), should have implications for
exchange rate behavior. Examples are the gold and the gold exchange standards, the
Bretton Woods system of pegged but adjustable exchange rates, and the European
Monetary Union which created a common currency by setting an irrevocable

15

exchange rate between sovereign nations. Moreover, the strategy has generally
always been the same across all regimes, namely to achieve a form of price stability.
Financial system stability was generally believed to be the collateral benefit from any
strategy that aims to keep inflation low and stable. At the risk of over‐simplification,
policy makers have always sought, but did not always succeed, in defining a monetary
policy regime that could rely on a minimum of policy instruments. One of the great
appeals of flexible inflation targeting is that a single instrument is capable of meeting
the strategic objectives of monetary policy. One only has to look at most central banks’
depictions of the monetary policy transmission mechanism prior to the global
financial crisis to get confirmation of this view.
Beyond these questions is the age‐old role of exchange rates that has also re‐emerged
as a fallout from large swings in currency values as central banks follow non‐
traditional policies and deviate from the simple rules based policies that appeared to
have worked so well during the Great Moderation (Bordo and Schenk 2016). Some
central banks have also returned to using the older tools of exchange market
intervention to short circuit the market’s view of the currency’s appropriate value.
This development is also a reflection of another perennial concern of policy makers,
namely exchange rate stability. In contrast to the attempt to return to the pegged
rates of the gold standard after World War I, the post Bretton Woods era has favored
greater exchange rate flexibility. Nevertheless, one cannot entirely dismiss the
possibility of a return to some attempt to moderate exchange rate movements
especially if inflation targeting, with its reliance on a floating exchange rate, is

16

threatened. Since the latest global financial crisis there are signs, so far unsuccessful,
that this movement toward formal exchange rate management could take place.12
What remains unclear is the form in which this might take place. A great deal of the
difficulty is that the trade channel of exchange rate changes differs from the financial
channel. In the former a depreciation improves the balance of trade but has negative
effects on financial flows. Complicating matters is that these channels have a different
impact depending on the sophistication of the financial system (e.g., see Kearns and
Patel 2016).
Now is a propitious time to examine whether certain kinds of economies are more
prone than others to adopting new strategies and to leave the past behind. 13
Moreover, it is also germane to ask whether certain types of events, such as a financial
crisis, are likely to push an economy to a tipping point leading to a change in the
monetary policy strategy in place.
Historically, large systemically important economies were at the forefront of creating
central banks and vesting them with the authority and tools to influence economic
outcomes. By the late 20th century, however, it was the small open economies that
were seen as relatively more innovative in developing best practices in monetary

12 Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2017), reprising an earlier study (Reinhart and Rogoff 2004), dispute
the view held, for example, by the International Monetary Fund, that exchange rate regimes have
typically become more flexible over the past couple of decades. Many inflation targeting economies
are said to have adopted a variant of managed floating. One can, of course, quibble with their
identification strategy. For example, Canadian officials would likely object to Canada’s regime being
labelled a managed float. Nevertheless their results remind us that policy makers scrutinize exchange
rate movements as an indicator of exchange rate management.
13 In what follows we focus on historical and economic reasons for the choice of regimes and not on
the nexus between monetary thought and the adoption or rejection of particular forms of monetary
policy. Interested readers should consult Laidler (2015), and references therein.

17

policy and coherent policy strategies. We provide some suggestive supporting
evidence for this insight.
This paper also argues that, by the late 20th century, small open economies were more
prone to adopting a new policy regime when the old one no longer served its purpose
whereas large, less open, and systemically important economies were more reluctant
to embrace new approaches to monetary policy.14 Small open economies are more
flexible 15 and as trade and financial globalization have progressed over time,
especially after World War II, more aware of the importance of global shocks. In
contrast, large and systemically important countries have tended to rely on a pre‐
conceived notion that they were more immune to global influences, that is, that their
policies potentially influence the rest of the world but not the other way around. It
has taken the aftermath of the global crisis of 2007‐8 for even the Fed to begin
publicly acknowledging that global conditions do matter. Assuming, as Milton
Friedman once wrote, that in the aftermath of a crisis policy makers tend to be more
receptive to the “ideas that are lying around”16 there are at least two sets of results
that can be informative about whether and what central banks learn from each other.
First, the policy response and reforms in the aftermath of a financial crisis. Second, if
the good ideas include the demonstration effect from the experience in other

In our data set these economies are: Canada, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland.
And are, in words of Capie, Wood and Castañeda (2016), are perhaps more likely to be “high trust”
societies.
16 In the Preface to the 1982 edition (pg. xiv) of Capitalism and Freedom (2002) Milton Friedman
argued: “Only a crisis—actual or perceived—produces real change. When that crisis occurs, the actions
that are taken depend on the ideas that are lying around. That, I believe, is our basic function: to
develop alternatives to existing policies, to keep them alive and available until the politically
impossible becomes politically inevitable.”
14
15

18

economies, then the extent to which global factors influence inflation in particular
may well be to provide another indication of the likelihood of learning from others.
The combination of a flexible exchange rate regime, a concern for ensuring a form of
price stability, and more effective prudential requirements rendered small open
economies more nimble to policy shocks from various sources. Hence, innovations in
the area of deciding when to reform an existing monetary policy regime may well
originate in small open economies.17
A significant challenge in explaining the evolution of central banks across several
economies lies in part with limitations on the scope and availability of data over a
long span of time combined with what appear to be frequent breaks or interruptions
in the conduct of monetary policy. Accordingly, this paper combines a narrative
approach with some empirical evidence that is intended to support some of the claims
being made. While the empirical evidence may not be definitive it does point in the
direction of clear connections across economies in the policy regimes adopted over
time. Our work is also assisted by the recent empirical macroeconomic literature that
has led to the view that a few common factors can explain the bulk of the variance of
macroeconomic data. If this is the case then there is considerable useful information
in cross‐country estimates of the drivers of inflation and economic growth.
As we shall see below, we can also potentially exploit correlations among cross
sectional units to consider a series of counterfactuals. Several central banks have

There are, of course, some exceptions such as the UK, an early adopter of many innovations in the
conduct of monetary policy that persist to this day. Similarly, in other important cases, such as in
Europe, politics overwhelms economics leaving the tension between the desire to have a common
currency while relying on monetary policy to deliver economic outcomes its members aspire to, largely
unresolved. See, for example, James (2012).

17

19

existed for a long time although, in historical terms, the institution is comparatively
young. Hence, one way to ascertain their influence is to ask ‘what if ’ kinds of
questions to better understand their economic impact as policy regimes and
strategies have evolved over time.
One asks whether countries that did not have a central bank while others did would
have ended up with better macroeconomic performance had they created a central
bank earlier. Relying on panel data since at least 1870, or before, for at least 10
economies we can generate hypothetical estimates of inflation and real GDP growth
under a counterfactual scenario such as the one just described. Until the 1990s, major
changes in policy regimes were often adopted more or less simultaneously by several
countries. However, regimes often ended as a result of examples from the smaller
economies. It is, therefore, worth asking whether the data are suggestive of a learning
mechanism whereby a change in the policy regime originates first from smaller, more
open economies instead of from the dominant economies in the international
monetary system.
3. Policy Regimes in Historical Perspective
Convenience dictates that exchange rate regimes should be sub‐divided into the fixed
or floating varieties. Of course, fixed exchange rates regimes come in different guises
while floating rate regimes are ill defined unless an anchor for policy is chosen. In the
case of fixed exchange rates we have seen the Gold Standard, through Bretton Woods,
followed by the limited exchange rate systems that eventually gave birth to the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) and, finally, a monetary union of the kind

20

that resulted in the creation of the euro. Floating regimes have generally targeted
either a monetary aggregate or, in recent decades, inflation.
Since central banks represent one of the most potent symbols of sovereignty their
ability to respond to both domestic and foreign shocks is an appropriate way to think
about policy regimes. Clearly, how the exchange rate regime is understood is one way
to identify how the balance between these two shocks defines the regime in place.
All told it is fair to say that the world economy has seen five major monetary policy
regimes adopted over the past two centuries.18 They are: the Gold and Gold Exchange
standards of pre‐World War II. Then, shortly after the Second World War ended, the
Bretton Woods system was put in place though it took several years to fully take
effect. Like its pre‐war counterpart the regime remained anchored to the notion that
exchange rate fluctuations should be limited. For a policy regime that has been
outlived by all the other major monetary arrangements, save one, it is surprising how
the Bretton Woods arrangement continues to appeal to the imagination of some
policy makers. Perhaps, as Dooley et. al. (2009) have argued, it is because the system
survived in a different form after its presumed collapse in the early 1970s.
Alternatively, as the global financial crisis reached its peak in 2008 and 2009, there
were calls from many quarters for a ‘new Bretton Woods’, culminating with the
London Summit of the G20 leaders.19
Once Bretton Woods ended, the search for an anchor of monetary policy led, in quick
succession, to variants of the Bretton Woods system, chiefly in Europe. It also led to

Six regimes if we add the creation of central banks. See below.
The desire for a new Bretton Woods was, like the aim for a monetary union in Europe, more
enthusiastically supported by politicians than academic economists.

18
19

21

the adoption of money growth targeting in a number of countries. The money growth
targeting regime survived for less time than did Bretton Woods. In the case of Europe
the volatile transition from the end of the Bretton Woods System and the pegged
exchange rate systems of the 1970s and 1980s hastened the adoption of a common
currency (the euro) and a common central bank (the ECB) among several sovereign
states, a monetary regime that had never before in history been implemented in this
manner. Yet, the drive to create a single currency in Europe was primarily driven by
political motives. Hence, while politics eventually enabled the creation of the euro it
also left the enterprise bereft of the necessary institutional structures and policy
instruments necessary for its long‐term survival which, as this is written, may be in
doubt (e.g., see James 2012, Sinn 2014, Brunnermeier, James and Landau 2016).
Nevertheless, this regime has so far still managed to outlive Bretton Woods.
While loose forms of exchange rate targeting persisted in various parts of the world
it is the spread of inflation targeting that came to define the last two or three decades
of monetary history. Indeed, on the eve of the global financial crisis, 10 advanced
economies had adopted an explicit numerical inflation target (IT) as well as 23
emerging market economies. Four other economies (i.e., the US, the Eurozone,
Switzerland, and Japan), although unwilling to acknowledge the IT label, do formally
recognize the need to aim for some inflation objective and have made public a
numerical value associated with some notion of price stability (e.g., see Siklos 2017).
Two other striking features about the foregoing brief history of policy regimes are
worth noting. First, it is often the case that the transition from one type of regime to
another, regardless of the type, has not always been a smooth one. The end of the Gold
22

Standard during the interwar era and the Great Inflation that spelled the end of
Bretton Woods immediately come to mind. Second, whereas there was less of a
tendency for different policy regimes to overlap each other before World War II,
following Bretton Woods there is seemingly more overlap in the adoption date of
policy regimes ranging from inflation targeting to the most binding form of a fixed
exchange rate regime, namely the Eurozone single currency area. Nevertheless, with
the exception of the UK, the adoption of IT is largely driven by small open economies
while the larger, more systemically important economies have either resisted
embracing the IT moniker or eschewed the label entirely. Table 2 provides a summary
chronology of the principal monetary regimes since central banks examined in our
sample were created.
If we focus on inflation performance only the Gold Standard always delivers the
lowest mean inflation rate followed by inflation targeting in those countries where it
was adopted. Note, however, that inflation volatility is relatively higher than in any of
the other policy regimes considered. Where IT is not adopted the period since the
euro enters into circulation provides the next best inflation outcome.20 In contrast,
Bretton Woods always delivers the highest rate of economic growth. No wonder then
that some of the G20 leaders at the 2008 Washington summit summoned the memory
of Bretton Woods (Winnett 2008). The Gold Standard comes in second place
everywhere except for the UK, France and Norway. Similarly, the relatively brief era

Except for France where ERM has a trivially lower average inflation rate (1.52% versus 1.54%
during ERM).

20

23

of monetary targeting often performed worse than the other policy regimes other
than for the UK.
Comparisons such as these are hazardous for several reasons. First, performance in a
particular era reflect a delay in problems that only emerge in the next era. Second,
economic growth performance cannot entirely be associated with the monetary
policy regime in place. Structural factors, often slow moving, emerge in the aftermath
of wars or technological developments that are independent of the monetary policy
in place. Finally, Stock and Watson (2004) noted some time ago that inflation
performance during the Great Moderation reflected a healthy dose of ‘good luck’ and
not ‘good policy’. The former was facilitated by relatively small shocks to the US
economy. The same type of phenomenon may well have explained inflation
performance elsewhere.
The recent financial crisis, however, has also reminded policy makers about another
important distinction that has the potential of shifting the singular focus on the role
of the exchange rate regime which has dominated the discourse about the influence
of monetary policy regimes throughout history at least until 2008. The events of the
past eight years have led to a rediscovery of the critical distinction between shocks
that originate from the real and financial sectors of the economy. The
interdependence referred to above, ostensibly guaranteed by a pure float, can be
upended when financial flows enter the picture. In particular, the subsequent global
impact of the financial shock that originated in the US in 2007 transcended how
existing exchange rate regimes operated. Indeed, the highly synchronized downturn

24

in economic activity and inflation was felt around the world irrespective of how
flexible exchange rate regimes were.21
Instead, it was a coherent policy strategy which included commitment to an inflation
objective at its core, a resilient and effective financial regulatory regime, together
with the flexibility and willingness to use the available fiscal space, that proved to be
the defining characteristic of economies that suffered relatively less economically,
especially during the worst moments of the global and subsequent Eurozone
sovereign debt crises in 2008 to 2010. Another important factor in the success of
these countries was the financial structure and regulatory oversight. Before the crisis,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand had nationwide universal banks and one
regulator in contrast to the U.S. Of course, these countries were not global financial
centers unlike the UK which had a similar banking and regulatory structure (see
Bordo, Redish, and Rockoff 2015). Finally, given the preference in some economies
for a policy strategy that includes less than perfect exchange rate flexibility, a
preference for anchoring expectations to an inflation objective proves relatively more
important than the de facto exchange rate regime in place, especially in some
emerging market economies. Indeed, IT regimes have been sufficiently successful at
anchoring inflation expectations to the target that, years after the GFC, below target
inflation rates are raising questions about whether central banks have become
complacent leading to calls to raise the inflation target substantially (e.g., see Ball
21 Rey (2015), for example, is another study that emphasizes the importance of a global financial cycle
since the 1990s, that is, a reflection of the monetary policy of a dominant or ‘centre country’ (viz., the
US). This has the implication of reducing the trilemma conditions for an independent monetary policy,
where a floating exchange rate plays a critical role, to a dilemma. Hence, capital account management
is necessary to preserve policy independence. Aizenman, Chinn and Ito (2016) conclude, however,
that the trilemma is alive and well, at least in emerging market economies.

25

2014, and references therein). It seems that proponents of higher inflation want
fewer opportunities to hit the ZLB which can create problems for central banks in
search of still looser policies. But those who favor a tactic of raising inflation targets
cannot provide a convincing argument that higher inflation will also improve
aggregate economic performance. Estimating a threshold beyond which inflation
produces a deterioration in economic growth has proved elusive (e.g., Bruno and
Easterly 1998, Vaona 2012) Instead, the essence of their argument is that central
banks must want to avoid the ZLB and negative interest rates as much as possible
even though there is little evidence that these developments have proved difficult for
central banks to implement
4. Methodological Approaches
The preceding section suggests that evaluating the impact of central banks
throughout history is full of challenges requiring the interested observer to ask
several ‘what if’ questions. Even under ideal circumstances engaging in
counterfactuals is difficult. For example, we ask what aggregate economic activity
would look like if an institution expected to intervene in the economy to meet a
particular objective, or set of objectives, did not exist. However, as noted above,
central banks are a pervasive feature of the economic landscape for a century or more.
We have very few examples, or the necessary data, to evaluate what might happen if
the monetary authority did not exist. Additionally, monetary history teaches us that
it is difficult to neatly separate policy regimes from other events that are very likely
to also have macroeconomic effects. To illustrate, it can be hazardous to contemplate
what inflation and real economic growth might have been if a central bank had been
26

created earlier especially during an era when rules such as the Gold Standard were in
place. Two reasons immediately come to mind. First, central banks under the Gold
Standard were less interventionist than today’s monetary authorities. Second, the
Gold Standard is squarely focused on price level developments not inflation per se.
Nevertheless, depending on the statistical properties of the price level one may still
be able to explore central bank performance in terms of inflation.22
Nevertheless, there is considerable value in conducting counterfactual experiments if
only to get an impression of some of the potential impacts of institutional changes
such as the creation of a central bank. In part this is because rules are rarely followed
exactly as intended. This is especially true when these institutions must also consider
the international environment in which the rules are intended to be applied.
Counterfactuals, while useful, cannot entirely replace inference based on the
observed behavior of time series. Accordingly, we also perform a set of econometric
tests to help us understand not only when central bank policies may have changed
but also the extent to which these changes are transmitted from one country to
another over time.
4.1 Breaks, Gaps and Their significance: Combining History and Econometrics
From a practical perspective the choice of a monetary policy regime is likely the result
of a shift in the behavior of one or more key economic performance indicators. Of
course, a regime change may also create additional forces that may also produce

“Under the Gold Standard the price level has a stochastic trend because real shocks to the demand
and supply of gold caused changes in the money supply and, over the long‐term, the price level.” (Bordo
and Schwartz 1999). The stochastic trend nature of price movements implies that the stationary
component of prices can be expressed in first differences of the (log) of prices.

22

27

changes in one or more of these indicators. For example, one can imagine that the
creation of a central bank, the abandonment of one exchange rate regime and the
adoption of another or even an explicit commitment to achieving a form of price
stability, at least statistically, is identified by a structural break. Given the particular
importance of inflation in assessing central bank performance, an obvious choice then
is to focus on the behavior of this variable. Output growth is another equally valid
candidate for analysis. After all, an ostensible reason for inflation control is to create
an environment for mitigating business cycle fluctuations, at least when interpreted
through the prism of modern macroeconomic thought.
Whereas monetary policy was geared towards inflation control post‐World War II,
the Gold and Gold Exchange standards involved strategies that focus on achieving a
form of price level stability by maintaining gold convertibility through the setting of
the fixed nominal price of gold. In more modern parlance, the price of gold served as
the instrument that translated into achieving price level stability.
There exist, of course, several statistical time series based tests for structural breaks.
Since the countries in our data set may well have undergone more than one regime
shift it is natural to consider first a test that allows for multiple structural breaks. The
Bai and Perron (1998) test is likely the best known test under the circumstances and
we also adopt it here. It has the advantage that it is model based as opposed to the
standard univariate approaches to testing for breaks. Of course, if the model is mis‐
specified the advantage disappears.
All structural break tests, and many have been proposed, have their drawbacks (e.g.,
see Perron 2005). For example, Perron (1989) pointed out that the behavior of US
28

real GDP is best described as a trend stationary process with a structural break
around the time of the Great Depression but that the result is partly dependent on the
choice of the year of the break. As a result, unit root testing from structural break
testing cannot be easily separated. Moreover, one must also consider the possibility
that the break is akin to a one time shock or can occur gradually.23
A retrospective historical analysis may well have led to selecting a year that differs
from the statistical testing. It is precisely differences between these two
methodologies that require further analysis. 24 Moreover, as we shall see below, a
narrative approach often leads to a range of years over which a break takes place as
opposed to a single year. And when a gradual change is allowed the statistical
procedure leaves little choice but to adopt a somewhat ad hoc function or model to
capture such changes. History can provide more flexible timing for breaks but this
does not mean that there is unanimity in pinpointing, for example, when financial
crises take place and for how long.25
In one set of calculations, we assume that before the creation of the US Federal
Reserve the Bank of England serves as the benchmark for global price stability. After
1913 the Federal Reserve is then assumed to serve as the standard sought by the

An innovation (innovation outlier, or IO) model which assumes that the break occurs gradually, with
the breaks following the same dynamic path as the innovations, while the additive model (or additive
outlier, AO) model assumes the breaks occur immediately.
24 There is occasionally the tendency to ignore history and rely instead on statistical testing alone. This
ignores that the specification of the null and alternative hypotheses, not to mention the power of
available test, invites caution in relying too heavily on this kind of strategy. Similarly, historical
analyses are also subject to selectivity bias. Presenting both forms of evidence at least has the
advantage of prompting the researcher to look for some explanation for any discrepancy between the
timing adopted by historians and the one generated via econometric means
25 An illustration is the Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) dating of various types of financial crises. Bordo
and Meissner (2016) find fault with some of the banking and currency crises identified by Reinhart
and Rogoff. In what follows we adopt the Bordo and Meissner (2016) chronology.
23

29

economies in our sample. The two are chosen because of the systemic importance of
both economies. Clearly, other benchmarks are possible see below). A difficulty here
is that, under the traditional Gold Standard and successive regimes tied to gold, the
instrument of policy, as previously noted, translates into a regime geared toward the
maintenance of price level stability. Once the Gold Standard ended in the middle of
the twentieth century the objective of policy evolved into a focus on inflation
performance. In what follows the discussion is in terms of inflation performance
strictly for convenience. For the Gold Standard era we derive the estimates of interest
in terms of the price level (or, rather, the log of the price level) and then take the rate
of change to ensure comparability with the post‐Gold Standard era.26
Define
dit   it   tB

where

(1)

 is inflation and B is inflation in the benchmark economy. Each economy is

indexed by i at time t. Notice that the benchmark economies are, by modern
standards, large systemically important economies. If smaller, more open, economies
adopt similar regimes over time and, as a result, deliver comparable inflation rates
then d in equation (1) is expected to be stationary. If, however, stationarity is rejected
then so is convergence of sorts between economy i and the benchmark economy. A
possibility then is that adopting a new monetary regime is conditioned on the
development, persistence, and size of any gap in inflation performance between

For the Gold Standard (and related regimes) period we also present and provide cross‐country
comparisons in terms of the price level. Not all results are presented below.

26

30

economy i and the benchmark economy in question. 27 In other words, we treat
equation (1) as serving as a proxy for the level of dissatisfaction with the existing
policy strategy. 28 Dissatisfaction with the preferred or best performing existing
international strategy may reflect a domestic failure to follow best practice in
monetary policy. Alternatively, if the benchmark economy no longer serves as the
lodestar for how to conduct monetary policy then the source of unhappiness with the
current regime lies with the economy that is seen as the standard for others to follow.
As note above, other benchmarks are contemplated. For example, if the 10 central
banks in our study can, in fact, be treated as a global network of central banks that
learn from each other then perhaps an international measure of inflation is a more
suitable benchmark. 29 Unfortunately, no universally accepted measure of global
inflation exists. Therefore, we construct three proxies. The simplest is an arithmetic
average across the 10 economies in our data set. Next, we extract the first principal
component in a factor model of inflation, again including data from all 10 countries in
the sample.30 Finally, many researchers extract a trend or equilibrium measure of a
time series by applying the Hodrick‐Prescott (H‐P) filter. Hamilton (2017) not only
reminds us of the drawbacks and distortions induced by this filter but recommends a

A similar argument can be made in terms of another key economic indicator such as real GDP
growth. Arguably, economic development is influenced by structural factors that are not easily
quantified. Hence, for reasons already stated, we prefer to focus on inflation performance.
28 For the benchmark economies the level of unhappiness with the existing regime would be its own
historical experience for one or more key economic indicator or continued discrepancies vis‐à‐vis
expectations for the particular economic indicator in question. This brings up the question of
credibility in monetary policy. See Bordo and Siklos (2016) for an historical examination relying on a
similar data set as the one used in the present study. The current study is more comparative in nature.
29 Alternatively, the real price of gold is also a suitable benchmark.
30 Again, in the Gold Standard era, we can examine these same relationships in terms of the (log) of the
price level although the conclusions did not change.
27

31

simple new alternative. In what follows we implement Hamilton’s replacement for
the H‐P filter to proxy for πtB in equation (1).
4.2 Counterfactuals
At the simplest level counterfactuals are an attempt to answer ‘what if’ kinds of
questions. As a result, quantitative methods to obtain counterfactual results are
varied. In what follows, we apply Hsiao et. al.’s (2012) method.
To illustrate their methodology consider the following four central banks. They are,
in order of the dating of their creation (years in parenthesis; see Table 1): the Bank of
Italy (1893), the Swiss National Bank (1907), the US Federal Reserve (1913), and the
Bank of Canada (1934). Ideally, we would like some data when these institutions did
not exist in order to determine what macroeconomic performance would have been
like if a central bank had been created earlier. The treatment or intervention then
refers to the year when a central bank is created.
Next, consider Figure 1. The plot shows when central banks were created relative to
when these economies became nation or sovereign states in the modern sense of the
word. 31 A positive bar means that the central bank came into existence before
statehood or independence while a negative bar indicates how many years it took
once statehood was achieved until the monetary authority to be created. The central
banks that are identified by the vertical dashed lines are the subject of the empirical
analysis. The choices are dictated by data availability and quality over a long time
span. Details are left to the following section.

31

The traditional definition relies on a date of independence or the introduction of a Constitution.

32

Almost half the central banks in our sample were in existence before statehood. As
discussed above they were, at least for a time, banks of issue and their functions
would evolve over time. However, statehood generally comes first followed by the
creation of a central bank. Indeed, in many cases, the gap between the two events is
small, a reflection of the almost symbiotic link between the concepts of sovereignty
and central banking.
Figure 2 plots the number of central banks created since the Riksbank, the world’s
first central bank, opened its doors in 1668. It is seen that central banks are largely a
creature of the 20th century. Indeed, the pace of central bank creation speeds up after
the 1950s. Hence, central banks are comparatively young institutions. However,
because so many central banks came into existence after World War II, when data
availability increases dramatically, the experimental way of conducting a
counterfactual experiment is simply not available or practical in the present context.
Therefore, an alternative approach is required and this is where a long span of
historical data is especially helpful.
Returning to the four central banks in our example, we have a substantial amount of
data about how economies performed in several economies when monetary
authorities did not exist in Italy, Switzerland, the US and Canada. While data
availability is adequate statistical challenges remain, as we shall see.
The approach proposed and implemented by Hsiao et. al. (2012) exploits information
in a cross‐section of data. Hsiao et. al. (2012) ask what economic growth in Hong Kong
would have been if sovereignty had not changed hands from the British to China in

33

July 1997. 32 The basic premise of the counterfactual is that there exist common
factors that drive economic variables of interest whether or not there is some
treatment or intervention. In the present context, once a central bank is created there
is the presumption that an institution is created that has some discretion. Granted the
scope of that discretion will be limited by the exchange rate regime in place, the remit
given to the institution, its autonomy from government influence, to name three
important factors. Similarly, there is not quite a comparable institutional mechanism
that is able to fully take the place of the central bank.33 Yet, economic performance,
as summarized, say, by the price level, inflation and output growth performance, in
two countries respectively with or without central banks will still respond to some
common factors.34
Therefore, we can use information in the cross‐section of inflation and real economic
growth performance in countries that had a central bank to ask how these two
variables would have behaved had a central bank been created in a country that did
not have a monetary authority over the same period.

They also ask what economic performance would have been if the 2003 economic partnership
agreement with mainland China had not been signed.
33 Before the creation of central banks there were, however, alternative institutional mechanisms that
effectively played some of the role later assigned to a central bank (e.g., as the US Treasury did in the
case of financial crises in the National banking era when it shifted deposits from the Independent
Treasury to key commercial banks or the role of clearing houses in issuing emergency currency
(Timberlake 1984. Gorton 1984). Also in the case of some dominant nationwide commercial banks in
Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. In some cases, the government would also intervene from time to
time in a manner reminiscent of what central banks would later do (e.g., as in the Finance Act of 1914
in Canada; see Siklos 2006).
34 Productivity, demographics, geographical location, even historical events may link these economies
even if they adopt different institutional frameworks. As we shall see, statistically speaking, the details
of the common drivers of economic performance are less critical than the mere fact that some of these
common factors are believed to exist.
32

34

More formally, suppose we observe a time series for country i, at time t, denoted yitN
for the case where there is no central bank. The counterfactual assumes that there
exist (common) factors that explain y. Hence, we can write
yitN   i  β i* Ft   it , i  1,..., N ; t  1,...T

(2)

where β * is a vector of coefficients that is constant over time but varies across the i
cross‐sections, F are the K common factors that vary over time, and

 is a residual

that represents the random idiosyncratic component for i, such that E( it )  0 . It is
assumed, among other things, that the idiosyncratic components are uncorrelated
across i. Therefore, E (ε t Ft' )  0 .35
Next, denote yitCB as the time series of interest when a central bank is in place.
Therefore, the expression
 it  y itCB  y itN

(3)

is the treatment effect of i at time t. Since, in our example, we don’t observe the right
hand side variables simultaneously, the observed data can be thought as being
expressed in the linear combination form
1, if i is under treatment at time t
yit  it yitCB  (1   ) yitN , it  
otherwise
 0,

(4)

Under the various assumptions made by Hsiao et. al. (2012) y1Nt can be predicted
from yˆ 1Nt obtained from estimating (4). With i=1, and the remaining i assumed to be

There are other assumptions that are less critical for the discussion that follows but should be borne
in mind. See, however, Hsiao et. al. (2012, p. 707).

35

35

unaffected in the presence of intervention,36 the foregoing expressions suggest that
we can estimate what the price level, inflation or real GDP growth would have been
in Italy, Switzerland, Canada, or the US, each of the i=1 in the above illustration, using
data from the countries where central banks were already in existence. The only
additional piece of information required is knowledge of T#, that is, the year when the
central

bank

is

created.

From

T#

until

the

data

ends

(i.e.,

T)

y t  y tN , t  1,...,T # ,T # 1 ,...,T . In other words, we observe a central bank in all

economies examined. Hsiao et. al. (2012) also show that one can fit time series models
to 1t (e.g., AR type specifications) to determine the evolution of the treatment effect
over time and in the long‐run.
For the illustration considered so far the empirical strategy based on the
counterfactuals proposed by Hisaio et. al. (2012) imply that, in the case of the US, we
can use data from all available countries before T# =1913, with the exception of
Canada which did not have a central bank at the time. Similarly, in the case of the
Swiss national bank, we can use all available data except for US and Canadian data
since a monetary authority did not exist in these countries at T#=1907. And so on for
other available cases, assuming we have sufficient data (see below).
One potential criticism is that if the size of the other economies used to generate the
counterfactuals is too large or too small then estimates might be biased. This can be
taken into consideration by adding a weight for the relative size of each economy in
In the case of the Hsiao et. al. (2012) application, Hong Kong may well have been affected by the
change in sovereignty but the comparator economies (e.g., neighbour economies with similar
economic characteristics; see Hsiao et. al. (2012, p. 717‐8) would not be similarly affected. In the
present context, the creation of the US Fed may have affected US economic activity but it is less likely
that these same variables would be impacted in the countries that already had central banks.

36

36

question. The difficulty is that if these weights change over time such an adjustment
is ad hoc. We do not pursue this extension. Similarly, if location is thought to matter
then, in principle, equation (2) could be expanded to include regional dummies (e.g.,
Europe vs North America).37
A more significant drawback perhaps is that for at least 6 economies in our data set
(see the next section) we cannot ask what would have happened if a central bank
existed because, with the exception of a few series, we have insufficient data.
Finally, we can use the Hsiao et. al. (2012) to determine what would have happened
if, for example, targeting had not been adopted. Other counterfactuals can be
imagined but the combination of data limitations and significant changes in economic
structure in the economies considered here limit their usefulness. We briefly return
to this issue later.
4.3 The Determinants of Inflation Differentials
The specification of equation (1) implies that, in a cross‐section setting, there are
likely economic and institutional determinants of inflation (or price level)
differentials across countries (and time). In the case of institutional determinants our
narratives suggest that a financial crisis, either of the global or banking varieties
especially, are likely critical determinants of these differentials and, hence, might spur
the adoption of a different monetary policy strategy. Other candidates include the

Hsiao et. al. (2012) examine the statistical benefits of relying on the factor model approach to
generating the counterfactual series (i.e., equation (2)) and find a significant deterioration relative to
the simplest case of, say, relying only on growth rates in countries with no treatment to estimate what
would have happened in the treatment economy (i.e., Hong Kong in their example). In the estimates
presented below we report results using the simpler approach since, empirically at least, the
performance of equation (2) was superior.
37

37

potential for fiscal dominance via the debt to GDP ratio.38 We provide a variety of
estimates of the following panel type regression written as:
d itj  θi j  λtj  x'it β j  εitj

(5)

where equation (5) is a standard fixed effects model (country and time effects, if
necessary) with x capturing the economic and crisis determinants of d. The index j is
added to recognize that a variety of benchmarks were considered. 39
4.4 A Network of Central Banks?
Billio et. al. (2012) have proposed a measure of ‘connectedness’ based on principal
components analysis and Granger‐causality. If the performance of central banks,
measured in terms of the price level (prior to World War II), inflation, or real
economic growth, is more similar then this should be reflected in the number of
orthogonal factors and their explanatory power. Define N as the total number of
principal components in the 10 country data set used in this study. If central banks
are highly interconnected then this should be reflected as a small number, n, of
principal components that can explain most of the variation in the system of central
banks considered.
Alternatively, causality testing provides an indication whether a particular time
series j “Granger‐causes” (G.C.) a time series i of past values of j contain information

38 A World War or a major political conflict could be other candidate variables. These can sometimes
represent harbingers of economic changes (e.g., following World War I the Gold Exchange standard
was introduced; Bretton Woods can be traced as a fallout from World War II). Hence, it is difficult to
identify these events as separate from other economic forces that produce regime changes.
39 We specify (5) in terms of inflation for simplicity. In so doing we convert the price level data to
inflation during the Gold Standard period even if some of the tests described above are evaluated in
terms of the (log) level of prices. This complication does not affect the real economic growth
specification.

38

that help predict i. The test can be carried out in a bivariate or multivariate (i.e., as in
a vector autoregression) settings. For example, continuing with equation (1) which
measures the inflation differential vis‐à‐vis a particular benchmark in the bivariate
setting, a Granger‐causality test between ditj and dktj with i≠k, would be carried out
by estimating the following two regressions, namely
d itj 1  a j d itj  bikj d ktj  eitj 1
d ktj 1  a j d ktj  bkij d itj  ektj 1

(6)

where a rejection of the null hypothesis that bik  0 implies that k Granger‐causes i.
We can augment equation (6) with other determinants to allow for the possibility that
there are additional factors, such as the type of exchange rate regime, or the incidence
of financial crises, to give two examples that can influence the Granger‐causality test
which have no direct association with the notion that central banks learn from each
other. Billio et. al. (2012) propose an indicator of connectedness they call the ‘degree
of Granger‐causality’ (DGC) defined as follows
DGC 

N
1
(k  i) (7)

N ( N  1) i 1 k  i

where k  i signifies that k G.C. i. A value of DGC that exceeds a certain threshold
indicates a systemic relationship between the various measures of d.
4. Data and Empirical Evidence
4.1 Data
Annual data, originally collected for 10 economies until 2008 by Bordo and Siklos
(2016), were updated where possible to 2015. The data used in their study represent
the accumulation of data collected and disseminated over the years by many scholars,
39

including Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Bordo and Landon Lane (2013), and Schularik
and Taylor (2009), with additional historical data from some individual central banks
(viz., Norway, Sweden, USA) who have made available historical data covering a long
span of time.40
Other original sources that were used to construct the series used in Bordo and Siklos
(2016) are found at the NBER (http://www.nber.org/data/). Global financial data,
and Historical Financial Statistics of the Center for Financial Stability
(http://www.centerforfinancialstability.org/hfs.php), are other data sources where
some of the series used in this study can be found.
The 10 economies examined are: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. An appendix
provides the list of available time series and the samples over which they are
available. Additional data were collected from various issues of the Central Bank
Directory (Central Banking Publications), Siklos (2002, 2017). A file containing a list
of original sources and the sources of updates to the Bordo and Sikos (2016) data is
available.
4.2 Empirical Results
Figures 3 and 4 plot inflation rates, where sufficient data are available, around the
time of regime changes identified by our historical narratives. Inflation five years
before and after the creation of 8 of the 10 central banks in the data set is shown.

Many of the links are provided in Bordo and Siklos (2016). Our data set also overlaps the recently
published Jordà‐Schularik and Taylor data set (JST; http://www.macrohistory.net/) which was also
partially constructed based on some of the earlier work of, for example, Bordo and Jonung(1995)). One
slight difference between their dataset and ours is the Canadian price level. We use data since 1910,
not 1870, to maintain consistency in the measurement of the price level. JST have data since 1870.
40

40

Figure 3, for example, shows that it is unlikely that the prime motivating factor to
create a central bank in Sweden or the UK was a desire to control inflation. Indeed,
history clearly shows there were other factors at play. The same appears true for all
the other cases shown with the exception of Norway where inflation becomes far less
volatile after the Norges Bank opened for business in 1816. Indeed, the volatility in
inflation is related to the fact that, in most instances, the Gold Standard was in place.
Hence, the focus was on the behavior of the price level and not inflation.
The top portion of Figure 4 highlights the evolution of inflation in all 10 countries in
our data set around the time of the break‐down of Bretton Woods. Whereas inflation
differentials were fairly small by the mid‐1960s a divergence began to emerge as we
approach the decade of the 1970s. The ‘unanchoring’ or drift in inflation that emerges
following the end of Bretton Woods, underscored perhaps by the Smithsonian
agreement of 1971, produced the great divergence in inflation rates exacerbated by
the two oil price shocks of the 1970s.
The bottom portion of Figure 4 reveals that differences in inflation rates persisted for
some time as countries sought, and then failed, to find a reliable anchor for monetary
policy. By the early 1990s, however, several of the small open economies in our
sample, and the UK, adopted explicit inflation targeting. Nevertheless, all central
banks, in their own fashion, placed a much higher premium on inflation control.
Hence, by the mid‐1990s we began to see a return to much smaller inflation
differentials. Indeed, the convergence in inflation rates would intensify throughout
the second half of the decade of the 1990s and the first decade of the new millennium
(not shown).
41

Tables 3 and 4 provide some summary statistics for some of the key series used in the
descriptive and econometric analyses. It is immediately apparent that the choice of
the benchmark has an impact on inflation and real GDP growth performance. It is
generally the case, however, that small open economies in our data set (i.e., Canada
and Sweden) perform relatively well regardless of the metric employed while a few
others, notably Italy and France, consistently under‐perform. Also note that inflation
is not noticeably affected by the exclusion of financial crises but only when the UK
and the US serve as the benchmark. Otherwise, there is a much more noticeable
impact. In contrast, real GDP growth differentials are strongly affected by the
exclusion of years when there is a GFC. Indeed, the asymmetry in inflation versus
output growth performance is striking. This has some bearing on notions of how
much central banks ought to concern themselves with real economic performance or
the strength of any link between inflation and real growth.
We can obtain a few more insights about the data by looking at Figures 5 and 6. Figure
5 displays proxies for dit as defined in equation (1). It is immediately clear that the
choice of benchmarks impacts the time properties of the data. Nevertheless, there are
some common features both pre and post‐World War II. 41 For example, the Great
Inflation of the 1970s is apparent across all proxies. Similarly, the great deflation of
the early 1920s and the Great Depression also generally show up in all variants of dit
as does the rise in inflation immediately after World War II. Note that parts A and B
of Figure 5 are, unless otherwise noted, cross‐sectional averages.

41

The sub‐samples were partly chosen to facilitate visual comparisons across filters and across time.

42

Parts C and D of Figure 5 displays the behavior of deviations in the price level or a
normalized indicator of the price level covering the Gold Standard period. Deviations
from the equilibrium price level, as proxied by Hamilton’s (2017) filter are stationary,
as noted earlier (also see table 6). The contrast between the deviation form and the
original (log) levels of the series are shown in part D, for comparison.
Figure 6 plots the deviations in domestic inflation from the global mean.42 Although
inflation is generally stationary the plots reveal sharp departures, often around the
time of financial crises of the global variety (highlighted by the shaded areas in the
figure. Note that, from this perspective, the GFC of 2008‐9 pales in comparison with
earlier GFCs. Volatility across the 10 economies also varies greatly. This may well
have implications for understanding the dynamics of inflation from a cross‐sectional
standpoint (see below).
Next, we turn to some comparisons between the narrative and statistical approaches
to dating crises. Tables 5 and 6 present a selection of results while Table 7 provides a
general summary. Table 5 distinguishes between financial crises that have been
deemed global in nature, according to Bordo and Landon Lane (2010), while the last
two columns rely on the country‐specific chronology from Bordo and Meissner
(2016). In addition, the Table identifies the joint occurrence of banking and currency
crises.
If crises are associated with a break in the time series properties of the data then
Table 6 provides some indications of when these were most likely to occur. The
manner in which the tests were applied is such that the first date shown represents

42

That is, the arithmetic mean for all ten countries in the data set.

43

the most likely occurrence of a statistical break in the time series in question. The last
date then represents the least likely timing of a break. Interestingly, the most recent
GFC is often, though not always, one of the least likely sources of a break, at least in
the time series property of inflation. 43 Similarly, the most prominent location of
breaks in the data often take place before World War II. The rank of breaks post World
War II is often fairly low. Of course, this is only indicative of the possibility that
developments in central banking contributed to this outcome since other factors were
also clearly at play (see below).
Table 7 provides some overall perspective on the importance of financial crises based
on both the narrative and statistical approaches. The small open economies in the
sample do comparatively well across the various indicators of crisis conditions,
especially Norway and Switzerland (e.g., see column (3)). Although this result does
not exclusively reflect the quality of monetary policy in these economies it is likely
one of the factors at play in explaining the relatively small number of statistical breaks
found in the behavior of inflation. Most of the breaks in the small open economies are
observed before World War II.
The extent to which global financial crises, based on the narrative approach, dominate
the landscape of crises in the individual countries sampled varies of course. GFCs are
least frequent in Switzerland (2 of 7 crises identified) while half, or a slightly higher
proportion of the total, accounts for crises in 4 of the 10 economies examined (US,
Germany, Norway, and Sweden). There is also considerable variation in the fraction

Not shown are results for output growth where the prominence of the 2008 GFC is higher relative
to inflation.

43

44

of crises that exceed a year in duration. It is also notable that there are differences in
the degree of agreement between the statistical and narrative dating of financial
crises. It is somewhat reassuring that, other than perhaps Switzerland, the overlap
between the quantitative and narrative interpretations of history is not small.
Nevertheless, the results also suggest that both approaches are essential for a proper
understanding of the determinants of financial crises and the potential role of the
central bank to which we now turn.
Tables 8 through 10 present a selection of panel regressions that seek to quantify the
importance of some determinants of inflation in the 10 economies in the sample.
Although the results are, broadly speaking, robust across the various filters applied
to the data, the most consistently reliable results, across various specifications and
samples, were obtained when Hamilton’s filter or global inflation were used as
proxies to generate deviations from country‐specific inflation rates.
Tables 8 and 9 differ only according to the proxy for financial crises. Bordo and
Landon Lane’s (2010) definition of GFCs is used as a determinant while, in Table 9,
Bordo and Meissner’s (2016) combined banking and currency crises serve as a proxy
for the impact of crises on inflation. 44 Finally, Table 10 estimates the same
relationship for the Gold Standard period only based on the dates provided in Table
2.
We focus on the common features found in these results and their implications.
Financial crises, whether of the global or domestic variety, affect inflation

Combining both types of crises seem to produce better results than separately including banking
and currency crises.

44

45

performance negatively. However, the impact is quantitatively largest when the crisis
is global. In contrast, crises are found to have a much smaller impact on deviations in
inflation from a benchmark during the Gold Standard era. Output growth is also seen,
on average, as raising inflation relative to any of the benchmarks considered, other
than for the Gold Standard period. These results merely confirm that inflation and
aggregate economic activity links are severed during the Gold Standard but are a
feature of the full sample.
If fiscal dominance is proxied by the debt to GDP ratio then this too is a feature of
central banking outside the Gold Standard era. Nevertheless, even if this variable is
statistically significant it does not appear to be economically significant as it is
dwarfed by the real and financial crises variables. Equally interesting is the finding
that deviations in inflation from some benchmark are highly persistent in the Gold
Standard era while there is much less persistence in the full sample estimates. Hence,
once domestic inflation moves away from the benchmark, there is a relatively fast
return to the benchmark. In other words, to the extent that this represents a global
factor not captured by the benchmark it exerts less impact since the end of the Gold
Standard. One way of thinking about the results is that there is potentially greater
variation in inflation regimes after World War II ended relative to some global
benchmark (e.g., the US).
Three other results are notable from Tables 8 through 10. First, the exchange rate
variable does not exert any significant influence on inflation relative to the
benchmark. This suggests that the benchmark captures the global component.
Second, although oil price inflation raises inflation relative to the benchmark in all
46

regressions, the coefficient is economically small. Finally, once we omit fixed effects,
the determinants combine to explain a relatively small fraction of the variation in
inflation relative to some benchmark. Consistent with some of the other results there
may be sufficient idiosyncracies in inflation performance that cannot be adequately
captured in the panel framework. Alternatively, as Bernanke (2010) and Yellen
(2015), among other central bankers, have pointed out we still have much to learn
about what drives inflation dynamics.
Next, we turn to network effects in inflation performance. Table 11 and 12 evaluate
the degree of connectedness in inflation and real output growth performance. There
is clearly considerable variation in the degree of connectedness based on the
principal components analysis. Indeed, the latest ‘wave’ of globalization is clearly
seen in the data for the last two or three decades with brief spurts beginning in the
1950s and falling by the 1970s while the reduced importance of the first principal
component in the first decades of the 20th century is also evident. In contrast, there is
considerably more connectedness and persistently more so in inflation throughout
history. Nevertheless, the strong connection in inflation performance is clearly a
feature of the post‐World War II era. There is no indication that inflation targeting
per se has raised the degree of connectedness over the last two decades. However, as
noted earlier, first Bretton Woods followed by a stronger commitment to lower
inflation, together with more exchange rate flexibility, implies that the exchange rate
regime as it is defined here plays a smaller role than we think in explaining inflation
differentials.

47

The measure of connectedness based on G.C. tests (see Table 12) also suggests that
central banks behave as if they are part of a related network, at least insofar as
inflation differentials are concerned. Note that networks permit relationships to be
indirect. 45 Hence, the existence of a network does not imply how integrated
economies are, only that there are links, some stronger, some weaker, that tie the
inflation fortunes of the economies in question.46 Moreover, other than for ditGlobal ,
there is little empirical indication that this has changed markedly over almost century
and a half of data used here.
Finally, we turn to some counterfactual experiments. These are shown in Figures 7
through 9. Figure 7 shows what inflation would have been like if the Swiss National
Bank (middle), the US Federal Reserve (top), and the Bank of Canada (bottom) had
been in existence before they were actually created47. Data limitations imply that we
can only go back to 1870 for the SNB and Fed and 1913 for the BoC. The smallest
impact from the late introduction of central banking is observed for Canada. The
observed and counterfactual lines are almost on top of each other. It is worth noting,
however, that thanks to the Finance Act of 1907, Canada arguably had a quasi‐central
bank before the Bank of Canada’s creation (e.g., see Rich 1989).

45 This is most readily seen by visualizing networks as a collection of nodes that are linked with varying
degrees of strength. A typical application is the identification of bank networks. See, for example,
Rönnqvist and Sarlin (2016).
46 Indeed, the existence of network effects implies that economies need not be integrated for a shock
to have systemic or global effects.
47 Under the classical gold standard a central bank can only have a small impact on the price level
except in the sense that a credible central bank could temporarily use its policy rate to affect domestic
variables within the gold points which served as a target zone. See Bordo and Macdonald (2010).

48

In the case of Switzerland, had the SNB been created in 1870 instead of 1907 inflation
would have been not much different, on average, but considerably less volatile.
Finally, in the US case, it is difficult to see any impact on inflation and inflation
volatility had the Fed been in place in 1870. It should be pointed out, as explained
above, that the raison d’être of the Fed lies in the search for financial stability not
inflation stability and the series of financial crises that hit the US throughout the
period shown testifies to the real problem with the monetary regime in the US.
Indeed, as shown in the next figure (Figure 8) which shows the counterfactuals for
real GDP growth, the chief benefit of an earlier central bank in the US would have been
observed through a substantial decline in the volatility of real GDP growth. 48 The
reduction in real GDP volatility is plain to see in all three cases shown with the impact
least dramatic for Canada, likely for the reason cited earlier.
Finally, we examine one more counterfactual, this time in the more recent era of
central banking. While some central banks are accountable via a numerical inflation
target (Canada, Norway, Sweden, the UK) others maintain they are equally
accountable in achieving low and stable inflation (the remaining countries listed in
Table 1) but not at the expense of an explicit recognition that real economic
performance is also part of their objective function. 49 Figure 9 then considers the
inflation and real economic growth consequences of inflation targeting (IT). We ask
what inflation and growth would have been if Canada (1991), Sweden (1993), and the
48 This result is also consistent with Miron’s (1989) finding that the founders of the Fed did not
believe their mission was to stabilize output. Instead, their role was to influence asset prices, as also
reflected in the drop in the seasonal variation of interest rates (also, see Mankiw, Miron, and Weil
(1994), and Mankiw and Miron 1991).
49 Since Norway adopted inflation targeting only in 2001 we opted not to consider this case since this
leaves us with relatively few (annual) observations.

49

UK (1992) had not adopted an IT strategy. Adoption years of IT are in parenthesis.
The USA, Japan, and Switzerland did not adopt IT. Hence, these economies act as the
controls used to estimate the treatment effect of IT. We define the treatment period
as the period since Bretton Woods until IT is adopted.50
The left hand side of Figure 9 plots the observed and counterfactual estimates for
inflation while the right hand set of plots display the outcomes for real GDP growth.
It is immediately clear that inflation is almost always higher in the absence of an
inflation target. Other than for Canada, differences between observed and
counterfactual inflation rates actually exceed one or even two standard deviations
away from the mean observed inflation rates. Hence, the improvement in inflation
performance is considerable. Turning to real economic growth the evidence is more
mixed with real economic growth lower under IT than in the counterfactual case.
Once again the differences are larger for Sweden and the UK than for Canada. Note
that, among the three IT economies, Canada has the reputation as having adhered
most closely to its inflation target since the regime was introduced (e.g., see Siklos
2014).
Clearly, one can contemplate other counterfactuals but the methodology followed is
not well suited to carry them out. For example, one might have asked about what
might have happened if the gold standard had persisted beyond the 1930s, or if a
central bank had not been created after World War II. Unfortunately, the available

50 We considered other control periods with little impact on the conclusions. We also tried to include
France, Germany, and Italy, as part of the control group and our conclusions are unchanged. It should
be noted, however, that since these three economies adopted a common currency as well as
transitional arrangements in the lead up to the introduction of the euro it was deemed preferable to
exclude them from the control group.

50

data does not permit the creation of a sensible set of common factors where the
treatment or intervention does not exist.
5. Conclusions
Central banks have evolved considerably over the past three centuries. Globally, the
central bank is a comparatively young institution and its role as primary vehicle for
economic stabilization is both unique and also of fairly recent vintage. Nevertheless,
the history of monetary policy is also a turbulent one with several changes in policy
strategies adopted over time. There has clearly been an evolution of sorts, again on a
global scale, with a clear preference for some form of price stability even if many
countries eschew adopting a formal numerical target.
Just when a consensus of sorts developed that convinced policy makers that best
practice consisted in giving a central bank a clear mandate, narrowly focused on
attaining some inflationary outcome that would promote stable economic growth,
two major financial crises, beginning in 2007 until about 2012, that is, the so‐called
global financial crisis and the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis, led to some sober
second thinking.
Although there are few indications that price stability is no longer a desirable
objective central banks are being asked, or are adopting by default, to widen the
scope of their mandate to include evincing a concern for financial stability.
Historically, we have seen this. Indeed, long before some central banks were given a
macroeconomic stability mandate, their task was for a time largely centered on the
maintenance of financial stability. However, this took place at a time when little
thought was given about whether the monetary authority should be autonomous
51

from government. As we have now come to accept central bank autonomy as useful,
if not appropriate, it is less clear how this principle is squared with an expectation
that financial stability and monetary stability are both tasks that a central bank
ought to carry out. Moreover, for central banks in large economies or ones that have
a systemic impact on the global economy, this development may further restrict
their ability to improve how policy is conducted and to innovate. In the early days of
central banking this was not the case partly because these countries were the first
and also due to the greater frequency of financial crises necessitating change and
adaptation to new circumstances.
In contrast, small open economies have long been buffeted by the complications of
navigating the occasional conflict between domestic objectives and the impact of
external shocks, regardless of the exchange rate regime in place. As a result, there is
some evidence that there is more of a willingness to adopt different monetary policy
strategies than in many, but not all, of the systematically important economies, at
least based on observed choices made in recent decades. It remains to be seen
whether this finding will extend to how the maintenance of financial system stability
is managed.
The only thing that is certain is that we have not seen the last of attempts to
improve how monetary policy is conducted nor in how central banks are governed.
It is equally possible that just as the pendulum has swung back to the monetary
authorities evincing a concern for financial stability the same forces will lead to a
rewriting of the ‘contract’ between the central bank and the government. Whether
this means a loss of autonomy or the development of a contingent contract between
52

the central bank and government remains to be seen. Clearly, crisis times require a
different approach to policy than normal times.

53

Table 1
The Origins of Central Banks
Year
Country
1668 Sweden
1694 UK

Name
Bank of the Estates of
the Realm. Forerunner
of the Riksbank
Bank of England

1800 France

Banque de France

1816 Norway

Bank of Norway

1876 Germany

Reichsbank. Forerunner
of Bundesbank

1882 Japan

Bank of Japan

1893 Italy

Banca d’Italia

1907 Switzerland Swiss National Bank

1913 USA

Federal Reserve System

1934 Canada

Bank of Canada

Motivation
Finance war and the
consequences of excessive
inflation
Finance war, debt
management, and banker to
the government
Manage public debt, issue
notes, : note issue, improve
state revenue (seigniorage)
Economic crisis in
neighboring Denmark
prompts monetary reform
(note issue, lending)
Consolidation of previous
note issuing authorities
following unification, upholds
Gold Standard, under
government management
Part of modernization of Meiji
regime, reserves
management, vehicle to
promote industrialization
Consolidation of previous
note issuing authorities
following unification and a
banking crisis
Centralization and
standardization of note issue,
banker for the government
and custodian of reserves
Creation of lender of last
resort and other banking
related functions
Lender of last resort

Source: Adapted, updated, and expanded from Siklos (2002), Table 1.2. Several of the
central banks in our sample have posted historical time series but they do not always
include prices or real economic information (e.g., the Swiss National Bank’s Historical time
series: //www.snb.ch/en/iabout/stat/statrep/statpubdis/id/statpub_histz_arch#t3).

54

Table 2
Principal Monetary Regimes in Select Economies Since the Early 19th Century
Economy
Gold
Bretton
Monetary
Inflation
Exchange
Standard
Woods
Targeting
Targeting
Rate
targeting/
Monetary
Union
Sweden
1873‐1914 & 1959‐1973
1993‐
‐
1922‐1931
Inflation
real GDP growth

United
Kingdom
Inflation
real GDP growth

France
Inflation
real GDP growth

Norway
Inflation
real GDP growth

Germany
Inflation
real GDP growth

Japan
Inflation
real GDP growth

Italy
Inflation
real GDP growth

Switzerland
Inflation
real GDP growth

USA
Inflation
real GDP growth

‐0.20 (3.75)
2.63 (5.70)

4.47 (1.98)
3.97 (1.55)

1821‐1914 & 1959‐1972
1925‐1931
‐0.38 (5.91)
0.94 (2.59)

4.26 (2.40)
2.49 (1.31)

1.30 (1.24)
2.20 (2.65)

1976‐1992
7.79 (4.16)
1.82 (2.09)

1992‐
2.65 (1.17)
1.72 (1.83)

1878‐1914 & 1959‐1973
1926‐1936
‐0.94 (8.44)
0.91 (4.09)

1993‐1999
(MU)‐2001

4.50 (1.49)
4.20 (1.02)

1.52 (0.61)
1.37 (1.42)
1.54 (0.83)
0.74 (1.43)

1875‐1914 & 1959‐1971
1928‐1931
‐0.17 (3.63)
2.13 (2.70)

4.08 (3.03)
4.24 (1.34)

1871‐1914 & 1959‐1971
1924‐1931
0.70 (3.18)
2.75 (4.40)

2001‐

2.54 (1.12)
4.67 (2.10)

1.82 (0.90)
1.32 (1.41)

1993‐1999
(MU)‐2001

3.23 (1.79)
2.62 (1.84)

1.89 (1.31)
1.51 (1.13)
1.64 (2.84)
1.04 (2.34)

2013 –

5.30 (1.16)
9.11 (3.40)

1993‐1999
(MU)‐2001

0.83 (7.23)
2.57 (4.45)

3.50 (2.00)
5.44 (1.80)

1878‐1914

1964‐1971

1980‐1999

‐0.57 (4.30)
2.66 (4.01)

3.72 (1.31)
4.07 (1.55)

2.75 (1.92)
1.70 (1.73)

0.73 (4.29)
3.00 (7.17)

2.71 (1.74)
4.23 (2.11)

1973‐2012
2.52 (4.35)
2.52 (2.66)

1884‐1917 & 1959‐1973
1927‐1934

1880‐1917 & 1959‐1971
1922‐1933

5.82 (3.28)
3.55 (1.64)

1975‐1991

1897‐1917 & 1964‐1972
1930‐1931
3.50 (8.93)
3.05 (6.56)

1971‐2000

3.26 (1.40)
1.42 (1.17)
1.95 (1.00)
‐0.08 (2.09)

1975‐1991

2000* –
0.52 (0.89)
1.82 (1.57)

2012** –

5.75 (3.07)
2.94 (2.49)

55

Canada

1854‐1914 & 1962‐1970
1926‐1929

Inflation
real GDP growth
*Inflation

0.47 (3.78)
4.08 (5.24)

2.89 (1.14)
5.36 (1.65)

1975‐1981

1991‐

9.13 (1.56)
3.41 (1.14)

1.90 (1.11)
2.41 (1.95)

forecast targeting; **Medium‐term inflation objective;

Sources: Siklos (2002), Bordo and Siklos (2016), and references therein. Annual data are
used. See the text for additional details. The first set of figures gives mean inflation; the
second gives real GDP growth for the samples listed. The last column occasionally provides
two sets of figures because two separate regimes are considered.

56

Table 3 Summary Statistics – Inflation Adjusted for Benchmarks: UK&US, Global Inflation, Global Financial Crises
Country
Benchmarks:
Benchmark I
Benchmark II:
Global
Benchmark II
Global
(1)
I: UK &US
excluding
Global inflation
inflation
excluding
inflation
(2)
Financial Crises
(4)
excluding
Financial
excluding
(3)
Global
Crises
Financial
Financial
(6)
Crises
Crises
(7)
(5)
Canada (CAN)
‐0.11 (2.49)
‐0.15 (2.37)
‐1.10 (3.32)
‐1.12 (0.34)
‐0.22 (0.26)
‐1.25 (0.34)
Switzerland
‐0.47 (4.36)
‐0.57 (0.38)
‐1.46 (3.64)
‐1.55 (0.32)
‐0.46 (0.38)
‐1.45 (0.31)
(CHE)
Germany (DEU)
0.38 (4.56)
0.42 (0.40)
‐0.67 (3.57)
‐0.65 (0.32)
0.35 (0.41)
‐0.67 (0.32)
France (FRA)
1.41 (7.37)
1.68 (0.71)
0.79 (5.91)
1.08 (0.56)
0.61 (0.77)
0.12 (0.61)
United Kingdom
0.72 (4.36)
0.68 (0.38)
‐0.24 (4.10)
‐0.28 (0.36)
4.69 (1.37)
3.53 (1.21)
(GBR)
Italy (ITA)
4.20 (14.97)
4.13 (1.30)
3.22 (13.20)
3.15 (1.15)
1.30 (0.59)
0.50 (0.52)
Japan (JPN)
1.35 (5.94)
1.37 (5.85)
0.50 (5.19)
0.54 (0.50)
0.82 (0.47)
‐0.21 (0.35)
Norway (NOR)
0.87 (5.38)
0.76 (0.47)
‐0.09 (3.95)
‐0.20 (0.34)
0.63 (0.45)
‐0.34 (0.33)
Sweden (SWE)
0.70 (5.03)
0.74 (0.44)
‐0.26 (3.78)
‐0.22 (0.33)
0.25 (0.37)
‐0.57 (0.36)
United States
0.18 (2.61)
0.20 (0.23)
‐0.78 (3.48)
‐0.75 (0.30)
0.08 (0.23)
‐0.85 (0.31)
(USA)
Note: Inflation is 100 times the log difference of the price level. Deviations from the US and UK benchmark and global inflation.
A negative value implies below the benchmark. Standard deviations in parenthesis. Standard errors in columns (3) ,(5), (6), and
(7). For the USA the level of inflation is given in column (2). Global inflation is defined in the text and in the notes to Figure 6.
Global financial crises are the ones identified by Bordo and Landon lane (2010). Financial crises are as defined in Bordo and
Meissner (2016).

57

Table 4
Selected Summary Statistics Output Growth Relative to Benchmarks:
UK & US, and Global Mean
Country
Full
CAN
CHE
DEU
FRA
GBR
ITA
JPN
NOR
SWE
USA

Benchmark: UK & US
Full –Adj. Full ex crises Full

0.14 (4.03)
0.04 (6.29)
0.08 (7.34)
‐0.84 (8.53)
‐1.19 (3.96)
‐0.14 (7.26)
1.03 (7.49)
0.22 (5.75)
0.18 (5.80)
3.51 (5.62)

1.16 (4.37)
0.26 (4.88)
0.99 (5.69)
‐0.31 (5.36)
‐1.23 (3.98)
0.43 (4.82)
1.74 (5.38)
0.65 (4.33)
0.47 (5.14)
3.25 (5.19)

1.06 (4.49)
‐0.21 (6.36)
‐0.21 (7.44)
‐1.15 (8.73)
‐2.03 (4.39)
‐0.52 (7.25)
0.71 (7.42)
‐0.11 (5.59)
‐0.10 (5.78)
4.06 (5.23)

0.90 (4.10)
‐0.14 (4.47)
‐0.07 (6.61)
‐0.98 (5.73)
‐1.33 (2.75)
‐0.28 (4.63)
0.89 (5.60)
0.07 (3.21)
0.15 (4.39)
0.79 (5.06)

Global Mean
Full – Adj. Full ex crises
0.60 (3.72)
‐0.34 (3.41)
0.42 (4.32)
‐0.87 (3.85)
‐1.40 (2.53)
‐0.14 (3.49)
1.19 (4.11)
0.07 (2.72)
0.03 (4.25)
0.43 (4.42)

2.15 (4.02)
‐0.17 (4.57)
‐0.13 (6.69)
‐1.06 (5.85)
‐1.35 (2.70)
‐0.43 (4.59)
0.80 (5.550
‐0.03 (3.11)
0.11 (4.41)
1.09 (4.97)

Legend: CAN: Canada, CHE: Switzerland, DEU: Germany, FRA: France, GBR: United
Kingdom, ITA: Italy, JPN: Japan, NOR: Norway, SWE: Sweden, USA: United States.
Note: The benchmark means that the UK serves as the benchmark until 1912; thereafter the
benchmark is the US. For the US the first 3 columns are growth rates and not in deviation
form. Hence, the values are in italics. Full means data since 1870, data permitting. See the
appendix. Adj. means that the war years 1939‐1946 are excluded as data are missing for
some of the economies in the data set. Standard deviations in parenthesis. 100 times the first
log difference in real GDP is output growth. See the text for the definition of the global mean.
Crises are the global financial crises identified by Bordo and Landon Lane (2010).

58

Table 5 Dating Crises: Narrative Schemes
Country
Global Financial Crises
CAN

CHE

DEU

FRA

GBR

ITA

JPN

1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921

Alternative Chronologies

Banking Crises Currency Crises

1923
2008

1931, 1933‐
1936, 2008

1891, 1893,
1908, 1914,
1921, 1929,
1931, 1950,
1962, 1981‐
1983, 1986
1914, 1939,
1971, 1977

1901‐1902,
1931‐1932,
2008

1893‐1894,
1907‐1910,
1914, 1931‐
1932, 1934,
1949

1882, 1888,
1889, 1907‐
1910, 1994‐
1995, 2008

1888, 1914,
1923‐1929,
1936‐1937,
1948, 1957‐
1959, 1968,
1992‐1993
1914, 1931‐
1932, 1947,
1949, 1961‐
1962, 1964‐
1967, 1974‐
1976, 1992
1893‐1894,
1907‐1908,
1935‐1936,
1964‐1969,
1976, 1981,
1990, 1992,
1995

1890‐1893,
1974‐1976,
2007

1891‐1892,
1893‐1894,
1907‐1908,
1914, 1921,
1930‐1933,
1935‐1936,
1990‐1995,
2008
1900‐1901,
1917, 1927‐
1929, 1992‐
1997

1900‐1901,
1904‐1908,
1917, 1921,

59

NOR

SWE

USA

1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008
1890‐1891
1907‐1908
1913‐1914
1920‐1921
1931‐1932
2007‐2008

1921, 1931‐
1935, 1986‐
1993

1897‐1899,
1907‐1909,
1921‐1922,
1931‐1932,
1991‐1994,
2008
1884‐1886,
1891‐1893,
1907‐1908,
1914, 1930‐
1933, 2007‐
2008

1931‐1934,
1979‐1980
1914, 1931‐
1935, 1949,
1971‐1972,
1986‐1993
1914, 1931‐
1933, 1949,
1971‐1972,
1991‐1994
1891‐1893,
1930‐1933,
1960‐1961,
1971

Note: Dates for global financial crises are from Bordo and Landon‐Lane (2010). Dates for the
other crises are from Bordo and Meissner (2016). Bold numbers identify the simultaneous
occurrence of banking and currency crises. The colors indicate the occurrence of a crisis
under the regimes identified in Table 2. Yellow for the Gold Standard, gray for exchange rate
targeting or a monetary union, bright green for monetary targeting, and turquoise for
Bretton Woods.

60

Table 6 Unit Root and Break‐Point Properties of Univariate Inflation Time Series
Benchmark: UK & US
Global Mean Inflation
Hamilton filter
Country
ADF
Breaks
ADF
Breaks
ADF
Breaks
‐9.62 *
1919, 1938, 1948, 1981,1987,
‐6.54* 1919, 1942,1946,1951,1977, 1983,
‐5.51*
1917, 1931, 1980
CAN
1999
CHE

‐5.37*

‐1.85

1918, 1937, 1945, 1951,1979, 1984,
1994
1891, 1915, 1932, 1973, 1987,
1991, 1995
1904, 1927,1936, 1987, 1991, 2008

DEU

‐1.01

FRA

‐9.05*

1878, 1916, 1974,1989, 1994

‐7.81*

‐6.92*

1932, 1915, 1893, 1946, 1974,
1991, 1995
1908, 1927, 1936, 1954, 1986,
1994

‐7.85*

‐6.00*

GBR

‐3.73*

1917,1941,1948, 1991, 1975, 2006

‐3.64*

1879, 1912, 1917, 1931,
1941,1952, 1968, 1981, 1986,
1991, 1995
1895, 1916, 1948, 1973, 1986,
1997

‐
10.26*

ITA

‐4.59*

1891,1915, 1948, 1974, 1987, 1996

‐5.02*

JPN

‐1.52 (9)

1908, 1978,1983, 2012

‐9.67*

1908, 1932, 1950,1977, 1989,
2013
1876, 1912, 1921, 1930,1950,
1942, 1957, 1989, 1994, 2013

‐7.67*

NOR

‐10.98*

1914, 1919, 1930, 1941, 1950,
1989, 2003, 2013

‐9.21*

SWE

‐6.83*

1914, 1919, 1930, 1941, 1992, 1996

‐7.54*

1876, 1914, 1919, 1942,1950,
1992, 1996

‐8.37*

USA

NA

1879, 1920, 1941, 1991, 1973, 1982,
2008

9.55*

1878, 1915,1987, 1994, 2008

‐8.87*

‐5.93*

‐5.10*

‐
10.03*

1911, 1916, 1921,
1981
1912, 1917, 1931,
1944, 1990
1887, 1923, 1932,
1953, 1974, 1986,
1990
1878, 1915, 1921,
1974, 1982, 2010
1878, 1912, 1917,
1949, 1974, 1986,
1990, 1997
1917, 1921, 1978,
1990, 1998
1878, 1915, 1921,
1987, 1991
1878, 1915, 1909,
1921, 1980, 1992,
1996
1879, 1912, 1917,
1931, 1980, 1990,
2011

Factor Model
ADF
Breaks
‐3.68*
‐3.69*
‐4.49*
‐1.37

1965, 1983, 1992,
1999
1931, 1936, 1994,
2009
1930, 1951, 1984,
1989, 1995
1927, 1936, 1954,
1986, 2013

‐3.36*

1925, 1935, 1949,
1991, 2013

‐3.57*

1927, 1936, 1996,
2014

‐8.78*

1930, 1932, 1982,
1999
1878, 1915, 1921,
1980, 1987, 1991,
2007
1931, 1934, 1950,
1992, 1996, 2013

‐5.00*
‐4.56*
‐4.03*

1966, 1982, 2008

Note: ADF refers to the Augmented Dickey‐Fuller statistic. Perron (1989) test with only an intercept break, an additive outlier
for the break, with the lagged dependent variable selected according to the Schwarz criterion, and a 10% trimmed estimate. The
breaks are found sequentially starting with the full sample (usually 1870‐2015, depending on data availability). In italics are
estimates are breaks before the central bank in question was established. * signifies rejection of the unit root null at least at the
5% level. NA means not applicable. Note that estimation samples are affected by the filter used as well as data availability. This
is especially the case for the factor model.

61

Table 7 The Anatomy of Financial Crises
Country

(1)
Total
number of
crises

(2)
Rank
Order

CAN
CHE
DEU
FRA
GBR
ITA
JPN
NOR
SWE
USA

13
7
9
15
11
18
10
8
11
10

3
10
8
2
4
1
6
9
4
6

(3)
Number of
Statistical
Breaks
crises
(% pre
WWII)
3 (66.7)
4 (75)
5 (80)
8 (37.5)
6 (50)
8 (37.5)
5 (40)
6 (50)
7 (57.1)
7 (57.1)

(4)
Overlap of
Narrative
&
Statistical
(%)

(5)
GFC as a
share
(%)

(6)
Crises that
exceed a
year,
consecutive
(%)

23
14.3
40
77.8
72.7
27.8
30
87.5
36.4
20

46.1
28.6
55.6
26.7
36.4
33.3
30
50
54.5
60

7.7
46.7
55.6
55.6
70
62.5
72.7
14.3
54.5
80

Note: see Table 4 for country name legends. The total number of financial crises is the sum
of banking and currency crises according to the Bordo and Meissner (2016) chronology. The
rank order is from largest to smallest number of financial crises. Column (3) is the number
of statistical breaks relying on the application of the Perron (1989) break test. See Table 6
for details about the estimation strategy. Column (4) indicates the fraction of financial crises
whose dates overlap with the ones obtained from a purely statistical analysis. Column (5)
represents the fraction of financial crises that are global in nature according to the Bordo
and Landon Lane (2010) chronology. Column (6) indicates the fraction of financial crises
(see column (1)) with a duration of more than one consecutive year

62

Table 8 Panel Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Inflation Differentials
Dependent Variable: Deviation from Hamilton Filter
Method: Pooled Least Squares
Sample (adjusted): 1872 2013
Included observations: 142 after adjustments
Cross‐sections included: 10
Total pool (unbalanced) observations: 1111
Convergence achieved after 13 iterations
Variable
Coefficient Std. Error t‐Statistic Prob.
Constant
1.16
0.72
1.60 0.11
OIL price inflation
0.07
0.01
6.89 0.00
Exchange Rate change
0.03
0.02
1.42 0.16
Real GDP growth(‐1)
0.29
0.05
5.70 0.00
Debt/GDP ratio(‐1)
0.02
0.01
2.30 0.02
GFC
‐2.31
1.12
‐2.07 0.04
AR(1)
0.37
0.03
12.72 0.00
Fixed effects?
NO
Time Fixed Effects?
NO
R‐squared
0.19 Mean dependent var 3.24
Adjusted R‐squared
0.18 S.D. dependent var
9.99
Log likelihood
‐4018.95
F‐statistic
41.82
Prob(F‐statistic)
0.00

Note: See Table 5 for the dating of the GFC variable which is the Bordo and Landon Lane
(2010) chronology. Sample reflects adjustment for data availability and the filter used. The
absence of fixed effects follows the application of a redundant fixed effects test (F‐based
statistic; resu;ts available on request). The mean of the dependent variable is different from
zero because the precise samples over which individual filtered estimates are computed can
differ from the unbalanced sample used in estimation. This also explains that the total
number of observations is not number of years times number of cross‐sections.

63

Table 9 Panel Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Inflation Differentials
Cross‐section fixed effects test equation:
Dependent Variable: Deviation from Hamilton Filter
Method: Panel Least Squares
Sample (adjusted): 1872 2013
Included observations: 142 after adjustments
Cross‐sections included: 10
Total pool (unbalanced) observations: 1214
Convergence achieved after 5 iterations
Variable
Coefficient Std. Error t‐Statistic Prob.
Constant
1.08
0.71
1.53 0.13
OIL price inflation
0.06
0.01
6.89 0.00
Exchange Rate change
0.00
0.00
0.62 0.54
Real GDP growth (‐1)
0.27
0.05
5.84 0.00
Debt/GDP ratio (‐1)
0.03
0.01
2.63 0.01
Financial Crises
‐1.60
0.62
‐2.58 0.01
AR(1)
0.39
0.03
14.43 0.00
Fixed effects?
NO
Time Fixed effects?
NO
R‐squared
0.19 Mean dependent var 3.09
Adjusted R‐squared
0.18 S.D. dependent var
9.68
Log likelihood
‐4352.66
F‐statistic
46.30
Prob(F‐statistic)
0.00

Note: See notes to Table 8. The Bordo and Meissner (2016) chronology is used to measure
financial crises by summing banking and currency crises (see Table 5). The absence of fixed
effects follows the application of a redundant fixed effects test (F‐based statistic; not shown).

64

Table 10 Panel Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Inflation Differentials:
The Gold Standard Period
Dependent Variable: Deviation from Global Inflation
Method: Pooled Least Squares
Sample (adjusted): 1871 1917 1923 1931
Included observations: 56 after adjustments
Cross‐sections included: 10
Total pool (unbalanced) observations: 458
Convergence achieved after 7 iterations
Variable
Coefficient Std. Error t‐Statistic Prob.
Constant
0.42
0.23
1.86 0.06
Oil price inflation
‐0.00
0.00
‐2.74 0.01
Exchange rate change
0.00
0.00
1.47 0.14
Real GDP growth (‐1)
‐0.00
0.00
‐0.11 0.91
Debt/GDP ratio (‐1)
‐0.00
0.00
‐0.47 0.64
Financial Crises
‐0.19
0.05
‐3.94 0.00
AR(1)
0.83
0.03
28.08 0.00
Fixed Effects?
YES
Time Fixed effects?
NO
R‐squared
0.96 Mean dependent var 0.09
Adjusted R‐squared
0.96 S.D. dependent var
2.38
Log likelihood
‐291.73
F‐statistic
766.47
Prob(F‐statistic)
0.00

Note: See note to Table 8. Deviations are derived from the log level of the CPI series less the
mean log levels globally (all 10 economies in the data set). See the text for more details.
Sample is based on the dating of the Gold Standard in different countries. See Table 2.

65

Table 11 The First Principal Component: Inflation and Output Growth
Sample
# of principal
Inflation
# of principal
Output Growth
components
components
1911‐1930
3
0.56
3
0.45
1916‐1935
3
0.56
3
0.48
1921‐1940
3
0.67
4
0.55
1926‐1945
3
0.73
3
0.48
1931‐1950
2
0.81
3
0.46
1936‐1955
3
0.61
2
0.65
1941‐1960
3
0.62
2
0.56
1946‐1965
3
0.60
3
0.62
1951‐1970
1
1.00
4
0.42
1956‐1975
1
1.00
3
0.73
1961‐1980
2
0.84
3
0.71
1966‐1975
2
0.82
3
0.68
1971‐1990
2
0.85
4
0.60
1976‐1995
2
0.85
4
0.54
1981‐2000
2
0.88
3
0.59
1986‐2005
2
0.76
3
0.59
1991‐2010
3
0.64
2
0.86
1996‐2014
3
0.58
1
1.00
Other Samples
1871‐1914
1
0.39
4
0.31
1886‐1913,
2
0.59
3
0.53
1925‐1933
Note: See text for the details. The columns give the number of principal components
estimated via maximum likelihood and the proportion of the total variation explained by
the first principal component in a factor model for inflation or real GDP growth for the 10
countries in the data set (unbalanced panel).

66

Table 12 Degree of Granger Causality
Variable
Full Sample
INF
21%
HAM
15.6%
FACTOR
22.2%
GLOBAL
27.8%
DEVIATION FROM
16.7%
BENCHMARK
Conditioned on GFC
17.8%
Conditioned on RR
16.7%

1870‐1925
23.3%
17.8%
NA
14.4%
15.6%
NA
NA

1950‐2015
17.8%
21%
23.3%
26.6%
13.3%
NA
NA

Note: See text for the definition and estimation details.

67

200
150
100

Swe de n, UK, France
Norway
Japan, Italy
Switze rland, USA
Canada

50

Ge rmany

0
‐50
‐100
‐150
‐200
Sweden
Finland
Austria
Indonesia
Belgium
Japan
Panama
United States
USSR
Peru
Mongolia
Ecuador
Taiwan
El Salvador
Argentina
Thailand
Guatemala
Germany
Philippines
Korea
Cuba
Saudi Arabia
Laos
Syria
Nigeria
Morocco
Somalia
Egypt
Algeria
Sierra Leone
Burundi
Malawi
Rwanda
Kenya
Uruguay
Malta
Gambia
Yemen
Fiji
Madagascar
Bahamas
Mozambique
Nauru
Comoros
Lesotho
Maldives
Luxembourg
Aruba
Namibia
Kyrgyz Rep
Tajikistan
Moldova
Azerbaidjan
Turkmenistan
Slovakia
Qatar
Montenegro

Gap between statehood and CB creation in years

Figure 1 Years of Central Bank Formation and Statehood

Note: vertical dashed lines indicate the central banks used in this study. The bars represent
the difference between the year a central bank was established less the year of statehood or
independence. Data are from Central Bank Directory 2014 (London, UK: Central Bank
Publications) and the CIA World Factbook. The central banks explicitly labelled in the figure
are the subject of the empirical and narrative analysis in the present study.

68

Figure 2 Number of Central Banks Established
Number of CB created in each year

10

8

6

4

2

0
1700

1750

1800

1850

1900

1950

2000

Note: See note to Figure 1.

69

0%

-12%
1901
1902
1903

1943
1944

1825
1826

1916
1917

1824

1818

1817

1816

1815

1814

1813

1812

1811

1810

1823

0%

1822

-5%
1915

5%

1821

-2

1914

10%

1820

15%

1913

20%

1819

2

1912

Swtizerland

1911

25%

1910

1909

-4
1908

-3

1907

-1

1809

United Kingdom

1906

Italy

1905

0

1904

1

1903

3

1902

4
1808

-16%

1901

-10%

1900

-4%

1807

10%

1806

8%

1899

30%

1898

1704

1703

1702

1701

1700

1699

1698

1697

1696

1695

1694

1693

1692

1691

1690

1689

1688

1687

1686

1685

20%

1897

1900

1942

1894

1893

1892

1891

1890

1889

1941

-12%
1899

-8%

1940

-8%
1898

-4%

1939

0%
1897

4%

1938

4%
1896

16%

1937

Canada
1895

8%

1936

1935

-4%
1888

Germany

1934

United States

1933

8%
1684

Sweden

1932

12%

1931

20%

1930

-6%

1929

-4%

1887

-2%

1928

0%

1886

2%

1927

4%

1885

6%

1884

-20%

1883

0%

1926

1678

1677

1676

1675

1674

1673

1672

1671

1670

1669

1668

1667

1666

1665

1664

1663

1662

1661

1660

1659

1658

20%

1925

18
71
18
72
18
73
18
74
18
75
18
76
18
77
18
78
18
79
18
80
18
81
18
82
18
83
18
84
18
85
18
86

40%

1924

1923

1922

1921

1920

1919

1918

1917

1916

1915

1914

1913

1912

1911

1910

1909

1908

1907

1906

1905

1904

1903

Figure 3 Inflation Around the Time Central Banks Were Created
120%

Norway

16%

12%
80%

4%

40%

0%
-40%

0%

-12%

-8%
-80%

-120%

Note: Inflation is 100 times the first log difference in the CPI. The vertical dashed lines
mark the year when the central banks shown were created.

70

Figure 4 Inflation Around the Time of Change in Monetary Policy Strategy:
Inflation Targeting and Bretton Woods
24%
20%
16%
12%
8%
4%
0%
1965

1966

1967

1968

1969

1970

1971

1972

1973

1974

1975

Sweden

UK

France

Norway

Germany

Japan

Itay

Switzerland

USA

Canada

12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Sweden

UK

France

Norway

Gemany

Japan

Italy

Switzerland

USA

Canada

Note: the shaded area in the top figure highlight the years when Inflation Targeting (IT)
was introduced in Canada, Sweden, the UK, and Norway. The vertical line in the bottom
figure approximately dates the end of the Bretton Woods regime.

71

Figure 5 Varieties of Inflation Rate Differentials
A. 1950‐2015
16%
12%
8%
4%
0%
-4%
-8%

Hamilton filter
US inflation

20
15

20
10

20
05

20
00

19
95

19
90

19
85

19
80

19
75

19
70

19
65

19
60

19
55

19
50

-12%

mean global inflation
1st PC

B. 1870‐1949
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%
-20%
-30%

18
70
18
75
18
80
18
85
18
90
18
95
19
00
19
05
19
10
19
15
19
20
19
25
19
30
19
35
19
40
19
45
19
50

-40%

Hamilton filter
UK or US inflation

mean global inflation
1st PC

72

C. The Gold Standard: Deviations from Equilibrium (log) Price Level
.8

WWI

Deviations from (log) CPI

.6
.4
.2
.0
‐.2

CAN
ITA

CHE
JPN

DEU
NOR

D. Gold Standard: (log level) Prices

19
30

19
15
19
22

19
10

19
05

19
00

18
95

18
90

18
85

18
80

18
75

18
70

‐.4

FRA
SWE

GBR
USA

3

log CPI (normalized)

2

1

0

‐1

‐2
1875

1880

1885
CAN
ITA

1890

1895
CHE
JPN

1900

1905
DEU
NOR

1910 1919

1925

FRA
SWE

GBR
USA

1930

Note: See equation (1) for the definition and the text for estimation details. Part C shows the
(log) price level less the Hamilton (2017) applied to the log of prices. Part D shows the (log)
of prices normalized to 1 on 1885 in each country. See Table 4 for country name legends.

73

-10%
-15%
-10%

-20%
-15%
-15%
-20%
-15%

-10%

Note: Observed Inflation is 100 times the first log difference in the CPI. Global mean inflation is the overall arithmetic mean
inflation rate in an unbalanced sample (1870‐2015). The dashed line is dit (see equation (1)). The shaded areas represent the
years when there was a global financial crisis as defined in Bordo and Landon‐Lane (2013).

74

2015

-10%

2010

-5%

-15%

2005

5%

2000

10%

1995

10%

1990

15%

5%

1985

10%

1980

15%

1975

Sweden

1970

20%

15%

1965

20%

15%

1960

20%

20%

1955

25%

15%

1950

-15%

1935

France

1930

-10%

-40%

1925

-30%

-40%
19
50
19
55
19
60
19
65
19
70
19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
00
20
05
20
10
20
15

-30%

-15%

1920

-10%

-20%

1915

-15%

1910

-5%

1905

-20%

1900

-20%

5%

1895

0%

-5%

10%

1890

-10%

15%

10%

1885

5%

19
15
19
20
19
25
19
30
19
35

0%

-10%

20%

10%

1880

0%

0%

20%

10%

1875

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

1935

1930

1925

5%

15%

1870

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

Norway

1950

1920

1915

1910

1905

1900

1895

1890

1885

1880

1875

1870

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

1935

1930

1925
Germany

1935

1930

1925

1920

1915

1910

1905

1900

1895

1890

1885

1880

-10%
-5%

1875

20%

10%

1870

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

Japan

1950

1920

1915

1910

1905

1900

1895

1890

1885

1880

1875

1870

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

1935

1930

1925

1920

Swtizerland

1935

1930

1925

1920

1915

1910

1905

1900

1895

1890

1885

1880

1875

1870

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

Italy

1935

1915

1910

1905

1900

1895

1890

1885

1880

1875

Canada

1930

1925

1920

1915

1910

0%

1905

-5%

1900

5%

1895

0%

0%

1890

1870

-10%

1885

5%

1880

10%

1875

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

1935

1930

1925

1920

1915

1910

1905

1900

1895

1890

1885

1880

1875

1870

15%

1870

2015

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

1935

1930

1925

1920

1915

1910

1905

1900

1895

1890

1885

1880

1875

1870

Figure 6 Observed Inflation Versus Deviations From Global Mean Inflation
United Kingdom

-5%
0%

USA

0%

10%

-5%

5%

0%

O bserved

-5%
Deviation from
global mean

Figure 7 Counterfactual Experiment:
Inflation Had the SNB, Fed, and BoC Been Created Earlier
USA
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%

Observed

19
12

19
09

19
06

19
03

19
00

18
97

18
94

18
91

18
88

18
85

18
82

18
79

18
76

18
73

18
70

-8%

Counterfactual

Switzerland
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
-5%
-10%
-15%

Observed

19
06

19
03

19
00

18
97

18
94

18
91

18
88

18
85

18
82

18
79

18
76

18
73

18
70

-20%

Counterfactual

Canada
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
-5%
-10%
-15%
-20%
1915

1918

1921
Observed

1924

1927

1930

1933

Counterfactual

Note: the top figure is for the US, the middle is Switzerland, and the bottom plot is for
Canada. Details of the counterfactuals are in the text.
75

Figure 8 Counterfactual Experiments:
Real GDP Growth Had the SNB, Fed, and BoC Been Created Earlier
USA

20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
-5%
-10%

Observed

19
12

19
09

19
06

19
03

19
00

18
97

18
94

18
91

18
88

18
85

18
82

18
79

18
76

18
73

18
70

-15%

Counterfactual

Switzerland
15%

10%

5%

0%

-5%

Observed

19
06

19
03

19
00

18
97

18
94

18
91

18
88

18
85

18
82

18
79

18
76

18
73

18
70

-10%

Counterfactual

Canada
16%
12%
8%
4%
0%
-4%
-8%
-12%
-16%
1915

1918

1921
Observed

1924

1927

1930

1933

Counterfactual

Note: See note to Figure 7.
76

Figure 9: Counterfactual Experiments: Inflation and Real Economic Growth With and
Without Inflation Targeting
Canada - Economic Growth

Canada - Inflation
6%

6%

5%

4%

4%
2%
3%
0%
2%
-2%

1%

Counterfactual

Observed

Sweden - Inflation

20
14

20
12

20
10

20
08

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

20
14

20
12

20
10

20
08

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

Observed

19
92

-4%

0%

Counterfactual

Sweden - Economic Growth

8%

8%
6%

6%
4%
4%

2%
0%

2%

-2%
0%
-4%
-2%

-6%
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Observed

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

1994

1996

1998

2000

Counterfactual

2002

2004

Observed

Unted Kingdom - Inlfation

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Counterfactual

United Kingdom - Economc Growth

9%

8%

8%

6%

7%
4%

6%
5%

2%

4%

0%

3%

-2%

2%
-4%

1%
0%

-6%
1993

1996

1999

2002
Observed

2005

2008

2011

2014

1992

1994

1996

1998

Counterfactual

2000

2002

Observed

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Counterfactual

Note: See notes to Figures 7 and 8 and the text for a description.
77

References
Accominotti, O. (2012), “London Merchant Banks, the Central European Panic and the
Sterling Crisis of 1931” Journal of Economic History.
Adolph, C. (2013), Bankers, Bureaucrats, and Central Bank Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
Aizenman, J., M. Chinn, and H. Ito (2016), “Monetary Policy Spillovers and the Trilemma in
the New Normal: Periphery Country Sensitivity to Core Country Conditions”, Journal of
International Money and Finance 68 (November): 298‐330.
Bagehot, W. (1873) [1962], Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (Homewood,
Ill.: Richard Irwin).
Bai, J., and P. Perron (1998), “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple
Structural Changes”, Econometrica 66: 47‐78.
Barro, R.J., and D.B. Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of
Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (July): 101‐121.
Bazot, G, M.D. Bordo and E. Monnet (2016), “International Shocks and the Balance Sheet of
the Banque de France Under the Classical Gold Standard” Explorations in Economic History.
October
Berg L. and L. Jonung (1999), “Pioneering Price Level Targeting : The Swedish Experience
1935‐1937 “ Journal of Monetary Economics Vol 43 pp 525‐531.
Bernanke, B. (2010), “Monetary Policy and Tools in a Low‐Inflation Environment”, speech
given At the Revisiting Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment Conference,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, 15 October.
Bernanke, B.S., and F.S. Mishkin (1992), “Central Bank Behavior and the Strategy of
Monetary Policy: Some Observations From Six Industrialized Countries”, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1992, Edited by O. Blanchard and S. Fischer (Cambridge, mass.: The
MIT Press), pp. 183‐238.
Bernholz, P. (2015), “The Swiss Experiment: From the Lower Bound to Flexible Exchange
Rates”, Cato Journal 35 (Spring.Summer): 403‐410.
Beyer, A, V.Gaspar, C. Geberding and O. Issing (2013), “Opting Out of The Great Inflation:
German Monetary Policy after the Breakdown of Bretton Woods” in M. Bordo and A.
Orphanides ( eds) The Great Inflation ; The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

78

Billio, M., M. Germansky, A.W. Lo, and L. Pelizzon (2012), “Econometric Measures of
Connectedness and Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors”, Journal of
Financial Economics 104: 535‐559.
Blinder, A.S, M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. De Haan, and D‐J. Jansen (2008), “Central Bank
Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence”, Journal of
Economic Literature 46 (4):91‐945.
Bordo, M.D. and B. Eschweiller (1994), “Rules, Discretion and Central Bank Independence;
The German Experience 1880‐1989” in Pierre Siklos ed. Varieties of Monetary Reform:
Lessons and Experience on the Road to Monetary Union. Boston, Kluwer Academic
Publishers
Bordo, M.D. and L. Jonung ( 1995) “ Monetary Regimes, Inflation and Monetary Reform: an
Essay in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud” in D.E Vaz and K. Vellupillai (edss) Inflation,
Innstitutions and Information: Essays in Honor of Axel Leijonhufvud. London. MacMillan
Bordo, M.D. and F Kydland (1995), “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in Exploration”
Explorations in Economic History (October)
Bordo, M.D., B. Eichengreen, D. Klingebiel, S.Martinez‐Peria (2001), “Is the Crisis Problem
Growing More Severe? “ Economic Policy 16(32): 52‐82
Bordo, M.D. (1993), “The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A Historical
Overview”, in A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International
Monetary Reform, edited by M.D. Bordo and B. Eichengreen (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press), pp. 3‐108.
Bordo, M.D. (1999), Essays on The Gold Standard and Related Regimes. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
Bordo, M.D. and A. Redish (1987), “Why Did the Bank of Canada Emerge in 1935?” Journal
of Economic History, June.
Bordo, M., and A. Schwartz (1999), “Monetary policy regimes and economic performance:
The historical record”, In Handbook of macroeconomics, ed. John B. Taylor and Michael
Woodford. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Bordo, M.D. and H.James (2007), “From 1907 to 1946: A Happy Childhood or a Troubled
Adolescent?” chapter 2 in The Swiss National Bank 1907‐2007, (Zurich: Neue Zurcher
Zeitung Swiss National Bank).
M.D. Bordo, T. Helbling and H. James (2007), “Swiss Exchange Rate Policy in the 1930s’s
Was the Delay in Devaluation Too High a Price to Pay for Conservatism?” Open Economies
Review 18 (February) 1‐25.
79

Bordo, M.D., and A. Orphanides, Editors (2013), The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern
Central Banking (Chicago, Ill.: Chicago University Press).
Bordo, M.D., O. Humpage and A.J. Schwartz (2015), Strained Relations :U.S. Monetary Policy
and Foreign Exchange Market Operations in the Twentieth Century. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bordo, M.D.and J. Haubrich (2016), “Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries and Financial Crises:
Evidence from the American Record” Economic Inquiry . October.
Bordo, M.D., and P.L. Siklos (2016), “Central Bank Credibility: An Historical and
Quantitative Exploration”, in Central Banks At A Crossroads, edited by
M.D. Bordo, Ø. Eitrheim, M. Flandreau, and J. Qvigstad (Cambridge, Mass: Cambridge
University Press), pp. 62‐144.
Bordo, M.D. and C.M. Meissner (2016), “Fiscal Crises and Financial Crises” North Holland
Handbook of Macroeconomics (eds) J.B. Taylor and H. Uhlig (Amsterdam:North Holland
Publishers).
Bordo, M.D. and C. Schenck (2016), “Monetary policy Cooperation and Coordination: An
Historical Perspective on The Importance of Rules” Hoover Institution Working Paper
Bordo, M.D. and H. James (2015) “ Capital Flows and Domestic and International Order:
Trilemmas From Macroeconomics to Political Economy and International Relations” NBER
Working Paper 21017 ( March)
Bordo, M.D., A. Redish, and H. Rockoff (2015), “Why Didn’t Canada Have A Banking Crisis in
2008 (or in 1930, or 1907, or…)?”, The Economic History Review 68 (February): 218‐243.
Bordo, M.D., and J. Landon‐Lane (2013), “Does Expansionary Monetary Policy Cause Asset
Price Boom?”, Journal Economia Chilena (The Chilean Economy), Central Bank of Chile, vol.
16 (August): 4‐52.
Bordo, M.D. , A. Dib,and L. Schembri (2010), “ Canada’s Pioneering Experience with a
Flexible Exchange Rate in the 1950s”. International Journal of Central Banking , October.
Bordo, M.D. ,M. Oliver and R. MacDonald (2009),“ Sterling in Crisis 1964‐67” European
Review of Economic History October.
Bremner, R. (2004), Chairman of the Fed: William McChesney Martin New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press).
Brunnermeier, M, H James and J.P. Landau (2016), The Euro and the Battle of Ideas.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
80

Bruno, M., and W. Easterly (1998), “Inflation Crises and Long‐Run Growth”, Journal of
Monetary Economics 41:3‐26.
Capie, F.H., G. Wood, and J. Castañeda (2016), “Central Bank Independence in Small Open
Economies”, in Central Banks At A Crossroads, edited by M.D. Bordo, Ø. Eitrheim, M.
Flandreau, and J. Qvigstad (Cambridge, Mass: Cambridge University Press), pp. 195‐230.
Debelle, G., and S. Fischer (1994), “How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?”, in J.C.
Fuhrer (Ed.), Goals, Guidelines and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers (Boston:
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston), pp. 195‐221.
De Kock, M.H. (1974), Central Banking (New York: St Martin’s Press).
Deutsche Bundesbank (1957), Annual Report (Frankfurt: Germany).
Dincer, N., and B. Eichengreen (2014), “Central Bank Transparency and Independence:
Updates and New Measures”, International Journal of Central Banking (March): 189‐253.
Dooley, M.P., D. Folkerts‐Landau, and P. M. Garber (2009), “Bretton Woods Still Defines the
International Monetary System”, NBER working paper 14371, February.
Eitrheim, O. and J .T. Klovlund (2016), A Monetary History of Norway. New York; Cambridge
University Press
Flandreau, M. (1996), “ The French Crime of 1873: an Essay on the Emergence of the
International Gold Standard 1870‐1880” Journal of Economic History Vol 56 pp 862‐892.
Fratianni , M and F. Spinelli (1997), A Monetary History of Italy. New York: Cambridge
University Press
Fregert, K (2017), “ Sveriges Riksbank ; 350 years in the making”, (Lund University, mimeo)
Friedman, M. (2002), Capitalism and Freedom: Fortieth Anniversary Edition (Chicago, Ill.:
University of Chicago Press).
Garber, P.M. (1993), “The Collapse of the Bretton Woods Fixed Exchange Rate System”, in A
Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform,
edited by M.D. Bordo and B. Eichengreen (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 461‐
494.
Geithner, T. (2016), “Are We Safer? The Case for Updating Bagehot”, Per Jacobsson Lecture,
October 8, Washington, D.C., from http://www.perjacobsson.org/lectures.htm.
Giavazzi F. and M. Pagano (1986), “The Advantages of Tying One’s Hands : EMS Discipline
and Central Bank Credibility”
81

Gorton, G (1985), “Clearing Houses and the Origin of Central Banking in the United States”
Journal of Economic History 45: 277‐283.
Hamilton, J. D. (2017), “Why You Should Never Use the Hodrick‐Prescott Filter”, Review of
Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).
Hansen, B. E. (1995), “Rethinking the Univariate Approach to Unit Root Testing: Using
Covariates to Increase Power”, Econometric Theory 11: 952‐983.
Pierre Cyrille Hautcoeur , Angelo Riva and Eugene n. White (2014) “ Floating a Lifeboat: the
Banque de France and the Crisis of 1889” NBER working Paper 20083 (May)
Hsiao, C., H. S. Ching, and S.K. Wan (2012), “A Panel Data Approach for Program Evaluation:
Measuring the Benefits of Political and Economic Integration of Hong Kong With Mainland
China”, Journal of Applied Econometrics 27: 705‐740.
Ilzetzki, I., C. Reinhart, and K. Rogoff (2017), “Exchange Rate Arrangements Entering the
21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?”, NBER working paper 23134, February.
Issing, O. (2005), “The Monetary Pillar of the ECB”, speech to the ‘The ECB and Its Watchers
VII Conference, 3 June, available from
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2005/html/sp050603.en.html.
James, H. (2012), Making the European Monetary Union (Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press).
Jonung , L. ( 1993), “ The Rise and Fall of the Scandinavian Currency Union 1873‐1920”
European Economic Review vol 37 pp 507‐517.
Jordà, Ò., M. Schularick and A.M. Taylor (2016), “Macrofinancial History and the New
Business Cycle Facts”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016 (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
Press).
Junge, G., and P. Kugler (2013), “Quantifying the Impact of Higher Capital Requirements on
the Swiss Economy”, Swiss Society of Economics and Statistics 149 (3): 313‐356.
King, M. (1995), “Commentary Monetary Implications of Greater Fiscal Discipline”, in
Budget Deficits and Debt: Issues and Options, Proceedings of the 1995 Jackson Hole
Symposium (Kansas City: Kansas City Federal Reserve), pp. 171‐183.
Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy 85 (June): 473‐492.
Laidler, D. (2016), “The Interactive evolution of Economic Ideas and Experience – The Case
of Canadian Inflation Targeting”, University of Western Ontario working paper 2015‐1,
July.
82

Laeven, l. and F.Valencia (2008), Systemic Banking Crises Database: a New Database” IMF
Working paper No. 08/224
Laeven L. and F. Valencia (2012), “Systemic Banking Crises ; An update” IMF Working
paper No. 12/163
Leeper, E. and T. Walker (2011), “Perceptions and Misperceptions of Fiscal Inflation “ BIS
Working Paper 364 November
McGouldrick, P (1984), “Operations of the German Central bank and the Rules of the Game
1879‐1913” in Bordo M. and A.J. Schwartz ( eds) A Retrospective on the Classical Gold
Standard 1821‐1931. Chicago: University of Chicago Preess
Mishkin, F.S. (2011), “Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from the Crisis”, NBER working
paper 16755, February.
Monnet, E. (2014), “Monetary Policy Without Interest Rates: Evidence From France’s
Golden Age (1948 to 1973)” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. Volume 6
October
Neufeld E.P. (1972), The Economics of the Canadian Financial System. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Orphanides, A. (2013), “Is Monetary Policy Overburdened?”, BIS working paper 435,
December.
Perron. P. (2005), “Dealing with Structural Breaks”, working paper, Boston University,
April.
Perron, P. (1989), “The Great Crash, The Oil Price Shock, and the Unit Root Hypothesis”,
Econometrica 57 (November): 1361‐1401.
Perron, P., and Y. Yamamoto (2015), “Using OLS to Estimate and test for Structural Changes
in Models with Endogenous Regressors”, Journal of Applied Econometrics 30: 119‐144.
Perron, P., and T. Wada (2009), “Let’s Take a Break: Trends and Cycles in US Real GDP”,
Journal of Monetary Economics 56: 749‐765.
Qvigstad, J. (2016), On Central Banking (Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press).
Ramon, G (1932), Histoire de la Banque de France.
Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoff (2004), “The Modern History of Exchange Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (February): 1‐48.
83

Rich, G. (1989), “Canadian Banks, Gold and the Crisis of 1907”, Explorations in Economic
History 26: 136‐160.
Roberds, W, and F. Velde (2016) “The Descent of Central Banks ( 1400‐1815) in Bordo, M.
O. Eitrheim, M. Flandreau and J. Qvigstad ( eds) Central Banks at a Crossroads; What Can We
Learn from History? New York; Cambridge University Press
Rogoff, K. (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to An Intermediate Monetary
Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics (November): 1169‐1189.
Rönnqvist, S., and P. Sarlin (2016), “Bank Networks From Text: Interrelations, Centrality
and Determinant”, ECB working paper 1876, January.
Rottemberg J (2013), “ Shifts in Federal Reserve Goals and Tactics for Monetary Policy: A
Role for Persistence?” Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol 27. No.4 pp 65‐68.
Siklos, P.L. (2017), Central Banks Into the Breach (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Siklos, P.L. (2014), “Communications Challenges for Multi‐Tasking Central Banks: Evidence,
Implications”, International Finance 17 (1): 77‐98.
Siklos, P.L. (2011), “Central Bank Transparency: Another Look”, Applied Economics Letters
18 (10): 929‐933.
Siklos, P.L. (2002), The Changing Face of Central Banking (Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge
University Press).
Sinn, H‐W. (2014), The Euro Trap (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Steigum, E.(2009), “ The Boom and Bust Cycle in Norway” in l. Jonung et al ( eds) The
Great Financial Crisis in Finland and Sweden . Northampton Mass: Edward Elgar Press pp
202‐244.
Stock, J., and M. Watson (2004), “Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and
Explanations”, in Monetary Policy and Unicertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy,
Economic Symposium (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 9‐56.
Taylor, J. (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy “ in Housing Finance and Monetary Policy .
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City pp 463‐476.
Thiessen, G. G. (2001), The Thiessen Lectures (Ottawa: Bank of Canada).
Thornton, H. (1802) [1939], An Enquiry Into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of
Great Britain (London: George Allen and Unwin).

84

Thornton, D. L. and D.C. Wheelock (2014), “Making Sense of Dissents: A History of FOMC
Dissents”, Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (Third Quarter): 213‐227.
Timberlake, R. (1984), ”The Central banking Role of Clearing house associations” Journal of
Money, Credit and banking 1691), pp 1‐15.
White, E.N. (2016), “How to Prevent a Banking Panic : The Barings Crisis of 1890” Rutgers
University ( mimeo).
Winnett, R. (2008), “Financial Crisis: Gordon Brown Calls for ‘New Bretton Woods’”, Daily
Telegraph, 13 October.
Vaona, A. (2012), “Inflation and Growth in the Long‐Run: A New Keynesian Theory and
Further Semiparametric Evidence”, Macroeconomic Dynamics 16: 94‐132.
Volcker, P.A. (1990), The Triumph of Central Banking?, The 1990 Per Jacobsson Lecture,
Washington, D.C, 23 September, International Monetary Fund.
Yellen, J. (2015), “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy”, speech delivered At the Philip
Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts,
24 September.

85

