                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    RETURNS TO PHARMACEUTICAL INNOVATION IN THE MARKET FOR ORAL
     CHEMOTHERAPY IN RESPONSE TO INSURANCE COVERAGE EXPANSION

                                      Caroline S. Bennette
                                         Anirban Basu
                                       Scott D. Ramsey
                                        Zachary Helms
                                         Peter B. Bach

                                      Working Paper 23842
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23842


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




Caroline Bennette was supported by an institutional mentored career development award from the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (PI: Sean Sullivan; No. K12HS022982). Dr.
Bennette was also supported by a grant from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation (PI: Peter
Bach). We are grateful for comments on earlier versions of this work from seminar participants
at the University of Washington and the Vancouver Health Economics Meeting. Opinions
expressed are the authors’ alone and do not reflect those of the University of Washington, NBER,
Flatiron Health, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality or the Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center. NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment
purposes. They have not been peer reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of
Directors that accompanies official NBER publications. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Caroline S. Bennette, Anirban Basu, Scott D. Ramsey, Zachary Helms, and Peter B.
Bach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Returns to Pharmaceutical Innovation in the Market for Oral Chemotherapy in Response to
Insurance Coverage Expansion
Caroline S. Bennette, Anirban Basu, Scott D. Ramsey, Zachary Helms, and Peter B. Bach
NBER Working Paper No. 23842
September 2017
JEL No. I11,I13,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimated the average returns, in terms of patient survival, to the marginal innovations in oral
chemotherapy market induced by Part D expansion of oral chemotherapy coverage for elderly
individuals by mandating inclusion of “all or substantially all” oral anti-cancer medications on
plans’ formularies. We exploited exogenous variation in the age of diagnosis for different cancer
sites - and therefore the relative expansion in market size for different cancers under the
Medicare’s prescription drug coverage – to isolate the effect of Part D on innovation and the
health benefits that these innovative technologies provide. Using data from FDA and clinical
studies from January 1994 to December 2016, we find that the approval rate for oral
chemotherapies increased an additional 5.7% (95% CI: 1.7, 9.8) after implementation of Part D
for every 1% increase in exposure to the Medicare market. In contrast, greater exposure to
Medicare was associated with a smaller increase in the indication-specific survival gains reported
in the drug’s label (3.2% [95% CI: 2.1, 4.3]) and 8.0% [95% CI: 6.1, 9.8] lower in absolute and
relative gains, respectively). Similar trends were not observed for intravenously administered
chemotherapy whose coverage was largely unaffected by Part D. These findings suggest that
there could be diminishing returns to incentives for pharmaceutical innovation created by broad
coverage mandates and that health policy tools, such as value–based pricing, may help maximize
the health benefits provided by future pharmaceutical innovations.

Caroline S. Bennette                             Zachary Helms
Flatiron Health                                  Center for Health Policy and Outcomes
New York, NY 10010                               Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
cbennette@flatiron.com                           zachary.t.helms@gmail.com

Anirban Basu                                     Peter B. Bach
Departments of Health Services,                  Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Pharmacy and Economics                           Department of Medicine
University of Washington                         Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
1959 NE Pacific St                               New York, NY 10065
Box - 357660                                     bachp@mskcc.org
Seattle WA 98195
and NBER
basua@uw.edu

Scott D. Ramsey
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
1100 Fairview Ave. North, M3-B232
Seattle, WA 98109-1024
sramsey@fhcrc.org
Introduction

       The high and rising cost of many prescription drugs is placing tremendous financial

pressure on patients, payers, and society. These trends have prompted considerable

debate about how best to foster pharmaceutical innovation while ensuring patient access

to affordable medications (HHS Pharmaceutical Forum; Ramsey et al. 2016; Mailankody

and Prasad 2016; Bennette et al. 2016 ). Strengthening insurance coverage, such as

through government subsidies or mandated benefits, is an often-used lever through which

policymakers can improve patients’ access to prescription drugs (Morgan and Kennedy

2010). Importantly, expanding prescription drug insurance coverage can also alter

incentives for pharmaceutical firms’ research and development (R&D) investments and

ultimately access to new medicines for future generations (Acemoglu and Linn 2004;

Blume-Kohout and Sood 2013).

       Prior research has shown that changes in insurance coverage can have a significant

impact on pharmaceutical innovation (Acemoglu and Linn 2004; Blume-Kohout and Sood

2013). However, these studies relied on definitions of innovation - such as the number of

new drugs developed - that do not capture the health benefits of such innovation (Morgan

et al. 2008). Even drugs designed as “breakthrough” therapies by the FDA exhibit large

variation in the expected health benefits offered to patients. This variation leaves

policymakers and other decision makers with little direct evidence about how policies that

impact pharmaceutical innovation will ultimately impact population health (Downing et al.

2014; Kim et al. 2015; Prasad et al. 2015). It is critical to understand how changes in

prescription-drug-insurance coverage impact not only the number but also the health

benefits provided by drugs ultimately brought to market if we are to design insurance

models and policies in a manner that ensures the greatest expected health benefits for

both current and future patients.

       The need to refine and develop new insurance payment models and coverage

policies is particularly acute in oncology given cancer’s large human and economic burden

and the rapidly growing output of new drugs to treat cancer from the pharmaceutical

industry. Anti-cancer medications are one of the three main pillars of cancer treatment


                                                                                             3
and recently became the most expensive therapeutic class of drugs. These trends are

fueled by a recent surge in the development and FDA approval of new therapies,

particularly orally administered chemotherapy (Martell et all. 2013). These new drugs can

deliver substantial health benefits to patients, but are often extraordinarily expensive: the

costs of chemotherapy now routinely exceed $10,000 per month (Bach 2009). In response

to these trends, a series of Institute of Medicine workshops discussed the need to ensure

all people with cancer have access to affordable anti-cancer drugs (IOM 2013; 2014);

however, many questions remain about how such goals should be achieved.

       To inform this ongoing discussion, we evaluated how the implementation of

Medicare Part D – the largest expansion of prescription drug coverage in United States’

history – impacted the development oral anti-cancer medications. Medicare Part D was

signed into law on December 8, 2003, by President George W. Bush. Before

implementation of Part D legislation on 1 January 2006, only intravenously administered

chemotherapy was covered under Medicare through the Part B (i.e. medical insurance)

program. Although the legislation creating Part D prohibited the federal government from

establishing a national formulary, Part D regulations require all health plans to cover “all or

substantially all” drugs in six protected classes, which include anti-cancer medications, to

help ensure Medicare beneficiaries’ access to these treatments.

       Because the average age of diagnosis of cancer vary across different cancer sites,

the passage of Medicare Part D created exogenous variation to the relative size of

expansion for the insured market of oncology drugs across cancer sites. We exploit this

variation to study how expansion of insurance coverage affect innovation and, importantly,

how the average returns from these marginal innovations compare to their predecessors.

       We hypothesized that the Part D expansion of prescription drug insurance and

mandated coverage of all oral chemotherapy agents would fuel pharmaceutical R&D and

ultimately lead to a significant increase in the number of oral chemotherapy agents

approved by the FDA via two mechanisms. First, prior studies have shown that firms’ R&D

investments increase proportionally to their revenues from sales, which increased

substantially upon implementation of Part D (Scherer 2001; Lakdawalla et al. 2013).


                                                                                                4
Second, economic theory and prior research indicate that pharmaceutical firms’ R&D

investments are responsive to changes in expected profitability of the products in their

pipeline (Blume-Kohout and Sood 2013; Friedman 2009).

       We further hypothesized that the marginal oral chemotherapy agents approved

would be more likely to result from incremental innovation (e.g. “me-too” drugs) and

ultimately provide diminishing returns to health. This hypothesis stems from several

reasons. First, the short duration over which innovators try to bring innovations to market

in response the coverage incentive is likely to make innovations use the same technology

(e.g., molecular targets) as their predecessors and hence subject to the diminishing returns

of technology. Note that some have suggested that the development of me-too drugs

within a class is better characterized as a race, rather than the imitation of successful

products (DiMasi and Faden 2011), and hence there is no reason to believe that later

entrants would necessary have smaller effects than their predecessors do. While this may

be true on average, for me-too drugs marketed in response to exogenous insurance

incentive might reflect those that were faring less well in the race and wouldn’t have seen

the market otherwise, and therefore one can expect diminishing rertuns. Furthermore,

because Medicare Part D’s coverage mandates provide strong incentives to develop new

oral chemotherapy agents, but do not reward the incremental clinical benefits these drugs

provide over existing therapies, innovators have the incentive to bring to market

innovations with smaller health benefits. Indeed, the coverage mandates require that all

oral chemotherapy drugs be included in all Part D formularies regardless of their price or

performance relative to alternative treatments (Bowman et al. 2006).

       We repeat our analyses for innovations in the intravenous space for oncology, as a

falsification test, since Medicare coverage expansion did not affect these products.

       We discuss the implications of these hypotheses, and the corresponding results for

future public policies in this field in the Discussion Section.




                                                                                              5
Methods

       Our overall strategy was to isolate quasi-experimental variation in the incentives

created by the Part D program for pharmaceutical firms’ to develop new oral

chemotherapy drugs by leveraging the fact that cancer is not a single disease, but rather a

heterogeneous set of clinical conditions that tend to affect individuals at different ages. We

then used time-series data to evaluate the impact of this quasi-experimental variation on

the number of oncology drugs approved by the FDA and the incremental health benefits

provided by these drugs.



Study Sample

       We assembled data on systemic anti-cancer medications approved by the FDA

between January 1994 and December 2016. The dataset included the date(s) each drug

was approved, the clinical indication(s), and route of administration (oral or

injection/infusion; topically-administered drugs were excluded). We included initial and

supplemental FDA approvals for anti-cancer medications used with the intent of extending

survival, but excluded those used for chemoprevention or to alleviate side effects of cancer

treatment. Our final dataset included 230 FDA approvals for anti-cancer medications.

       We used a previously published list of survival benefits associated with the initial

FDA approval of anti-cancer drugs approved between 1995 and 2013 and followed a similar

approach to estimate the survival benefits for supplemental approvals in new indications

and for anti-cancer drugs approved in 1994 and 2014-2016 (Howard et al. 2015). Following

the approach used by Howard et al. (2015), we calculated the incremental survival benefit

for each approved indication using the improvement in median survival reported by the

randomized clinical trial(s) included in the drug’s label. We measured benefits by

subtracting the median overall survival in the control arm from the median overall survival

in the treatment arm; when estimates of overall survival were not reported, we used

estimates of progression-free survival. If results from more than one trial were included in

the label, we used a weighted average of the survival benefit estimates from both studies

(using only the results from the largest or most favorable trial made little difference to our


                                                                                                 6
findings). If a trial included more than two treatment arms (e.g. multiple doses of an

experimental treatment versus a control), we estimated survival benefits as those most

favorable to the experimental drug. We did not estimate survival benefits for approvals

based on non-survival endpoints (e.g. objective response rate) or single arm studies. Our

dataset therefore included estimates of survival benefits for 130 approvals.



Analytic Approach

       We addressed the challenge of isolating the effect of Medicare Part D’s coverage

expansion on the development of new oral chemotherapy agents amidst tremendous

advances in basic science by exploiting quasi-experimental variation in the proportion of

patients with different types of cancer who are Medicare-eligible at the time of their

diagnosis. We hypothesized that Part D would induce more innovation in oral

chemotherapy for cancer sites with a higher proportion of patients who are Medicare-

eligible. We defined the proportion of each cancer that was Medicare-eligible as the

proportion of patients who were ≥65 at the time of diagnosis, which we obtained from the

Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program database (Gold et al. 2013).

Our approach rests on the intuition that the variation in age at diagnosis is not caused by

the presence of anti-cancer drugs, but it could cause differences in how developing them is

prioritized by the biopharmaceutical industry if guaranteed Medicare coverage creates an

incentive.

       We also hypothesized that the incremental survival benefit of oral chemotherapy

agents developed in response to Part D would provide diminishing returns to health.

Therapies for cancers that have higher incidence rates in older individuals may provide

fewer survival benefits than those developed for cancers that afflict younger individuals

simply because younger patients have more years of life left to gain with an effective

treatment. Our fixed effects analytic framework leverages changes over time within a

cancer site, rather than comparing survival outcomes across cancers, to address this issue.

We also repeated our analyses using the relative incremental survival benefit of oral

chemotherapy (i.e., the hazard ratio) as our outcome measure.


                                                                                              7
       Lastly, we repeated all of our analyses using infused chemotherapy agents as a pre-

specified falsification test, in which the absence of effects is expected (Prasad and Jena

2013). Medicare pays for infused chemotherapy through the Part B outpatient medical

benefit. Coverage for infused agents was therefore similar before and after the creation of

Part D. A finding of no relationship between Part D and the number and survival benefits

of infused chemotherapy agents further strengthens the evidence that the estimated

effects in the market for oral chemotherapy are associated with the Part D coverage

mandates and not potential unobserved confounders.



Statistical Analyses

       We used fixed effects Poisson regression with robust standard errors to evaluate

how introduction of Medicare Part D was associated with changes in: (i) the number of anti-

cancer drugs approved by the FDA each year and (ii) the average number of months these

drugs improved median survival (as reported in the FDA label). Cancer sites were entered

as fixed effects to allow estimation of the within-cancer changes over time in each outcome

and thereby eliminate time-invariant differences in observed and unobserved

characteristics between different cancers that are potentially correlated with our outcome

measures. We also included year fixed effects to absorb differences across time in

unobserved characteristics that are common to all cancer sites and included a dummy

variable for the pre- versus post-Part D time period. We adjusted for the annual incidence

of each cancer over time to capture differential changes in the market for different cancers

that might impact pharmaceutical R&D investments. Finally, we included an interaction

term between the proportion of each cancer site that was Medicare-eligible and the post-

Part D time period. The coefficient from these interaction terms, which can be thought of

as a ratio of the outcome measures in the pre versus post-Part D time periods, would be

greater than one if cancer sites that have a greater relative exposure to the Medicare

market experienced larger increases in the outcome of interest.

       Our model specification is as follows:




                                                                                             8
       E(yjt|.) = exp((β0 + νj) + β1Postt + β2Sharej*Postt + βXjt + ωt), where

       νj = cancer-specific fixed effects

       ωt = year-specific fixed effects

       Postt = indicator for Post-Medicare Part D period

       Sharej = Cancer-site specific share of Medicare eligibility

       Xjt = Annual incidence of each cancer over time



       The clinical testing and approval process for new drugs is estimated to take

approximately 4-12 years (Blume-Kohout and Sood 2013). In our main analyses, we

therefore compared rates of our outcomes in the ten years before Medicare Part D was

enacted (January 1994-December 2003) to the 4-12 years after it was enacted (January

2008-December 2016). We hypothesized stronger effects over time after Part D was

enacted and conducted sensitivity analyses to examine such trends. All analyses were

conducted in STATA 14 (Stata Corp, College Station, TX).



Results

       The rate oral and infused chemotherapy agents approved by the FDA increased

substantially from the pre-Part D (1994-2003) to post-Part D (2008-2016) time periods;

however, there were important differences between oral and infused agents and across

cancer sites. The relative change in the number of oral chemotherapy agents approved for

particular cancers was strongly associated with the proportion of individuals with that

cancer who were Medicare-eligible (Figure 1a; p=0.004). We found a much smaller and

non-significant trend for infused chemotherapy (Figure 1b; p=0.23).



FDA approval of oral chemotherapy agents

       In multivariable fixed effects regression analyses, we found that greater exposure to

the Medicare market was associated with a greater increase in the number of oral

chemotherapy agents approved after Medicare Part D was implemented (Table 1). The

rate oral anti-cancer drugs were approved by the FDA increased an additional 5.7% (95% CI:


                                                                                           9
1.7, 9.8) after Part D was implemented for every 1% increase in exposure to the Medicare

market. We also evaluated the timing of these associations and found no evidence that the

relationship between the level of exposure to the Medicare market and oral chemotherapy

FDA approvals preceded Part D, but observed an increasingly robust trend in the time

periods post-Part D (Figure 2a).



Survival benefits of oral chemotherapy agents

       Greater exposure to the Medicare market was associated with a smaller increase in

the improvement in median survival reported in the FDA label for each newly approved

oral chemotherapy indication. The absolute improvement in median survival associated

with approvals after Part D was 3.2 percent (95% CI: 2.1, 4.3; p<0.001; Table 2) lower for

every 1% increase in exposure to the Medicare market. The effect of Part D on the relative

improvement in survival (i.e., the hazard ratio scale) with these drugs was an 8.0 percent

(95% CI: 6.1, 9.8; p<0.001) decline in effectiveness for every 1% increase in exposure to the

Medicare market. To translate these results to returns to innovation, we calculated an

elasticity of incremental absolute survival benefit with respect to pharmaceutical

innovation induced by Part D to be equal to -0.56.

       We performed several sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of our results.

First, our conclusions were very similar if we used negative binomial regression. Second,

our conclusions were similar if we focused only on the first FDA-approved indication for

each oral chemotherapy agent. We found a 2.3% (95% CI: 0.1, 4.5) increase in the rate of

first approvals and a 7.9% (95% CI: 6.0, 9.9) decrease in the relative survival benefits

provided by these therapies after Part D was implemented for every 1% increase in a

cancer site’s exposure to the Medicare market. Third, our findings were also similar if we

excluded individual cancers or therapies from the analyses. For example, after excluding

all lung cancer approvals we found a 5.5% (95% CI: 1.9, 9.3) increase in the approval rate

and 7.7% (95% CI: 5.8, 9.7) relative decrease in the survival benefits of newer oral

chemotherapy agents for every 1% increase in exposure to the Medicare market.




                                                                                             10
Infused Chemotherapy Falsification Test

       As hypothesized, we did not find evidence that the rate infused chemotherapy

agents were approved before versus after Part D implementation was associated with the

level of exposure to the Medicare market (Table 1; Figure 2b). We also did not find that the

improvement in survival provided by newly approved infused chemotherapy agents was

associated with the level of exposure to the Medicare market (p=0.5, Table 2; Figure 3b).




Discussion

       The creation of Medicare Part D was the largest expansion of prescription drug

insurance coverage in US history. We found that the Part D expansion was importantly

associated with an increase in the number of oral anti-cancer drugs approved by the FDA;

however, these drugs produced smaller improvements in survival over existing therapies

than their predecessors. Thus our findings suggest that there are diminishing returns to

incentives for pharmaceutical innovation induced by broad coverage mandates and that

more nuanced coverage and reimbursement policies may help maximize the health

benefits provided by future pharmaceutical innovations.

       Prior research has documented a robust response by the pharmaceutical industry

to changes in market size and insurance coverage. Acemoglu and Linn (2004) found that

larger markets driven by changes in US demographic trends were significantly associated

with an increase in the entry of new drugs. Our finding that increases in the annual

incidence of different cancer types over time were significantly associated with increases in

the number of chemotherapy approvals parallel these results. Blume-Kohout and Sood

(2013) found that implementation of Part D was associated with significant increases in

industry-sponsored clinical trials for drug classes most likely to be affected by Medicare

Part D. Our findings of substantial increases in the approval of oral anti-cancer drugs

corroborate their work and add an important evaluation of the health benefits provided by

the drugs eventually brought to market.


                                                                                             11
         The coverage mandates in Part D are not linked to clinical benefits, and there are no

pricing constraints in this market. Thus the mandates to include “all or substantially all”

anti-cancer medications on Part D formularies severely constrain health insurers’ ability to

negotiate on the basis of a drug’s clinical or economic value by eliminating the threat of

excluding the drug from the formulary (Ramsey et al. 2016). The ability to restrict the use

of a product if it does not represent good value can serve as a powerful tool to lower drug

prices. In 2012, Sanofi reduced the price of Zaltrap in half after Memorial Sloan Kettering

Cancer Center publicly refused to use the drug, arguing that it was twice as expensive and

no more effective than a similar medicine, Avastin (Pollack 2012). More recently, value-

based formularies have been tested as a way to improve value within a health care system

(Yeung et al. 2016). An often-touted benefit of increased innovation – especially of

duplicative efforts to develop “me too” drugs – is that the resulting competition works to

lower drug prices; however, we have previously found that there is currently little pressure

to lower prices in the oral anti-cancer drug market, even in the presence of increased

competition (Bennette et al. 2016). This may be justified if these drugs produce benefits for

different subgroups of patients; however, little evidence exists that this is the case. Thus,

Part D coverage mandates coupled with high prices provide strong incentives for

pharmaceutical firms to continue developing oral anti-cancer drugs even if the specific

market is relatively saturated and they offer few benefits over existing therapies (Bach

2014).

         Importantly, our findings of diminishing returns to health from increased

pharmaceutical innovation apply only due to expanded prescription drug coverage under

Medicare. The results do not apply to average or marginal investments made by the

pharmaceutical industry in response to basic science advances or clinical opportunities.

Recent advances in molecular and genomic science have fueled tremendous progress in

anti-cancer therapies. Investments from pharmaceutical firms to develop new drugs that

leverage these advances may – and if successful, likely will – return substantial health

benefits to society. But many of these new treatments are also likely to be extremely




                                                                                                12
expensive, putting even more pressure on policymakers and health insurers to ensure

affordable access for patients.

       How can we as a society ensure patients’ access to anti-cancer drugs? Coverage

mandates like those included in Medicare Part D do help protect patients’ access, but they

distort the market and create incentives for innovation that may heighten the underlying

issue of anti-cancer drug prices rising faster than inflation and the health benefits they

provide in the long run (Howard et al. 2015; Bennette et al. 2016) . More nuanced coverage

mandates that are linked to a drug’s value or an incremental clinical benefit, might help

protect patients’ access to the most valuable or effective therapies while leaving insurers

some leverage in negotiations with manufacturers (Bach and Pearson 2015). Another

policy option, value-based pricing, would financially reward pharmaceutical firms in a

manner that was proportional to the clinical benefits their drugs provide patients, and

could therefore provide a powerful additional incentive for firms to invest in developing

treatments that have the greatest potential health benefits for patients. We believe that

accelerating efforts to develop and implement a transparent coverage and reimbursement

system that is linked to the clinical benefits a drug provides would thus help improve

current and future patients’ access to the most effective therapies.

       Our study has several limitations. First, we estimated health benefits using the

improvement in median survival per drug. Although there are challenges in using median

survival to compare clinical benefits of treatments across different cancers, it is reasonable

for these analyses because we evaluate incremental benefits within cancers. Indeed,

median survival is the most commonly reported metric of absolute health benefit in the

clinical trials supporting FDA approval for the drugs in this analysis. That said, median

survival measures do not incorporate potential impacts on quality-of-life and may be

inadequate in capturing the health benefits of drugs that offer a small percentage of

patients the chance of long term benefits. Second, we did not include estimates of survival

benefits for drugs approved on the basis of surrogate endpoints or single arm studies.

However, we do not expect this limitation to bias our results, as we found a very similar

relationship between the rate drugs were approved and exposure to the Medicare market


                                                                                              13
among only approvals based on survival benefits (4.2% versus 4.6%). Lastly, there may be

other factors, such as scientific advances or federal research investments, that were

differential across cancers and that could have confounded the relationships we observed

if they were also correlated with the proportion of newly diagnosed individuals with a

specific cancer that were eligible for Medicare. Importantly, we did not observe similar

trends in the market for infused chemotherapy, which we expect would be similarly

impacted by most scientific advances (e.g. discovery of a new molecular target) that may

have differed across cancer sites over time. Moreover, we observed a stronger association

over time after (but not before) Part D was implemented for oral agents, which further

suggests that the effects we observed are causal.

       In conclusion, we found diminishing returns to health from increased incentives for

pharmaceutical innovation created by Medicare Part D’s coverage mandates for oral

chemotherapy. Alternative coverage policies could create more targeted incentives for

pharmaceutical research and development investments and ultimately help maximize the

health benefits gained from future innovations.




                                                                                           14
References
Acemoglu D, Linn J. Market size in innovation: theory and evidence from the pharmaceutical
        industry. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. August 2004:41.
Bach P. Could High Drug Prices Be Bad For Innovation? Forbes 2014.
Bach PB, Pearson SD. Payer and Policy Maker Steps to Support Value-Based Pricing for
        Drugs. JAMA. Dec 15 2015;314(23):2503-2504.
Bach PB. Limits on Medicare's ability to control rising spending on cancer drugs. The New
        England Journal of Medicine. Feb 5 2009;360(6):626-633.
Bennette CS, Richards C, Sullivan SD, Ramsey SD. Steady Increase In Prices For Oral Anti-
        cancer Drugs After Market Launch Suggests A Lack Of Competitive Pressure. Health
        affairs. May 1 2016;35(5):805-812.
Blume-Kohout ME, Sood N. Market Size and Innovation: Effects of Medicare Part D on
        Pharmaceutical Research and Development. Journal of Public Economics. Jan
        2013;97:327-336.
Bowman J, Rousseau A, Silk D, Harrison C. Access to cancer drugs in Medicare Part D:
        Formulary placement and beneficiary cost sharing in 2006. Health Affairs 2006; 25(5):
        1240-1248.
CMS proposes to test new Medicare Part B prescription drug models to improve quality of
        care and deliver better value for Medicare beneficiaries. 2016;
        https://http://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2016-
        Fact-sheets-items/2016-03-08.html. Accessed April 6, 2016.
DiMasi JA, Faden LB. Competitiveness in follow-on drug R&D: a race or imitation? Nature
        Reviews Drug Discovery 2011; 10: 23-27.
Downing NS, Aminawung JA, Shah ND, Krumholz HM, Ross JS. Clinical trial evidence
        supporting FDA approval of novel therapeutic agents, 2005-2012. JAMA. Jan 22-29
        2014;311(4):368-377.
Friedman JN. The Incidence of the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit: Using Asset Prices to
        Assess its Impact on Drug Makers. Harvard University; 2009. Job Market Paper.
Gold LS, Buist DS, Loggers ET, et al. Advanced diagnostic breast cancer imaging: variation and
        patterns of care in Washington state. J Oncol Pract. Sep 2013;9(5):e194-202.
HHS Pharmaceutical Forum: Innovation, Access, Affordability and Better Health.
        http://www.hhs.gov/hhs-pharmaceutical-forum/. Accessed May 21, 2016.
Howard DH, Bach PB, Berndt ER, Conti RM. Pricing in the Market for Anti-cancer Drugs.
        Journal of Economic Perspectives. 2015;29(1):139-162.
Institute of Medicine. Delivering Affordable Cancer Care in the 21st Century: Workshop
        Summary. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2013. doi:10.17226/18273.
Institute of Medicine. Ensuring Patient Access to Affordable Cancer Drugs: Workshop
        Summary. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2014. doi:10.17226/18956.
Kim C, Prasad V. Cancer Drugs Approved on the Basis of a Surrogate End Point and
        Subsequent Overall Survival: An Analysis of 5 Years of US Food and Drug
        Administration Approvals. JAMA Internal Medicine. Dec 2015;175(12):1992-1994.
Lakdawalla D, Sood N, Gu Q. Pharmaceutical advertising and Medicare Part D. Journal of
        Health Economics. Dec 2013;32(6):1356-1367.



                                                                                           15
Loftus P. New Push Ties Cost of Drugs to How Well They Work. Wall Street Journal2015.
Mailankody S, Prasad V. Implications of Proposed Medicare Reforms to Counteract High
       Cancer Drug Prices. JAMA. May 5 2016.
Martell RE, Sermer D, Getz K, Kaitin KI. Oncology drug development and approval of systemic
       anti-cancer therapy by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The Oncologist.
       2013;18(1):104-111.
Morgan S, Kennedy J. Prescription drug accessibility and affordability in the United States and
       abroad. Commonwealth Fund Pub 1408, 2010; vol. 49.
       http://www.commonwealthfund.org/~/media/Files/Publications/Issue%20Brief/2010/J
       un/1408_Morgan_Prescription_drug_accessibility_US_intl_ib.pdf. Accessed August
       2017.
Morgan S, Lopert R, Greyson D. Toward a definition of pharmaceutical innovation. Open
       Medicine. 2008;2(1):e4-7.
Pollack A. Sanofi Halves Price of Cancer Drug Zaltrap After Sloan-Kettering Rejection. New
       York Times. November 8, 2012.
Prasad V, Jena AB. Prespecified falsification end points: can they validate true observational
       associations? JAMA Jan 16 2013;309(3):241-242.
Prasad V, Kim C, Burotto M, Vandross A. The Strength of Association Between Surrogate End
       Points and Survival in Oncology: A Systematic Review of Trial-Level Meta-analyses.
       JAMA Internal Medicine. Aug 2015;175(8):1389-1398.
Ramsey SD, Lyman GH, Bangs R. Addressing Skyrocketing Cancer Drug Prices Comes With
       Tradeoffs: Pick Your Poison. JAMA Oncology. Apr 1 2016;2(4):425-426.
Scherer FM. The link between gross profitability and pharmaceutical R&D spending. Health
       Affairs. Sep-Oct 2001; 20(5):216-220.
Yeung, K., Basu, A., Hansen, R. N., Watkins, J. B., & Sullivan, S. D. (2016). Impact of a Value-
       based Formulary on Medication Utilization, Health Services Utilization, and
       Expenditures. Medical Care. DOI: 10.1097/MLR.0000000000000630




                                                                                             16
Figure 1. Relative change in number of FDA approvals in (a) 2011-September 2016 (post-Part
D) compared to (b) 1994-2003 (pre-Part D) by a cancer’s exposure to the Medicare market.




                                                                             (a)




                                                                            (b)




                                                                                        17
Figure 2. Percent change in number of (a) oral anticancer medications and (b) infused
chemotherapy agents approved in various time periods, relative to number approved 1994-
1998, for every 1% increase in a cancer site’s exposure to the Medicare market. (NOTE:
Estimates are from Poisson regression models with robust standard errors and adjusted for
changes in the annual incidence of the cancer site over time.)




                                                                        (a)




                                                                        (b)



                                                                                       18
Figure 3. Percent change in the survival benefits from (a) oral anticancer medications and (b)
infused chemotherapy agents approved to treat cancer in various time periods, relative to
those approved 1994-1998, for every 1% increase in a cancer site’s exposure to the Medicare
market. (NOTE: All estimates are from Poisson regression models with robust standard
errors and adjusted for changes in the annual incidence of the cancer over time.)




                                                                           (a)




                                                                           (b)



                                                                                            19
Table 1. Relative change in the rate chemotherapy agents are approved by the FDA, in pre-Part D
(1994-2003) versus post-part D (2008-2016) time period. Models included cancer and year fixed
effects and a binary indicator for post-Part D period.

 Independent variable                                 Relative         95% CI            p value
                                                      change
 Oral chemotherapy
      1% increase in exposure to Medicare              1.057         1.017, 1.098         0.005
      market
      1% increase in annual incidence                  1.406         1.111, 1.781         0.005
 Infused chemotherapy
      1% increase in exposure to Medicare              1.014         0.993, 1.036          0.2
      market
      1% increase in annual incidence                  1.225         1.070, 1.403         0.003




                                                                                             20
Table 2. Relative change in absolute survival benefits reported in drug’s label in pre-Part D (1994-
2003) versus post-part D (2008-2016) time period. Models included cancer and year fixed effects
and a binary indicator for post-Part D period.

 Independent variable                                        Relative          95% CI         p value
                                                             change
 Oral chemotherapy:
      1% increase in exposure to Medicare market              0.968         0.957, 0.979       <0.001
      1% increase in annual incidence                         0.810         0.686, 0.957       0.013
 Infused chemotherapy:
      1% increase in exposure to Medicare market              1.018         0.969, 1.069         0.5
      1% increase in annual incidence                         1.317         0.875, 1.983         0.2




                                                                                                 21
