                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               EAST ASIAN FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                         Randall Morck
                                         Bernard Yeung

                                      Working Paper 23845
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23845


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




This working paper is intended for the Handbook of Finance and Development. We are grateful
to the editors, Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine for helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
East Asian Financial and Economic Development
Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 23845
September 2017
JEL No. G0,N25,N35,O1,O16,O53,P1,P11,P5

                                          ABSTRACT

Japan, an isolated, backward country in the 1860s, industrialized rapidly to become a major
industrial power by the 1930s. South Korea, among the world’s poorest countries in the 1960s,
joined the ranks of First World economies in little over a single generation. China now seems
poised to follow a similar trajectory. All three cases highlight the importance of marginalized
traditional elites, intensive early investment in education, a degree of economic openness, free
markets, equity financing, early-stage coordination of firms in diverse industries via arrangements
such as business groups, and political institutions capable of curbing the power of families grown
wealthy in early-stage rapid development to make way for prosperity sustained by efficient
resource allocation to high-productivity firms.


Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
CANADA
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

Bernard Yeung
National University of Singapore
Mochtar Riady Building
15 Kent Ridge Drive
BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
Singapore 119245
bizdean@nus.edu.sg
1.      East Asian Financial and Economic Development

A complete discussion of Asian development is too vast a topic for a single chapter. We focus on East
Asia, and on that region’s most successful large economies – Japan and South Korea. This omits
fascinating developmental histories of successfully developed small economies – Hong Kong, Taiwan,
and Singapore. We then focus on China, the region’s largest economy and its ongoing rapid
development.


In describing each country’s ascent, our focus is on how it overcame (or in China’s case, is overcoming)
critical coordination problems that Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) shows to block the rapid rise of living
standards in low-income countries. Of course, other things affect economic development as well, but
the East Asian success stories we summarize suggest that they do so, in a large part at least, by
contributing to the solution of these coordination problems. In both late 19th century Japan and post-
war Korea, functioning free market institutions, a degree of openness to the global economy, working
stock markets, and passably good business group governance during critical high-growth periods are
evident. In China, after a long series of politically and ideologically driven policies led to economic
retrogression culminating in widespread poverty, a sequence of bold reforms raised the country into the
ranks of middle-income economies. We argue that China’s prior reforms leave it well-positioned to
follow Japan and Korea into the ranks of high-income economies. In all three cases, this final stage was
(or will be) closely accompanied by institutional changes or pressures to curb the power of elites grown
wealthy in earlier stages of development.




2.      Financing Economic Development

The development literature highlights many impediments blocking rapid economic growth. Critical
impediments fell away in Japan, South Korea, and China, allowing rapid growth for substantial periods.
Some features of these countries’ histories are not transferable. For example, all three are relatively
homogenous ethnically, which Easterly and Levin (1997) argue facilitates development. Other features
they share are of ambiguous relevance. All share a Confucian-Buddhist religious tradition, which
Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986) associate with rapid economic growth, but earlier studies link to
backwardness (e.g. Weber 1915; Fairbank et al. 1960). All three also share a German legal origin (La


                                                   1
Porta et al. 2008), a factor whose economic interpretation is problematic (see e.g. Beck et al. 2003). This
section reviews key strands of the finance and development literature, highlighting studies relevant to
the subsequent sections describing the ascents of Japan, South Korea and China. The literature is too
large to cover thoroughly, so we focus on studies directly relevant to their financial development or to
political, legal, or other institutional features relevant to their financial development.


Basic institutions


One very fundamental impediment to rapid financial development is traditional extractive elites – feudal
landowners, regional warlords, court mandarins, and the like - who benefit from the status quo and
protect their vested interests by blocking institutional reforms, even reforms as basic as universal
education (Acemoglu et al. 2002; Rajan and Zingales 2003, 2004). China, Japan and South Korea were
traditional extractive economies, and none was ever a European colony, either of settlement or
extraction, though all three were briefly occupied by Western powers at the ends of major wars – Japan
and South Korea after World War II and China after the Boxer Rebellion of 1899-1901. Japan’s
traditional nobility, disgraced by its inability to repel Admiral Perry’s U.S. gunboats, was overthrown by
reformers who comprehensively and selectively replaced Japan’s discredited traditional institutions with
institutions they perceived to be global best-practice. Japanese gunboats did much the same in Korea,
which was a Japanese colony of extraction from 1910 to 1945, when its Japanese colonial extractive elite
was expelled. Most colonial-era physical plant that survived the World War was devastated during the
Korean War; however, intangible institutions such as the legal system remained. China’s tumultuous 19th
and 20th-century history, culminating with Mao’s purges of traditional elites and customs, likewise left
China an institutional tabula rasa. Albeit at great cost to their citizens, all three countries had become
institutional “blank slates”, on which institutional reformers could draw anew.


Easterly and Levine (2016) show that former European settler colonies tend to have more growth
enhancing institutions. Glaeser et al. (2004) argue that this empirical regularity turns on settlers’ human
capital (education); while Acemoglu et al. (2014) argue settlers brought a broad array of institutions
relevant to financial development and other dimensions of development. Japan had unusually high
levels of literacy before its comprehensive institutional reboot, which included measures to modernize
education. Both South Korea in 1952 and China in 1978 had high illiteracy rates, but both undertook
major educational reforms that rapidly lifted education levels before the advent of high growth.
Intensive investment in education may well be important in providing abundant skilled labor to make

                                                      2
foreign institutional imports operational. However, North Korea, which adopted the institutions of
Stalin’s Soviet Union, is also thought to have increased literacy rapidly after the Korean War, though
official statistics are unavailable. North Korea’s continued poverty in contrast to South Korea’s ascent to
the First World supports that argument of Acemoglu et al. (2001; 2014) that bad institutions can retard
growth even if education levels are high.


Efficient Capital Allocation for a Big Push


Efficient allocation of capital is known to matter more than magnitude of investment to economic
growth (King and Levine 1994; Levine 2005; Wurgler 2000); and inefficient capital allocation is attributed
to barriers to external financing (King and Levine 1993ab; Rajan and Zingales 1998; Beck et al. 2000,
2004; Love 2003). Efficient capital allocation in high-income economies turns on technologically
innovative upstart firms obtaining external capital. Because developing economies can grow rapidly
using off the shelf technologies, capital allocation was long thought less important than the magnitude
of investment at earlier stages of development (Harrod 1939; Domar 1946; Lewis 1954). However, this
view misapprehends the complexity of the problem of economic development.


Capital allocation is thought to matter critically to rapid economic development because successful
development entails constructing complex networks of interdependent firms (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943;
Murphy et al. 1989). A high-income economy is a complex network of firms, each critically depending on
the mere existence of uncounted other firms. Firms buy inputs from other firms, relying on the existence
of multiple competing suppliers of every input to protect them from monopolistic pricing, shoddy
quality, and hold-up problems of all sorts. Each such firm, in turn, relies on multiple competing firms to
supply each of its inputs, as do their suppliers, their suppliers’ suppliers, and so on. Every firm likewise
depends on selling its output to multiple competing buyers, so that no monopsony buyer can drive
down the price. These buyers likewise have buyers, as do their buyers. Every such firm relies on positive
externalities from hosts of tangible and intangible public goods – highways, power grids, court systems,
laws, accepted business practices, and the like – financed with general taxes made lucrative by the
existence of the whole network.


New firms, typically unprofitable at first, even in developed economies, are especially vulnerable to
bottlenecks in the network. The isolated state-of-the-art steel mill surrounded by a subsistence
economy is economically unviable. Surrounded by a sparse network of other firms, its position can be


                                                     3
little better. Monopolistic providers of raw materials, power, or transportation can “hold up” (Hart and
Moore 1990) the steel firm by demanding monopolistic prices or side-payments, supplying low-quality
goods or services, or regularly imposing costly delays. Monopsony buyers of steel can likewise “hold up”
the steel mill to force down the price of the mill’s products or applying other extortive tactics. Complete
contracts in a perfectly efficient legal system let the parties involved commit to prices before making
irreversible investments, but contracts always incomplete and contract enforcement is expensive and
uncertain, and more so in lower-income economies (Djankov et al. 2003). Unless the steel mill has
alternate suppliers and customers, it has no choice but to accept such treatment from other firms that
do have alternative business partners or that have political influence sufficient to drive home their
terms. Sparse network problems are still critical barriers to entry in low-income economies today (Weiss
and Weber 2017).


The problem of capital allocation in a developing economy is thus the coordinated investment needed
to construct an entire network of interdependent firms. Western European economies took centuries of
trial and error to develop such networks. Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) argues that low-income economies
can be transformed rapidly into high-income economies via the centrally coordinated establishment of
this entire network, each component going into place and expanding to meet the needs of all the
others. This necessitates firms in new sectors operating at inefficient economies of scales and/or
refraining from exploiting market power for a time as the network forms. That is, individual firms must
be run altruistically: not maximizing profits and perhaps eating losses deliberately for the good of the
whole. Corporate governance directed towards firm value maximization precludes such behavior, and so
impedes rapid economic development (Murphy et al. 1989).


Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) thus argues for a state-orchestrated Big Push, in which central planners lay out
this entire ecosystem, pruning back firms that threaten other firms and spreading capital to where
network as a whole currently needs growth. State-control, he argues, is essential because


        “Existing institutions of international investment (floating of shares and loans) are inappropriate
        to the task of industrialisation of a whole area. They deal with too small units, and do not take
        advantage of external economies. Capital mostly goes to individual enterprises. There has never
        been a [private sector] scheme of planned industrialisation comprising a simultaneous planning
        of several complementary industries.”



                                                    4
Japan and South Korea both accomplished this transition to high-income economy status. Both
encountered precisely the coordination problem Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) envisions. Both tried to solve
it with state-directed development with, at best, very limited success. Easterly (2006) argues that the
close business-government interdependencies intrinsic to a state-led Big Push so encourage political
rent-seeking (corruption) as to make this growth strategy perversely detrimental to development. This is
because the vast economic powers a state-run Big Push assigns to government officials make corrupting
and controlling those officials the highest return investment option available to established firms
positioned to benefit from hold up strategies.


In fact, both Japan and South Korea ultimately achieved successful transformations into high-income
economies by freeing market forces to let large extraordinarily broadly diversified business groups of
predominantly equity-financed firms coordinate the simultaneous rapid growth of multiple firms across
multiple industries. The patriarch at each group’s apex allocates that group’s resources by command and
control, coordinating investments in group firms across multiple different sectors. Competition among
business groups for workers, consumers, capital, and exports limits the perverse incentives problems
Easterly (2006) finds in state-run Big Push development programs. Rather, competing business groups,
each orchestrating its version of Big Push coordination, can advance economy-level development.
Indeed, in Japan and Korea, the largest groups comprised substantial shares of their national economies
(Samsung member firms are about 12% of South Korea’s GDP), so group-led Big Push coordinated
expansions mobilized much of each nation’s resources. During early industrialization, large business
groups’ objectives arguably align with rapid overall economic development. In this way, both countries
ultimately relegated rapid development to a private-sector-led Big Push centrally planned at the
business group level. Both countries then confronted the problem of dismantling these structures once
their economic purpose was achieved.


China seems on a different course, but might merely be partway along what may turn out to be the
same trajectory. The Communist Party of China (CPC) exercises strong central control over large
networks of firms in multiple industries throughout the country. In theory, the CPC might orchestrate
the state-directed Big Push Rosenstein-Rodan originally prescribed. The system seems organized to
incentivize sub-government officials and SOE top managers to deliver tangible growth subject to a Party
loyalty constraint, and SOE bank top executives to help them along. However, this development strategy
seems vulnerable to Easterly’s (2006) critique of state-led Big Push policies, which stressed their
vulnerability to political rent-seeking (Krueger 1976). Corruption is a serious issue in China (Lü 2000) and

                                                     5
its SOEs are less profitable than other firms, despite their access to subsidized capital and numerous
regulatory privileges (Berkowitz et al. 2016). Such problems ultimately forced Japan and South Korea to
liberate market forces, abandon dirigisme, and let privately-controlled business groups coordinate
capital allocation. China may yet have to cross the bridge.


Transition


Once a functional network of competing firms is in place, an economy can draw abreast of other high-
income economies. Sustaining growth from that point on requires ongoing productivity enhancement. In
existing high-income economies, productivity growth arises from innovation, which is often disruptive
(Fogel et al. 2008). Productivity growth is a process of creative destruction, wherein new upstart firms
arise, destroying (partially at least) the value of old established firms (Schumpeter 1911). Efficient capital
allocation – directing capital to upstart innovators and away from relatively lethargic established firms—
now becomes the central social purpose of the finance sector. The allocation of capital is thus central to
sustaining rapid economic growth in both developing and developed economies (Levine and King 1993),
though efficiency entails capitalizing the necessary network of interconnected firms in the former and
capitalizing innovative upstart firms in the latter.


The owners of the established firms created in a successful Big Push rationally prefer the status quo,
and corrupting government officials to erect regulatory barriers to entry that prevent creative
destruction can become their highest return investment. Ascent into the ranks of high-income countries
requires avoiding this Middle Income Trap, in which economic growth slows after an initial spurt of rapid
development. Always developing, but never developed, entrapped economies’ big business sectors are
left the preserve of business dynasties descended from their first generation business elites, grown
wealthy amid early-stage development, who use political influence to lock in a status quo favourable to
them and their heirs (Olson 1963; Rajan and Zingales 2003, 2003a, Morck, Wolfenzon and Yeung, 2005).
Haber (1991, 1997) posits this as an explanation for Latin America’s slow growth.


Japan’s early-stage business elite, arguably already cowed by the wartime military dictatorship, was
displaced entirely by late 1940s reforms under US military occupation. Professionalized management at
established firms and a burst of highly innovative entrants newly listed after World War II – Cassio,
Honda, and Sony and many others – boosted Japanese productivity growth for decades thereafter.
Korea’s early stage business elite, tarred by high-profile corruption scandals arising out of their efforts to


                                                       6
influence top politicians, is in the crosshairs of reformers. China is now a middle-income country, and
the scions of its Communist era revolutionary leaders left now hold privileged positions. Communist
princelings’ rent-seeking might yet ensnare China in a Middle Income Trap that preserves their power
and wealth. Or China may follow in Japan or Korea’s footsteps, outlined below, by more
comprehensively liberalizing to step past the snare. The Xi administration initiated an aggressive anti-
corruption campaign in Dec. 2012, which may further market development (Lin, Morck, Yeung, Zhao,
2016).

Financial Systems and Stages of Development


Japan and South Korea both relied primarily on stock markets during their high growth periods, and
China’s SOEs have tapped its stock markets. China is well positioned to rely on its stock markets to
finance the growth of private sector firms. In both Japan and Korea, the equity financing provided risk-
tolerant capital to business group controlling shareholders establishing new firms, or expanding existing
firms, to complete needed supply chains. When bank financing was also used, it often made firms and
business groups vulnerable to bankruptcies in economy-wide shocks, more common and severe in lower
income economies (Morck et al. 2011). Highly leveraged firms and groups failed, those dependent more
on equity financing survived episodes of market-wide volatility. This accords with Demirguc-Kunt and
Maksimovic (2002), who find stock market development, but not banking system development,
conducive to more firms using long-term external finance.


These observations need not contradict cross-country studies. Prior work (, e.g., Beck and Levine 2002,
2004; Levine 2002; Luintel et al. 2008) links overall financial development to growth, finds whether the
financial system is bank or market-centered to be comparatively unimportant, especially after
controlling for legal origin. Bank-centred and market-centered financial systems may solve different
economic problems (Levine and Zervos 1998), and might even arise endogenously in response to an
economy’s economic conditions. 1 Thus Japan (Morck and Nakamura 2005) and Germany (Fohlin 2005)
both relied on stock market-centered financial systems to industrialize, but then relied on bank-
centered financial systems to reconstruct their economies after World War II. 2 The problems of initially

1
    Banks and markets may ease different transaction costs (Levine 1997; Huybens and Smith 1999; Demirgüç-Kunt
    and Levine 2001). Boyd and Smith (1998) thus model credit and equity markets as complements.
2
    Japanese banks in the 19th and early 20th century followed Scottish banking practice in requiring liquid collateral,
    such as inventories, and thus primarily financed trade rather than long-term investment. Japanese banks that did


                                                            7
industrializing a low-income country and of rebuilding a war-devastated industrialized economy may
require differently structured financial systems, and that of sustaining growth through creative
destruction in a high-income economy may require yet another. Initial industrialization requires the
coordinated roll-out of multiple firms in many different sectors, a task to which pyramidal business
groups may be well suited, and is a highly uncertain proposition, for which more risk-tolerant equity
financing may have advantages. In contrast, post-war reconstruction is primarily fixed capital investment
to rebuild economic networks of firms whose viability is well-tested, tasks at which bank-centered
financial systems might be better-suited (Jackson 2001, p. 184).


Once an economy reaches (or returns to) the technological frontier, a bank-centered financial system
may prove less adept at financing ongoing disruptive innovations critical to growth through creative
destruction. Banks in many developing economies are controlled by tycoons or powerful business
families. Such banks might be ordered to decline loans to entrants whose creativity might destroy their
existing capital (Morck and Yeung 2003; Rajan and Zingales 2003) and to lend energetically to other
firms their controlling shareholder run during downturns, leaving the bank insolvent but apt to be bailed
out by the state (Caprio and Levine 2002; Caprio, Lauven and Levine 2007; Lauven and Levine 2005).
Such risk-shifting was evident in bank-financed business groups in both Japan and South Korea during
their ascents. Similar episodes litter the financial histories of Latin America (Haber 2004, 2005; Maurer
and Haber 2004; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Zamarripa 2003), Russia (Laeven (2001), and other
economies (Morck, Yavuz and Yeung 2011).


Japan is rearranging its financial system towards reliance on equity markets to allocate capital (Franks et
al. 2014).3 This is driven in part by banks’ seeming reluctance to finance productivity boosting innovative
upstarts, which often have few collateralizable assets and small odds of spectacular success. Information
about new technologies is costly and financial markets’ ability to mobilize the wisdom of crowds may
trump the careful scrutiny of a banker, however well-informed (Allen and Gale 1999). Also, Gompers
and Lerner (2004) show how the venture capital cycle, critical to financing disruptive innovation in the
United States, depends on venture capital providers regularly bringing successful ventures via initial


    finance long-term investment, generally controlled by the tycoons whose firms their financed, tended to fail in
    downturns (Morck and Nakamura 2005). Cameron et al. (1967) links sound banking systems to positive
    economic developments in Scotland and Japan. More competitive banking systems are generally associated with
    faster growth (Claessens et al. 2005).
3
    No such shift is evident in Germany (Franks et al. 2015).


                                                         8
public equity offerings to raise capital to fund a new cycle of start-ups. Finally, the dividends paid to
shareholders can be cut if success fails to materialize; whereas debt-financing requires regular interest
payments from the outset or the firm is bankrupted. This basic characteristic of equity seems
advantageous to entrepreneurs raising external financing for uncertain innovative ventures. Japanese
banks are also thought to be holding-up their borrowers, demanding they take out more and more
costly loans and avoid risky investments (Weinstein and Yafeh 1998; Morck et al. 2000). Consistent with
all of this, Brown et al. (2013) link stock market development to investment in innovation and credit
market development, albeit less strongly, to fixed investment.




3.        How Japan Grew Rich

Japan’s “high growth” period, from roughly 1880 to the mid-1920s, lifted its initially very low living
standards to European levels.4 The broad outline of Japan’s growth trajectory features an era of
unsuccessful state-directed economic development followed by an extended period of small
government, free market economic policy, and stock-market centered corporate finance. This
description jars with many popular accounts of the Japanese economy, and so requires elaboration.


Isolation

In 1543, Portuguese ships brought Christian priests and firearms and, in 1549, Saint Francis Xavier, who
initiated an intense Jesuit mission to convert Japan. Spain’s 1570 conquest of Manilla, abetted by
converts, left Japanese Catholics’ loyalty in doubt. In 1597, Chief Minister Toyotomi Hideyoshi ordered
nine missionaries and seventeen converts crucified. In 1614, Hidetada, second Shogun of the Tokugawa
Dynasty, expelled all missionaries for bringing disharmony and made Christianity a capital offense.
Underground Christianity persisted nonetheless. A Christian uprising in 1637 provoked intensified
efforts to stamp out residual foreign influence. In 1645, to restore harmony, Tokugawa Hidetada
decreed the expulsion of all foreigners and a mandatory death penalty for foreigners entering Japan and
Japanese returning from abroad.


For over two centuries thereafter, Japan was a world apart. Contact with the outside world was

4
    This section draws heavily on Morck and Nakamura (2005, 2007) throughout.


                                                       9
restricted to one hermetically sealed Dutch trading post on a tiny artificial islet off Nagasaki. After a
time, a trickle of foreign trade resumed and Western ideas – now called “Dutch Learning” – could be
discussed, albeit very cautiously and in limited circles. A rigid and perversely inverted caste system left
merchants socially inferior to warriors (samurai), peasants, and tradespeople. Japanese civilization,
incomparably superior, had no use for foreigners’ grotesque mechanical trinkets and treacherous
notions, nor for foreigners’ opprobrious preference for consorting with the exorable merchant caste.


Shock Therapy

Japan’s penchant for executing shipwrecked sailors did not go unnoticed. In 1853, to protect its whalers
and pursue its Manifest Destiny, the United States dispatched one fourth of its navy (eight vessels,
including four steam-powered “black ships”), commanded by Admiral Matthew Perry, to end Japan’s
isolation. Killing the foreigners proved difficult because their ships could change direction regardless of
the wind and bombard Japanese ships and positions from far away. Tokugawa Ieyoshi despondently
acquiesced to a treaty opening Japan to US citizens and trade. Other foreign countries then negotiated
similar terms.


These agreements came to be called Unequal Treaties because they created “foreign concessions”:
enclaves, subject to foreign, rather than Japanese law, courts and police; but no analogous zone of
Japanese jurisdiction adjacent New York or London. The foreigners pointed out that Western countries
had never made being Japanese a capital offense, but the counterargument fell on deaf ears. The
Unequal Treaties are still regarded as exemplifying foreigners’ contempt for Japanese. However, the
unequal treaties cut tariffs to very low levels and created foreign courts in these enclaves, in which
business disputes could be settled. These gave Japan its first exposure to Western institutions.


Appalled by the craven Tokugawa, a band of young samurai overthrew the dynasty and seized power in
the name of the Meiji Emperor in 1868. The leaders of this Meiji Restoration, once in power, quickly also
realized how relatively weak Japan had become and concluded that the Japanese must “learn foreign
ways [to] better resist foreigners” (Boot 2006).


To this end, the 1871-1872 Iwakura mission visited Europe and America to investigate foreign ways, and
returned with a profound sense of Japan’s backwardness. From the 1870s on, waves of young Japanese
studied abroad, and all manner of Western experts were brought to Japan. Though local samurai


                                                    10
rebellions erupted, opposition to reform faded. The Meiji rulers concluded that the comprehensive
rebuilding of Japanese institutions according to global best practices was their only path forward. Japan
adopted a Scottish banking system, British naval command, German legal code, American free press,
Westminster bicameral parliament (its lower house elected by males with substantial property),
universal compulsory public education (literacy in 1868 was roughly 40% for males and 15% for females,
but rapidly rose into the 90% range for both),5 and diverse other Western institutional bits and pieces.


A Failed State-led Big Push

Japanese merchants were interested in trading with foreigners, but initially saw huge risk and scant
profit in importing and operating foreign technology. The Meiji rulers wanted an economy capable of
producing state-of the-art weaponry, and the craven merchant class was not up to the task. The
government therefore established state-owned enterprises in every industry judged essential to
upgrading the economy, each run by foreign-trained Japanese sometimes advised by foreign experts.
Each state-owned enterprise was commanded to get the most modern technology available up and
running as rapidly as possible.


A large stable of state-owned national champion firms was in place within a few years, but the cost was
huge. The Meiji leadership understood that rapid industrialization would cost money, but envisioned
state-owned mining firms’ profits footing the bill for all other state-owned enterprises until they became
profitable. This was not unreasonable. At the time, Japan had huge natural resource wealth, and state-
owned coal, copper, gold, iron ore, and silver mining operations were all substantial (Morck and
Nakamura 2017).


Unfortunately, all the state-owned enterprises (including the mining firms) continued losing increasing
amounts of money. Each SOE had its orders, and the government had committed to provide the
necessary funds. The SOEs thus had what Kornai (1986) calls soft budget constraints: market forces were
not in play, so economic efficiency was at best subordinate to obeying orders. SOE losses mounted, and
suppressing the final samurai mutiny (1877 to 1878) left the government’s fiscal situation dire. By 1879,
Japan was in a full-fledged financial crisis. The first banks, largely capitalized by ex-samurai who
accepted government bonds in compensation for the cancellation of their hereditary pensions, issued

5
    See Kornicki (1998, p. 275) on the provenance and reliability of the early estimates and the rapid development of
    the education system.


                                                          11
bank notes unreservedly to keep up their lending (Tang 2013). Inflation soared; the government was
broke, the currency collapsed, and its sovereign debt was unsalable.


As a last resort, with economic and state collapse looming and no other option available, the Japanese
government resigned itself to a liberal free market economy. Finance Minister Matsusaka Masayoshi
created the Bank of Japan with a monopoly on banknote printing, rewrote banking regulations to allow
the formation of a new generation of stable banks, and slashed subsidies to state-owned enterprises,
demanding financial reports from each. Using the state-owned enterprises’ balance sheets and income
statements to highlight the costs to date and ongoing maintenance costs of each state-owned
enterprise, Matsusaka succeeded in imposing hard budget constraints and mobilizing widespread
political and public support for a mass privatization. In the world’s first mass privatization, he auctioned
off almost all the SOEs to private owners in the 1880s. Thereafter, the government focused on building
infrastructure and a handful of remaining state-owned enterprises with military importance.6


A Successful Private-sector Big Push


Burnt by the 1879 financial crisis, a generation of Japanese leaders embraced Victorian liberalism, free
markets, and minimal government (Morikawa 1992; Morck and Nakamura 2007). The state would
henceforth finance courts, schools, and national defense. The yen went on the gold standard, and
Japanese sovereign debt discounts narrowed (Sussman and Yafeh 2000). There would be no more huge
subsidies to business, no more industrial policies subsidizing national champion firms, and no more
state-sponsored national building (Miyajima 2004). For the next four decades, market forces would
allocate resources. These decades were also relatively, though not entirely, corruption free – perhaps
because officials were both relatively well paid and markedly less worth corrupting under laissez-faire.


The mass privatization reallocated capital assets and talented employees to old merchant families, such
as the Mitsui (silk merchants) and Sumitomo (copper mine owners), as well as new entrepreneurs who
would end up running huge business empires – Mitsubishi, Nissan, and others. These could do what the
government could not: each initially used one or more mining firms as cash cows, recycling mining
earnings (grown substantial under private-sector management) into revitalizing industrial SOEs that

6
    A few subsidies persisted. A Mistubishi company continued receiving subsidies for carrying government mail.
    Politicians condemned Mitsubishi for tunneling these subsidies to finance investment in other businesses. For a
    list of major firms privatized, prices, and buyers see Morck and Nakamura (2007).


                                                         12
ended up in their hands or into buying assets and hiring employees away from floundering ex-SOEs
(Morck and Nakamura 2017).7 As these business empires grew, they channeled the earnings of their
mines and other firms grown profitable into capitalizing yet more new firms to provide inputs, services,
or uses for excess outputs needed by existing group firms. These business groups were dubbed zaibatsu
(財閥, lit. financial cliques).


A nationwide banking system developed from the 1880s on (Mitchener and Ohnuki 2009), and most
such business groups contained a bank. However, group banks did not lend to finance new group firms
capital spending or operating costs in most cases. Rather, most group banks seem to have adhered to
Scottish banking practices (notably, the real bills doctrine), requiring that loans be backed by liquid
collateral, preferably inventories. Bank loans thus facilitated transactions and zaibatsu expansion was
ultimately largely equity financed, especially in the early 20 th century.8


The exceptions to this rule are of special interest. A few zaibatsu used their banks to finance capital
investment by their other member firms. Called “organ banks” (Kato 1957), these group industrial
development banks are associated with financial instability. The most prominent case was the Suzuki
zaibatsu, whose Taiwan Bank collapsed in 1923 when a major earthquake caused a sharp recession,
initiating a chain reaction of bankruptcies that destroyed the entire highly leveraged zaibatsu. Other
organ banks similarly disappeared in consolidations forced by 1920s banking reforms (Okazaki and
Sawada 2007). Banks controlled by business tycoons or families who also control industrial firms are
associated with capital misallocation in recent decades (Morck, Yavuz and Yeung 2011). This may be
because their controlling shareholders can tunnel income away from their bank to bail out their
industrial firms, confident that the government would bail out their banks (La Porta et al. 2003, Lauven
and Levine 2009).9


Economy-wide diversification might offer sufficient risk reduction to justify high leverage in diversified
group firms in high-income economies (Hoshi et al. 1990, 1991; though see also Morck and Tian 2017),
However, developing economies typically have much higher market-wide risk (Morck et al. 2000), so

7
    On the importance of mining earnings to each nascent business group, see Morck and Nakamura (2017).
8
    One exception, the Sumitomo zaibatsu, refrained from doing so until the 1930s. Earnings from its copper mines
    sufficed to finance expansions and new subsidiaries until that point.
9
    Johnson et al. (2000) call the transfer of assets or liabilities at non-market prices between separately listed
    member firms of a business group to enhance the wealth of its ultimate controlling shareholder “tunnelling.
    Tunnelling is regarded as a corporate governance problem by the losing firm in the transaction.


                                                         13
cross-industry risk-sharing provides creditors limited protection from bankruptcy risk in their more
frequent and severe economy-wide downturns. In contrast, shareholders must accept systematic risk
without recourse to bankruptcy protection.


As industrialization accelerated, the profits of their mines and other existing firms became insufficient to
finance needed group expansions, so the zaibatsu tapped Japan’s stock markets (Rosovsky 1961). Stock
exchanges, founded in Tokyo and Osaka in 1878, now became important sources of start-up capital
(Franks et al. 2014). The late 19th and especially the early 20th century saw massive equity issuances, as
existing firms used the proceeds of equity issues to capitalize growing ranks of listed subsidiaries
(Miyajima 2004). These equity issues reshaped the business groups into pyramids: the tycoon or
business family directly controlling one (or a few) listed or unlisted firms, each of which controlled a set
of listed firms, which each controlled yet other listed firms, and so on. Pyramidal structures of multiple
tiers of listed firms controlling listed firms controlling listed firms, also prominent in other late
industrializing countries in the West, became the defining characteristic of Japan’s zaibatsu business
groups.


Most of these pyramidal business groups were ultimately controlled by business families, but some
were run by entrepreneurs and capped by widely held apex firms. For example, Nissan zaibatsu was a
pyramidal group with a widely held firm at its apex. Lower tier firms’ shareholders had to accept their
firms being run to benefit other firms in the group. To retain control, Nissan’s tycoon needed only to
retain the support of shareholders in the apex holding company by maximizing its share shareholder
value, subsidiaries in lower tiers of the Nissan pyramidal business group likewise had to accept their
fates.


Morck and Nakamura (2007) argue that Japan’s great zaibatsu were the private-sector mechanisms for
coordinating the development of multiple sectors of the economy that Rosenstein-Rodan asserted do
not exist. By the turn of the 20th century, each major zaibatsu had at least one member firm in every
significant sector. Because all the firms in a zaibatsu were under the unified control of its tycoon or
business family, its member firms could be made to forego profits and even to lose money to benefit the
group as a whole. This “full set” diversification was necessary so that no group firm had to depend on a
non-group firm, which might “hold-up” the group firm by exerting market power, providing low quality
inputs, or otherwise behaving opportunistically. With multiple firms along all intersecting product chains
under common control, hold-up problems could be eliminated (Grossman and Hart 1986).

                                                    14
The zaibatsu firms enthusiastically imported foreign technology (Goto 1982). Zaibatsu corporate
governance was at the business group level, and entailed a centralized managerial control and
coordination, whereby the apex firm collected the profits of the entire business group and then
strategically financed expansions of existing group firms and the creation of new firms embodying new
technologies deemed important to the group as a whole (Aoki 1988, p 223). This could force individual
firms to forego profit maximization by forsaking hold-up opportunities, so the group as a whole could
transcend market imperfections that would render freestanding firms unviable (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943;
Khanna and Yafeh 2007). Miyajima (2004) highlights how the controlling shareholder monitored and
controlled the capital investment of zaibatsu member firms in multiple industries. Hasegawa (1938)
describes a centralized budgeting process applied across all member firms in the Nissan zaibatsu.
Nissan’s founder describes reallocating profitable firms’ earnings to subsidize unprofitable, but
necessary, firms and new firms necessary to the nation and the group’s long term prospects (Morck and
Nakamura 2007, p 583). Mitsubishi member firms remitted their entire earnings to the apex firm for
reallocation to where the group needed higher investment, much as Soviet state-owned enterprises
remitted their entire earnings to the central planners in Moscow for reallocation across the economy in
accordance with the central plan. In general, the zaibatsu used earnings from profitable firms to finance
investment in new or unprofitable, but necessary, firms (Almeida and Wolfenzon 2006). Morikawa
(1992, p. 105) observes that zaibatsu member firms’ managers recognized that an individual firm’s
fortune sometimes had to be sacrificed for the group’s “national” objectives (Morikawa 1992, p. 105).


Group firms were not always needed to provide inputs or buy outputs. Sufficient numbers of competing
independent firms arose in some sectors. Most importantly, the Unequal Treaties had forced Japan
open to foreign trade, so imports and exports could fill in missing pieces of the economic network where
transportation costs were not prohibitive. In particular, Japanese firms with insufficient domestic
markets attain efficient economies of scale by exporting. By the 1910s, Japanese exports were
everywhere (Meissner and Tang 2017), and Japanese supply helped sustain the Allies in World War I.
This dovetails with Trindade’s (2005) argument that trade openness can mitigate coordination costs in
Big Push industrializations.


Asia’s First High-income Economy


Japan’s high growth period, from the 1880s to the 1920s, saw the country rise into the ranks of
developed economies. Despite damage to its Kanto plain industrial heartland in a severe 1923

                                                   15
earthquake, Japan’s economy attained an industrial composition not greatly different from many
Western economies by the end of the 1920s: natural resources were greatly diminished; manufacturing
and services were greatly expanded. While Japan’s 1930s per capita GDP still trailed that in the richest
Western economies, Japanese living standards were on par with those in much of Europe.


Japan sought international recognition as an industrial power in the interwar era (Kajima 1967). Its 1895
defeat of the Qing navy and colonization of Taiwan, 1905 defeat of the Russian navy, 1910 colonization
of Korea, and important role in supplying the Allied Powers in World War I made Japan a player in Great
Power politics. Many Japanese took pride in what other Asians saw as an increasingly aggressive
expansionism. Japanese students resented racism they experienced while abroad. When the post-WW I
Versailles Treaty Commission, chaired by the Progressive US President Woodrow Wilson, rejected a
Japanese proposal for a racial equality clause, liberal Japanese were justifiably dismayed.10 Nationalists
began reminding people why Japan had decided to “learn foreign ways” in the first place.


As the Great Depression devastated the Western economies, intellectuals and pundits everywhere
proclaimed that capitalism and democracy had run their course. Reischauer (1988, p. 305) describes
“widespread condemnation of the zaibatsu, particularly by the supporters of the military, as elements of
Western decadence in Japanese society, corrupters of the parliamentary system, and money grubbing
betrayers of Japan’s imperial destiny” in the interwar decades. The zaibatsu controlling shareholders, in
particular, were berated for their myopia in putting their short-term profits ahead of the country’s long-
run greatness. As the global economic collapse deepened, Japanese nationalists remembered, or
imagined they remembered, a purer and nobler samurai warrior spirit. The military was constitutionally
well placed to exploit this sentiment.


Military Dictatorship

Japan’s constitution made the military High Command, like the civilian government, subject only to the
Emperor, who was expected to be a mere figurehead. This left the High Command legally free of civilian
oversight. The Prime Minister could neither command nor discipline Japan’s admirals and generals; and
when secret societies of sincere officers began assassinating elected politicians, the government and
courts were impotent. Soon, only military officers accepted high government positions and, by the mid-


10
     Wilson promoted eugenics and imposed racial segregation across the US federal civil service (Goldberg 2008).


                                                          16
1930s, Japan was effectively a military dictatorship. Cabals of sincere zealots within the army
orchestrated Japan’s attacks on China, East Asia and Hawaii, with sometimes apparently secretly
appalled civilian government officials rushing to look like they were in charge (Buruma 2003).


The military had no patience for market forces. The wartime economy was a command and control
system (Okazaki 1994; Noguchi 1998). The military assigned each plant production quotas and
controlled agency costs by militarizing human resources management. The role of the zaibatsu families
in the wartime economy is controversial. Seemingly, they cheered the war effort on, but the military had
effectively marginalized them and cut their income streams by severely curtailing dividends to provide
more retained earnings to finance the war effort.


American Occupation

At the end of WWII, Japan in 1945 was in ruins. US firebombing had incinerated major cities and
industrial plants, and the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki had shattered the military’s plans
to deter occupation by promising a protracted guerrilla war. Japan surrendered unconditionally and an
American military government under General Douglas McArthur ruled the country from 1945 to 1952.


Economic policy under the US occupation was largely delegated to New Dealers weaned on the
extensive state intervention in the US economy characteristic of successive Roosevelt Administrations.
New Deal economists in the US, led by Adolf Berle and Gardiner Means (1933), had sought to rebuild
popular trust in the U.S. economy with reforms attacking big businesses. Key to this strategy was a
series of reforms aimed at dismantling the pyramidal business groups, quite similar to Japan’s zaibatsu,
controlled by America’s “robber barons”. These reforms (Kandel et al. 2017) included escalating taxes on
inter-corporate dividends, a prohibition on large scale business groups in public utilities, reforms to
sever ties between large banks and industrial firms they previously controlled, and reforms subjecting
companies whose assets are shares in other companies to regulation as mutual funds. While no single
reform was critical, the ensemble effectively rid the US of pyramidal business groups by 1950.


Reassigned to Japan, New Deal economists saw similar reforms rebuilding confidence in capitalism and
democracy in Japan. Moreover, reforms would be easier because Japan was under a military occupation.
Nuanced regulatory reforms were unnecessary: the occupation government simply seized and
reallocated both the zaibatsu families’ shares and the inter-corporate equity blocks that held their


                                                    17
pyramidal groups together. The zaibatsu families, compensated with government bonds that quickly lost
most of their value amid high post-war inflation, left the stage.


When the US withdrew in 1952, it left a post-New Deal US corporate governance system in place (Morck
and Nakamura 2005; Franks et al. 2014). Most Japanese corporations had widely held share ownership
and were run by salaried professional managers (sarariman). After stock markets reopened, a wave of
IPOs unrivaled since the high growth period capitalized new corporations – Honda, Sony, Sanyo, and
many others – that would become global leaders in subsequent decades (Mehrotra et al. 2011).


Japan Resumes its Place

The major task the Japanese government and financial system had before them was not economic
development, but the reconstruction of a war-devastated developed economy. For this, bank financing
was preferred, for reconstructed property, plant and equipment served well as collateral and proven
pre-war managers and skilled employees awaited work.


Unpropitious developments in Japanese equity markets reinforced this tilt towards debt financing. The
dispersed share ownership structures the American regime created left Japanese firms vulnerable to
hostile takeover and greenmail threats.11 To halt this, Japanese banks organized groups of firms into
mutual defense organizations called keiretsu (Sheard 1991, 1994). To form a keiretsu, a group of firms
(often former member firms of the same pre-war zaibatsu) acquired blocks of stock, typically two or
three percent stakes, in each other. Each firms’ income statement could be left unaffected by issuing
and acquiring shares to balance its increased dividend expenses against its increased dividend income.
Thus, in a keiretsu of 30 firms, each taking two percent stakes in each other, each firm in the group
would end up 60% owned by the other keiretsu member firms collectively, but with no single firm having
a dominant block in any other. The organizing bank’s equity block, though capped after 1953, was often
the largest among these. Every keiretsu member firm remained fully protected against hostile takeovers
because the keiretsu member firms pledged never to sell their “stable” shareholdings in each other.12


The system was remarkably effective. When the American raider T. Boone Pickens sought to take over

11
   Greenmail refers to a target firm buying back all of its shares that a hostile bidder has purchased, typically at a
   high price that provides the hostile bidder a side payment for abandoning the takeover.
12
   Franks et al. (2014) note that all this occurred under a regime of strong de jure shareholder rights, highlighting
   the de facto inadequacies of such measures.


                                                           18
the seemingly widely held Koito Auto Parts Company in 1987, he found he could not (Morck and
Nakamura 1999). Nineteen other Japanese firms, each with a small stake, collectively owned a majority
of Koito stock and would not tender, nor even acquiesce to Pickens, the firm’s largest shareholder by a
huge margin, having a single representative on Koito’s board. Pickens had to walk away. Japanese
managers were thus insulated from pressure to increase shareholder value. Hostile takeover and
greenmail threats had ceased, but so had initial public offerings. Firms turned to bank-loans and bank-
financed bonds to fund reconstruction. This was facilitated by keiretsu member firms propping each
other up to reduce every member firm’s overall bankruptcy risk and cost of debt (Hoshi et al. 1992). The
next decades, from the mid-1960s to the 1980s saw the full reconstruction of the economy and Japan’s
emergence, or rather, its re-emergence, as a major developed economy.


From the 1950s to the 1980s, Japan’s economy grew rapidly, and the country resumed its place among
the world’s richest economies. This was the era of Japan’s global pre-eminence as an alternative
economic model characterized by bank-centered financing and state coordinated economic growth
(Morris-Suzuki and Seiyama, eds. 1989). Japan’s keiretsu member firms were good financial performers
in the 1960s and bank oversight of their corporate governance was lauded (Aoki and Patrick 1994;
Kaplan and Minton 1994; Li and Li 1996). Bank corporate governance oversight and intra-keiretsu
bailouts (Morck and Nakamura 1999) made high leverage to finance capital investment projects seem
viable for keiretsu member firms (Hoshi et al. 1990, 1991). With the post-war era of low-risk high return
reconstruction drawing to a close, Johnson (1982) credits Japanese bankers and bureaucrats, especially
in the Ministry of International Trade and Investment (MITI), for competently orchestrating Japan’s rise
by circumventing market forces. Less restrained Japan-experts began lauding the country as a new
alternative economic model, superior to capitalism (critiqued by Beason and Patterson 2004).


Such claims now seem inflated at best. Like industrial policy bureaucracies elsewhere, MITI “picked
losers” (Beason and Weinstein 1996). Nogochi (1998) links the post-war system of bureaucratic
planning, ineffective shareholder rights, and rigidly hierarchical human resources management to the
wartime military economic system. Nonetheless, Japan recovered smartly under this system. Perhaps
oversight by bankers and bureaucrats is appropriate to reconstructing a war-devastated developed
economy.13

13
     Germany also initially industrialized under a 19th century equity market dominated financial system, but
     recovered rapidly from wartime economic devastation under a bank-led financial system (Fohlin 2005).


                                                           19
In the late 1980s, capital continued flowing into Japanese businesses and a bubble economy developed
(Uchida and Nakagawa 2007). Lacking viable internal investment projects, Japanese firms poured
borrowed money into real estate speculation and foreign acquisitions. The bubble burst at the end of
the 1980s, triggering a financial crisis. Firms whose banks more heavily involved in real estate loans were
especially adversely affected (Gan 2007). “Zombie firms,” keiretsu member firms not quite bankrupt but
insulated from takeovers, staggered along (Hoshi and Kashyap 2004, Peek and Rosengren 2005). A long
era much slower growth ensued.


While these years have been referred to as Japan’s lost decades, unemployment and inflation were low
and most people got on with their lives. Japan had resumed its position on the technological frontier
and, deprived of easy growth through catching up, now began to retool large sections of its economy
grown unaccustomed to innovation and the economic instability associated with creative destruction.
Japan’s financial system is reverting to its pre-war market-centred form (Franks et al. 2014). Initial public
offerings resumed (Katsuna 2004; Katsuna et al. 2009), though bankers feature prominently on many
newly listed firms’ boards (Takahashi 2015). Corporate takeovers resumed, but new takeover defenses
swiftly followed – notably the 2005 advent of the poison pill (Arikawa and Mitsusada 2011), a US anti-
takeover defense. However, the power of banks remains prominent. For example, Japanese takeover
look quite different from those in other countries. In the United States, takeover targets’ share prices
rise and bidders share process can move either up or down (Morck et al. 1990). In Japan, bidder firms
share prices rise on news that they are launching takeovers (Kang et al. 2000), and target firms’ share
prices fall – apparently because mergers are often bank-orchestrated bailouts of a financially distressed
bidder by a more financially solvent target tied up in cross-holdings (Mehrotra et al. 2011). Increasing
numbers of Japanese firms are also turning to season equity issues to raise capital. Elsewhere, firm’s
share prices drop on news of seasoned equity announcements because investors presume the firm
would not issue more shares unless its shares were overvalued (Myers and Majluf 1984). But Japanese
shares rise on seasoned equity issue announcements, probably because equity financing reduces their
dependence on their banks (Cooney et al. 2003). The use of executive stock options also boosts share
prices (Hideaki et al. 2005), perhaps because it incentivizes CEOs to attend less to banks and more to
shareholders.


Nonetheless, many large Japanese firms, especially those in keiretsu, remain deeply tied to and
dependent on their banks (Yasuda 2007; Amiti and Weinstein 2011). Bankers serve on many firms’
boards (Kaplan and Minton 199x; Morck and Nakamura 1999) and banks often hold large equity blocks

                                                     20
in the firms they lend to (Hodder and Tschoegel 1985; Prowse 1990; Flath 1993). Such bank connections
are associated with depressed share valuations (Morck et al. 2000) and capital misallocation (Hoshi and
Kashyap 2004; Peek and Rosengreen 2005). Firms with stronger bank ties borrow more, pay higher
interest rates, and post lower profits (Weinstein and Yafeh 1998), suggesting their banks have hold-up
power (Rajan 1992). Hanazaki and Horiuchi (2000, 2001) argue that this system compromised the quality
of bank lending as well. Nonetheless, a broad change of direction towards a market-centred financial
system akin to that in the United States is increasingly evident (Aoki et al. 2007; Franks et al. 2014).




4.         How South Korea Grew Rich14

Korea during its Goryeo Dynasty (918–1392 A.D.) was an economically sophisticated realm that traded
with Arabs, Japanese, Chinese, and Manchurians (Ho 2014). The subsequent Joseon Dynasty (1392–1897
A.D.) shut out the world and Korea became known as the “hermit kingdom.” Christian missionaries,
preaching obedience to Rome, rather than the dynasty, grew increasingly pernicious and in 1758 the
dynasty outlawed Christianity. The religion was relegalized in 1785, but state-sanctioned pogroms killed
large numbers of Christians in 1801 and again 1866.


The dynasty’s foreign policy of sadae (lit. serve the great) entailed acquiescing to tributary status under
China and shutting out the rest of the world. This ended when Japan’s Captain Inoue Yoshika, having
learned his trade from Admiral Perry, steamed his Western-armed Japanese gunboats into Korean ports.
Emulating its treatment by the United States, Japan forced Korea to sign the “unequal treaty” of 1876
severing it tributary obligations to China, opening three ports to Japanese merchants, and granting
Japanese trading enclaves extraterritorial legal status. The Western powers followed suit, and a brief
period of modernizing reforms followed. However, the Korean Empire became a Japanese protectorate
in 1905 and a Japanese colony in 1910.


A Blank Slate

Japanese colonial rule is generally remembered for its ruthless destruction of Korean institutions: the
overthrow of Korea’s traditional aristocracy of Confucian sophocrats and landowners and the

14
     This section draws heavily on Lim (2000, 2012), Lim and Hahm (2006), and Lim and Morck (2017).


                                                         21
suppressing of its rigid caste system, which was similar to that of Tokugawa Japan. Although Kohli (1999)
and Shin and Robinson (2000) find some positive contributions in Japanese colonialism, such views are
controversial and revisionist (Haggard et al. 1997). The Japanese are roundly condemned for treating
Koreans deplorably (Cummings 2005, p. 135). An 1890s visitor describes “a wilderness of demons, rag,
dogs, unburied dead, vermin, squalor.” (James Scarth Gale, quoted in Cummings 2005, p. 136). When
colonial rule ended in 1945, 78% of Koreans were illiterate. However, ill intentions need not end badly.
Acemoglu et al. (2002) argue that stronger traditional institutions can impede economic development by
helping entrench elites protect their vested interests. A point of general agreement is that Korea’s
traditional institutions and elites were shattered by colonial rule, and Woo (1991) argues that the not
having a traditional elite greatly contributed to Korea’s ultimate success


The colonial era ended in 1945 with the peninsula’s partition into a Soviet-controlled northern sector
and a US-controlled southern sector. In 1948, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea)
and Republic of Korea (South Korea) gained independence. After a communist insurrection in South
Korea, North Korea’s army invaded in 1950, devastating the country as South Korea’s military retreated
to the southern extreme of the peninsula. A US-led counter-offensive pushed fighting back up to near
the Chinese frontier, whereupon the Chinese army responded pushing the South Koreans and
Americans back down to the southern tip. In 1953, a renewed US-led offensive pushed the front back to
roughly where it had been in 1950. Thus, armies trampled most of the peninsula multiple times.


For the second time, existing institutions and elites were destroyed. By 1953, few colonial era vested
interests retained any influence and little existing capital remained to defend in any event. South Korea,
perhaps more than any other country in modern history, was a “blank slate” on which new institutions
could be designed.


Syngman Rhee and Crony Capitalism

South Korea’s first president, Syngman Rhee, was a student of Princeton professor (and later US
President) Woodrow Wilson. Rhee valued education and rolled out universal compulsory public
education (Seth 2002). His core development policy channeled a massive flow of US foreign aid into
subsidizing businesses protected by an import substitution program run by people he trusted (Haggard
et al. 1991). Many of these businesses were remnants of Japanese-owned businesses he had seized
(without compensation) and privatized at subsidized prices to favored buyers (Lim 1999, 2003).


                                                    22
Privatized banks often went to the buyers of privatized industrial firms, who used their banks to finance
their purchases of their other firms (Cho and Kim 1997; Lim 2003).


Rhee’s education program raised literacy markedly (Azariadis and Allan 1990), but his crony capitalism
primarily enriched his family and his cronies. South Korea remained among the poorest countries in the
world. Virtually any country in sub-Saharan Africa looked to have better odds for rapid development and
dismayed US officials disparaged South Korea as a “foreign aid sinkhole” (Chapin 1969), though
Campbell and Tullock (1958) blame inept and naïve US economic advisors. Rhee was well-educated
about the workings of US government, and kept large-scale US aid flowing with few interruptions
through successive scandals and financial crises. The dismayed US officials were also right about its
efficacy. By 1959, South Korea’s living standards were no higher than in 1945 and North Korea seemed
the richer of the two countries. The state-owned Korea Development Bank was plagued by non-
performing industrial development loans; political cronies used their banks as cash cows to fund their
financially shaky other firms. Rhee seemed to be leading the country towards penury, and his attempt to
steal an election provided an excuse for ousting him in 1960 (Kim and Koh 1972).


Park Chung-hee and the Developmental State

A democratic election brought Chang John Myun to power on a platform of prosecuting corrupt
business leaders, cutting military spending and professionalizing the civil service (Han 1974). Rhee’s
terrified ex-cronies readily acquiesced to General Park Chung-hee seizing power in 1961 and holding it
until he was assassinated in a 1979 coup. Park, though a son of poor peasants, had studied at the
Japanese Military Academy in Manchukuo (Japanese-ruled Manchuria), then another Japanese colonial
possession, and later at the elite Tokyo Military Academy. He was consequently both aware of pre-war
Japanese institutions.


Park earned the gratitude of Rhee’s cronies by bailing out some of their businesses (though he
nationalized their banks), and their fear by threatening to restart Chang’s prosecutions (Lim 2002). He
earned the respect of the military by increasing its budget. He earned continued US aid by restoring a
veneer of democracy and cracking down hard on all further corruption. Park followed through with
Chang’s initiative to professionalize the civil service. Trained to look down on merchants, he viewed any
officers or officials who consorted with them as unworthy; and his successive administrations are
generally regarded as relatively, though certainly not totally, corruption-free.


                                                     23
Park’s most pressing challenge was retaining the continued support of the military by bringing South
Korea up to economic and military parity with North Korea. Some of his initiatives were unambiguously
successful. For example, to improve the health of military conscripts, the regime brought treated water
to the villages (Park 2009). Others were less well-considered. His first effort to spur the economy, an
inflationary import-substitution program, culminated in a financial crisis and a condition-laden US
bailout that greatly limited Park’s freedom of action (Haggard et al. 1991; Lim 2003).


His subsequent interventions in the economy became more narrowly focused – in the words of Amsden
(1991), more “disciplined.” His second effort centered on earning foreign exchange, needed for imports
important to the military (Lim 2003). Meeting regularly with exporting firms’ owners, Park tracked
individual firms’ exports, regularly rewarding successful exporting firms with subsidies (notably, state-
guarantees for their foreign borrowings) and their controlling owners with medals (Haggard et al. 1991;
Kim 2004). Thus, although protected from imports, Korean firms had to confront global market forces to
export. However, his guarantees of firms’ foreign borrowings triggered another financial crisis in 1969
when the inevitable moral hazard problems materialized. Park held to his guarantees of the
overleveraged exporter firms’ foreign debt and submitted to IMF conditions for a government bailout,
but left other firms on their own. The crisis reverberated through the domestic economy as financially
stressed firms borrowed at escalating rates from shadow banks, then called the curb loan sector. In
1972, Park ended the crisis by declaring a three-year debt moratorium, after which curb loan interest
rates were to reset to 16.2%, payable over 5 years, though market rates had been near 40% (Lim 2003).
This was essentially a state-enforced transfer from curb market lenders to borrowers.


Concerned with American’s failure to defend South Vietnam and the unrelenting threat from North
Korea, Park then launched his Heavy and Chemical Industries (HCI) drive, a massive effort to subsidize
domestic firms important to the military. Chosen firms received subsidized loans directly from the state
or through state-owned banks. However, Park now worried about firms with excessive debt, and so
encouraged firms to issue equity. The Korea Stock Exchange, founded in 1956, had previously played a
minor economic role. The 1970s saw a burst of equity financed capitalizations of new firms and
expansions of existing firms in pyramidal business group structures essentially identical to Japan’s pre-
war zaibatsu business groups. These structures, called chaebol (재벌, lit. wealth clan in Korean), thus
were capped by tycoon or business family-controlled apex firms with multiple listed subsidiaries, each
with listed subsidiaries of their own, and so on. However, the families, fearing loss of control, were
reticent about too much dilution of their inter-corporate control stakes. To push them along on his HCI

                                                    24
drive, Park had to continue the flow of subsidies.


As in Japan, government bureaucrats were credited with planning the development of these key
industries. At first, the state was quite likely directing the chaebol (Amsden 1992; Woo 1991), rather
than the converse. Woo-Cumings’ (1999) sees a genuine “state-capital partnership” of equals. Lim
(2000) and Hundt (2009) see an alliance. But, by the end of the 1970s, the balance had shifted and the
chaebol were widely perceived as having captured the state (Luedde-Nerath 1986; Chibbers 1999,
2005). Also as in Japan, the prescience of the government planners may well be exaggerated. Park’s HCI
Drive was restricted to a narrow set of firms, and his drive to generate foreign exchange had a narrowly
focused goal. Both were clearly important interventions, but no broader state direction of the economy
appears consequential during the Park years.


When asked why Lucky Goldstar (LG), one of Korea’s largest chaebol, established new firm after new
firm, the patriarch of its controlling family, Koo Cha-Kyung, made no mention of guidance from
government technocrats. Rather, Koo explains (Kim and Lee 2010) how


        “My father and I started a cosmetic cream factory in the late 1940s. At the time, no company
        could supply us with plastic caps of adequate quality for cream jars, so we had to start a plastics
        business. Plastic caps alone were not sufficient to run the plastic molding plant, so we added
        combs, toothbrushes, and soap boxes. This plastic business also led us to manufacture electric
        fan blades and telephone cases, which in turn led us to manufacture electrical and electronic
        products and telecommunications equipment. The plastics business also took us into oil refining,
        which needed a tanker shipping company. The oil refining company alone was paying an
        insurance premium amounting to more than half the total revenue of the largest insurance
        company in Korea. Thus, an insurance company was started. This natural step-by-step evolution
        through related businesses resulted in the Lucky-Goldstar (LG) group as we see it today.”


Conceivably, Koo was reticent about crediting government planners. However, accounts of Park’s
thoughts at the time support Koo’s version of events. The general was dismayed about the chaebol
families’ unpatriotic dereliction of duty in diverting HCI subsidies into other sectors, such as consumer
electronics and automobiles (Hundt 2009, p. 68).


The member firms in these pyramidal groups clearly engaged in complicated inter-corporate cross-
subsidies or “tunneling” (Lim 2012). This may have been, as Koo explains, to set up new firms to fill in

                                                     25
missing links in production chains or to expand existing firms to accommodate the needs of other group
firms. This sort of tunneling is growth enhancing if consistent with the chaebol coordinating a private-
sector “scheme of planned industrialisation comprising a simultaneous planning of several
complementary industries” that Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) thought impossible. Morck and Nakamura
(2007) argue that such a scheme was accomplished by Japan’s late 19th and early 20th-century zaibatsu
pyramidal groups, and South Korea’s chaebol may well have followed suit.


Like Japan’s great zaibatsu, Korea’s largest chaebol groups attained “full set” diversification: each had at
least one member firm in every significant sector. Also like the zaibatsu member firms, a chaebol’s
member firms preferred doing business with each other and avoided dealing with member firms of
another chaebol, as might be expected if avoiding hold up problems were paramount. Again like the
zaibatsu, the largest chaebol competed with each other, at least in export markets.


The chaebol may also have competed with each other domestically, but the largest among them were
now so huge that cartelization became a concern. Perhaps more important, the tycoons and heirs
controlling the major chaebol wielded vast economic power, which begat vast political influence. In the
1960s, the government could credibly claim to be directing the chaebol. By the late 1970s, their
positions were widely thought reversed.


When Park seized power in 1961, South Korea’s per capita income was barely half that of North Korea.
Despite recurring financial crises, South Korea had pulled far ahead and well into the ranks of middle-
income economies by the late 1970s. Many South Koreans remained poor and inequality was stark, but
a middle class was forming. Modern buildings were rising, and parts of Korean cities looked decidedly
prosperous. North Korea was clearly trailing ever further behind.


Chun Doo-hwan and the Transition to Democracy

By the late 1970s, Park’s HCL subsidies were out of control: inflation was soaring and foreign debt was
50% of GDP and another financial crisis loomed. In 1979, Park decided to end subsidies to businesses.
But before his decision could be announced, he was assassinated by the head of the secret service. The
military turned to General Chun Doo-hwan, who ruled from 1980 to 1987. Chun took over a bankrupt
government with no prospects for borrowing more money and, to gain international aid, reluctantly
acquiesced to liberalizing the economy. Subsidies ended, save for limited research and development


                                                    26
support. Like Japan a century earlier, in 1980 South Korea turned to laissez-faire economics as a
desperate last resort when all other options were closed off.


South Korea’s acquiescence to free market economics was less complete than Meiji Japan’s. While
productivity-levels in South Korea were rising towards those of high-income countries, South Korean
wages were kept comparatively very low. A rising labor movement sought pay increases commensurate
with Korean workers’ rising productivity. To preserve Korean firms’ global labor cost advantage, Chun’s
government ruthlessly suppressed labor unionization.


Unlike Meiji Japan at this stage, South Korea had yet to establish a functioning democracy. To suppress
criticism of his use of police power against labor, Chun imposed state security measures that, to many,
seemed more brutal and intrusive than those of the Park era.


Widespread labor actions and student protests brought down the military dictatorship in 1987. South
Korea established a multiparty democratic government, and became a stable democracy. Under
democracy, wages rose rapidly, approaching those of other high-income countries by the mid-1990s.


The established banks, kept independent of the chaebol, were reluctant to grant industrial development
loans. The chaebol consequently relied mainly on equity issues to expand existing firms and capitalize
new pyramid member firms. However, this risked unacceptably diluting the inter-corporate equity
stakes that held the chaebol together. To obtain debt financing, the chaebol established non-bank
financial institution member firms which then lent to other chaebol member firms of the chaebol at
lower rates than banks offered to independent firms. This appears to have reflected some mixture of
financial self-dealing within the group, chaebol member firms propping each other up to reduce their
bankruptcy risk (Yafeh and Khanna 2007; Bae et al. 2008) and lenders’ believing the chaebols to be too
big (or too politically connected) to fail (Gormley et al. 2015).15


The chaebol continued to expand, largely through share issues. Sprouting new listed subsidiaries, the
chaebol diversified further away from their heavy and chemicals industries focus. The transition to
democracy appears to have forced a change in the chaebol’s strategy (Mo et al. 2013). Henceforth,
rapidly rising wages diminished Korea’s labor cost advantage, but increasingly well-paid paid Koreans
became an increasingly lucrative domestic market.

15
     The chaebol were reliably bailed out except during in a brief period in the 1990s (Minnett and Yun 2015)


                                                          27
Investment, barely ten percent of GDP under Rhee, and around twenty-five percent of GDP under Park,
rose to nearly forty percent of GDP under democracy. South Korean per capita GDP rose rapidly, as
productivity rose rapidly (Young 1995).16 Foreign and domestic investors, seeing the huge returns
generated as this newly high-income economy formed, poured still more capital into South Korea; and
into other East Asian economies that seemed good bets to become high-income economies as well.
Kwon and Hwon (1995) find evidence of capital misallocation as this excess supply of capital became a
stock market bubble that expanded and then burst in the 1997 Asian financial crisis.17 After a brief
recession, productivity growth resumed, albeit at a slower pace consistent with a maturing economy
and amid concern about the suitability of the chaebol corporate governance model going forward (Lim
and Hahm 2006).


Throughout all of this, the chaebol dominated the South Korean economy. Baek et al. (2004) report that
chaebol firms took longer to recover, especially if they were more leveraged and their controlling
shareholders actual ownership (cash flow rights) were smaller. The chaebols’ eventual recovery may
have been aided by their substantial ongoing domestic market power (Jeong and Mason 1990; Yang and
Huang 1994; Aw et al. 2003).


Johnson et al. (2000) define as income transfers between member firms of a business group designed to
augment the wealth of the controlling shareholder at the expense of the income donor firms’ public
shareholders. Bae et al. (2002), Joh (2003), and Baek et al. (2006) report credible evidence of extensive
tunneling between member firms of chaebol before and during the 1997 crisis.


While potentially harmful to the share valuations of the income donor firms, tunneling between
member firms of economy-spanning business groups can facilitate the coordinated development of
firms in multiple interdependent sectors that Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) identifies as key to rapid
development. Almeida et al. (2011) report that the chaebol grew in two ways: (1) their controlling
families acquired and held direct equity ownership of high-earnings firms and (2) listed chaebol member
firms acquired and held control blocks in low-earnings firms. The second of these tended to decrease
the acquirer firms’ share prices. However, new chaebol member firms appear to have been critical to

16
   Young (1995) argues that other studies linking most of South Korea’s growth to factor accumulation mismeasure
   its productivity growth. See Ramazani and Markus (1993), Park and Kwom (1995), and others.
17
   Foreign capital inflow prior to the crisis suggests herding, but foreign investors appear to have played a
   stabilizing role during the stock market collapse by buying securities domestic investors were selling (Choe et al.
   2005).


                                                         28
the economy’s productivity growth (Feenstra et al. 1992). Also, Almeida et al. (2015) present evidence
that inter-corporate wealth transfers between each chaebol’s member firms were efficiency-improving
in the sense that capital flowed towards firms with more valuable growth opportunities.


The political influence of the chaebol remained, and successive democratic governments did little to
curtail it. Measures to regulate their inter-corporate equity control block structures merely altered those
structures without compromising the power of the controlling families. By the early 21st century, the
tycoons who had founded the great chaebol business groups were largely gone and control had passed
to heirs and to heirs’ heirs. Concerns about the competence of the new generations of controlling
shareholders grew as scandals grew more brazen.


Japan’s zaibatsu never got to this stage. Japan’s wartime military dictatorship imposed central planning
on the zaibatsu, effectively sidelining their controlling families. After the war, the American occupation
government seized the control blocks in zaibatsu member firms and relaunched them as freestanding
widely-held listed corporations. Such high-handed tactics were impossible in democratic South Korea.


The incongruity of what many Koreans deem a feudal corporate governance system in an otherwise
egalitarian democracy invites corporate governance reform. However, the chaebol families economic,
and hence political, influence make this a vexing political economy challenge (Haggard et al. 2003).
Defenders of the status quo point to the survival of pyramidal business groups in other high-income
countries. Canada was dominated by highly leveraged pyramidal groups in the 1990s, but these broke
up when interest rates spiked in the 1990s (Morck and Tian 2017). Kim (2016) suggests similar
vulnerabilities may be developing in Korean chaebol. Sweden’s economy remains dominated by large
pyramidal business groups, but their longevity appears due largely to political connections, rather than
high productivity (Hogfeldt 2005). Moreover, Swedish firms exhibit valuation patterns consistent with
tunneling (Bjuggren & Palmberg 2010) and debate about the future of Swedish business groups
continues (Henrekson & Jakobsson 2003; Larsson and Petersson 2017).


Chaebol reform returned to Korean headlines in 2017 when a corruption scandal involving Samsung heir
Lee Jae Yong led to his arrest and the impeachment and imprisonment for corruption of President Park
Geun-hye, the daughter of General Park Chung-hee. Calls for the democratization of South Korean
corporate governance resumed. The most prominent model for dismantling Korea’s chaebol is the
United States, where a series of New Deal corporate governance reforms in the 1930s legislated that


                                                    29
country’s pyramidal business groups out of existence (Morck 2005; Kandel et al. 2017) by taxing inter-
corporate dividends and estates, subjecting firms whose major assets are shares in other firms to
regulation as mutual funds, and limiting the number of tiers in pyramids in regulated public utilities.
None of these reforms was sufficient alone, but together they left the United States almost without
major pyramidal business groups by 1950. The most recent example of a country forcing the dismantling
of its pyramidal business groups is Israel. There, a campaign led by the pro-market Israeli business
newspaper The Marker culminated in the 2013 Law for Promotion of Competition and Reduction of
Concentration, which limits pyramids to two tiers of listed firms controlling listed firms. Given prior
reforms precluding the issuance of dual class shares (Hauser and Lauterbach 2004), this effectively limits
the scope for separating ownership from control via pyramiding.




5.         How China is Growing Rich

China’s Great Reversal

For centuries, China’s economy was large and comparatively advanced (Brandt, Ma and Rawski 2014).18
Even in the mid-19th century, China was still the largest economy in Asia and larger than the US economy
Bolt and Zanden 2014). In the late 18th and 19th centuries, China had sophisticated private-sector banks
with nationwide branch networks based in Shanxi, the inland terminus of the “tea road” caravan route
to Russia (Morck and Yang 2011; Huang 1992). The Rishengchang Bank, the first of the Shanxi banks,
was perhaps also China’s first joint stock company (Morck and Yang 2011).


China’s final imperial dynasty, the Qing (1644–1912), oversaw the massive economic reversal that all but
ruined the economy. The dynasty entrenched an interlocked patronage-dependent Manchu elite
(Brandt, Ma, Rawski, 2013) accustomed to an “iron rice bowl privilege” (Elliott, 2001) and increasingly
wary of potentially disruptive Western influence. The dynasty isolated Western trade to the Portuguese
enclave at Macau and a small sealed-off section of the riverbank in Guangzhou, which Western
merchants could visit briefly, under close supervision, and subject to the sometimes arbitrary caprices of
local bureaucrats, to trade with a small number of approved Chinese merchants. These state-sanctioned

18
     Brandt, Ma, and Rawski, 2014 present a comprehensive and excellent review of China’s economic history from
     the Song Dynasty (960) to the reforms of the 1990s.


                                                        30
monopolists sold Western merchants tea, silk and other Chinese products for silver. British merchants,
seeking a more advantageous medium of payment, turned to selling Indian opium to Chinese
merchants. This soon reversed the flow of silver (Brandt, Ma, and Rawski 2014).


To combat the rapidly growing opium addiction problem, the dynasty forbade the opium trade and
seized and destroyed all opium inventories in 1839. The British government, objecting to the seizure,
sent in gunboats that quickly routed Chinese defenses in the First Opium War. The 1842 Treaty of
Nanking, China’s first “unequal treaty”, opened five ports to British merchants, granted them
extraterritorial legal rights, and ceded Hong Kong to Britain.


Civil wars worsened China’s situation. Hong Xiuquan (1814-64), an unsuccessful civil service examination
candidate and the self-proclaimed little brother of Jesus, led the worst of these, the Taiping Heavenly
Kingdom Rebellion (1850 – 1864). At its acme, the rebellion severed southern China from Beijing, cutting
off internal trade and communications. The rebellion’s strength reflected “increasing poverty, natural
disasters, and incompetent government” (Schrecker 2004). Regional officials ultimately suppressed the
rebellion and restored Qing rule across China. The ensuing Tongzhi Restoration (1861–75) saw an “effort
to restore stability and prosperity by revitalizing orthodox Confucian ideology … and restoring regular
civil service examinations” (Brandt, Ma, and Rawski 2014).


Ongoing attacks on British subjects and continued resentment over opium sparked the Second Opium
War (1856 – 1860). Defeated again, China acceded to open more ports, create more extraterritorial legal
enclaves, and legalize opium and Christianity. China continued losing conflicts with Western powers and
later Japan, opening more treaty ports protected by extraterritoriality with each defeat (Brandt, Ma,
Rawski, 2014, p. 81). Japan gained suzerainty over Korea and colonized Taiwan in 1895. Russia seized
Manchuria the same year. Germany took Qingdao in 1898. Anti-foreign, anti-colonial and anti-Christian
sentiment intensified.


As in Japan, views divided about responding to the outside world. Hostility towards foreigners, viewing
them as a contamination to be eradicated, vied with arguments that China could only be saved by
adopting and adapting foreign ideas. However, unlike in mid-19th century Japan, where the latter view
won overwhelmingly, the debate continued at all levels in late 19th century China. The pro-reform “self-
strengthening” movement succeeded in reforming customs, initiating modernization of the military, and
establishing the Imperial Bank of China in 1897. High-level Qing mandarins led efforts in modernizing


                                                     31
China’s navy and tried to establish heavy industries such as steel mills. In 1898, the Emperor Guangxu
launched the Hundred Days’ Reform to curtail corruption, reform the military, and modernize education
by introducing medicine, science, and commerce and abolishing the Confucian-literature-based civil
service exam. The measures threatened entrenched elites, who rallied behind the Dowager Empress Cixi
to overthrow Guangxu and end the reforms. Furious about foreign influence challenging her monopoly
on power, Cixi endorsed the Boxer (Yihutuan, lit. Righteous Fists) Rebellion in 1900. Initially an anti-
foreigner militia, the Boxers killed foreign civilians, diplomats, missionaries and Chinese Christians. This
brought Western and Japanese troops into Beijing in 1901. Each successive conflict and loss to
foreigners accentuated China’s backwardness, drained its finances with new rounds of reparations
payments, deepened the entrenched elite’s opposition to the modernization that might have led to
economic recovery, and dimmed reformers’ hopes for a policy reversal.


The Shanxi banks faded away amid this chaos, and economic activity found refuge in the enclaves of
foreign extraterritorial jurisdiction created by the “unequal treaties.” Shanghai, a major port for
maritime trade from the latter 19th century on, hosted a new generation of Chinese banks (Ji 2003).
Foreign banks arose to finance trade with the West – notably the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp
(HSBC). The Bank of Communication, established in 1908, still exists. A foreign-stock trading house
(shanghao) facilitated the trading of foreign shares in the foreign concessions of Shanghai from the
1860s on, and a Hong Kong analog (Xiang-gang gupiao jingji xiehui) was formed in 1891. Markets for
Chinese shares only developed as the Qing dynasty fell. The first, active in 1911, was the Beneficent
Fragrance Tea House in Shanghai.


The Dowager Empress Cixi died in 1908, a day after the death of the Emperor Guangxu and
enthronement of the three-year-old “last emperor,” Puyi. In 1911, the Qing Dynasty collapsed, and
history records the establishment of the Republic of China in Nanjing by Dr. Sun Yat Sen. In reality, China
became a mere geographical expression, with sovereign warlords ruling former imperial provinces. The
Republic of China army, subsequently led by General Chiang Kai-chek, vied with Mao Zedong’s
communist guerrillas to gain control, often by co-opting regional warlords. Japanese invasions from
1931 on seized the Manchurian provinces and then penetrated deep into China. The civil war facilitated
Japan’s advances until 1937, when the Chang reluctantly agreed to combine forces with Mao’s
guerrillas. After Japan surrendered to the United States in 1945, full-scale civil war resumed in 1947.


The period from 1850 to 1949 has been called China’s century of humiliation. Its political system and

                                                    32
economy both collapsed. Bolt, Timmer, and van Zanden (2014) reports China’s 1850 per capita GDP at
$600 (1990 US dollars) and Japan’s at $681. By 1950 China’s per capita GDP was down 25.3% to US$448,
while Japan’s had risen 182% to $1,921.


Mao Blanks the Slate

Mao’s Communist Party of China drove Chiang’s Republic of China onto the island of Taiwan in 1949.
The Communist victory was widely attributed to endemic corruption on Chang’s side of the civil war. The
People’s Republic of China nationalized all businesses in the early 1950s and imposed Soviet-style
central planning, which effectively eradicated private markets. Owning a private business employing
more than a handful of people was made a crime. Land reforms in 1952 expropriated all farmlands to
establish collective farms. SOEs and communes took charge of all manufacturing, with central planners
decreeing prices, production quotas, investment allocations, and employment assignments. The state
assigned university graduates to jobs and controlled their lifelong careers. Consumer goods were
allocated via ration coupons.


Once firmly in power, the Communist regime set about deepening China’s economic collapse. The
Korean War (1950 - 1953) and Sino-India War (1962) renewed China’s isolation from the emerging
postwar world order. Mao launched a rapid succession of political campaigns aimed at solidifying
control, settling internal power struggles, and promulgating ideological purity – the Counter-
Revolutionary Campaign (1951-52), Hundred Flowers Campaign (1956), and Anti-Rightist Movements
(1957-59) – that left Party cadres and the population at large cowed and submissive. This let Mao launch
the hugely destructive Great Leap Forward (1958 - 1962), which moved peasants off the land to run
village iron smelters. Starvation soon set in, even as desperate villagers deforested the countryside to
fuel their smelters, melted cooking pots to make their quota, and left their collective farms’ fields to
erosion. Ultimately, the sheer scale of the unfolding disaster marginalized Mao. To renew his political
power, Mao launched another political campaign, the Cultural Revolution (1966 – 76), which dealt the
economy a final blow by purging educated people from factories, government offices, schools and
universities to make way for ideologically pure Maoists.


After its century of humiliation, China underwent twenty-seven more years of political turmoil and
economic reversal. Bolt, Timmer and van Zanden (2014) record China’s per capita GDP (in 1990 US
dollars) rising a mere US$14 (2.1%) from 1950 to 1960, while Japan’s rose US$2,095 (107.2%). China’s


                                                   33
per capita GDP in the 1970s was among the lowest in the world. The sole silver lining in Mao’s legacy is
that he left China a blank slate. China, its extractive elite thoroughly devastated, was, like South Korea,
ready for institutional reforms (Acemoglu et al. 2002).


China’s Economic Reforms Begin in 1978

Before dying in 1976, Mao designated Hua Guofeng his successor, who soon ended the Cultural
Revolution. Deng Xiaoping, a pragmatic reformer, exiled by Mao, regained political influence and
pressed for economic reforms. The 3rd Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China (Dec 18 -22 1978) officially adopted Deng Xiaoping’s reforms, which put economic
pragmatism before political ideology.


By any standards, Deng’s reforms, and the further reforms that followed, were blazingly successful.
China’s real per capita GDP rose from levels comparable with the poorest countries in sub-Saharan
Africa in 1977 to levels comparable with better performing economies in Latin America in 2015 (about
US$6500 in 2010 constant dollar), its real growth rate averaging some 10% per year. The reforms made
China a rising middle-income economy: its 2015 per capita GDP roughly matching South Korea’s in 1986
(Morck and Yeung 2016), and China shares many of the problems typical of middle-income economies.
Development is decidedly varied across provinces and between urban versus rural areas, environmental
degradation is reaching dangerous proportions (Ebernstein, 2012; Zheng and Kahn 2013, 2017;
Ebenstein et al. 2015), debt is burgeoning (Zhu 2016), and inefficient resource allocation is depressing
productivity (Hsieh and Klenow 2009). China’s development is very much a work in progress.


China’s Financial Reforms Paradox

Persuasive work in financial economics argues that financial development is intimately related to
economic development (King and Levine 1993), and the rapid development of Japan and Korea
described in the previous sections support this view. China’s financial development has been much more
constrained. Before the reforms, China had only one bank, the People’s Bank of China, which
implemented the Central Plan by collecting and reallocating the revenues of all communes, factories and
other organizations. The reforms made the People’s Bank of China the central bank, divesting it of
operations that became four huge state-owned banks: the Bank of China, China Construction Bank,
Agriculture Bank of China, and Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. All four now rank among the


                                                    34
largest banks in the world. The Bank of Communications, founded in 1908, was recreated in 1987. Still,
although a few foreign banks have limited operations in China, all Chinese banks remain state-owned.
China’s stock markets, the Shanghai and the Shenzhen stock exchanges, founded in 1990, also rank
among the largest stock markets in the world by total market capitalization. But most firms listed on
both, especially the largest among them, are controlled, directly or indirectly, by the state. Many also
have comparatively small public floats.


On the surface, China’s financial development looks impressive; but the state retains control of the
economy’s financial commanding heights to an extent that neither Japan nor South Korea ever sought.
Various studies present evidence suggesting that China’s finance sector plays little role in promoting
efficient capital allocation (Deng et al. 2015; Fan, Morck, and Yeung 2012; Allen, Qian, Shan, Zhu 2015)
and still gives SOEs privileged access to capital (Allen et al. 2012). Others express concern that China’s
seemingly global best practice banking and financial regulations are window dressing, enforced
optionally at the discretion of Party officials (Allen and Shen 2012). The Constitution of the People’s
Republic of China enshrines Party leadership, making proscriptions of Party influence over regulatory
and legal decisions effectively non-binding. Fan, Morck, and Yeung (2012) argue that “reforms that
would let capital market forces allocate savings impartially to their highest value uses … [would] make
high growth sustainable”, but the credibly of any such reforms would remain unclear.


Disaster Reversed

China’s rapid economic success from 1978 to 2015 might suggest that further reforms are not necessary.
The argument that China is doing fine with the system it has runs up against the stylized fact that a
country’s growth rate can be higher if it starts out very low (Barro and Sala Sala-i-Martin (1976). China in
1978 was a profoundly broken economy, devastated by a century of Qing collapse, civil war, invasion,
more civil war, and then by decades of ideologically-driven Maoist economic failure. China had done so
much wrong that merely reversing the most egregious economic mistakes with virtually any
economically sensible reforms permitted growth.


China’s course reversal was gradual. It retained the old order alongside experimental market reforms
with a Dual Track System (Wu and Zhao 1987). The first reforms, launched in 1978, granted a degree of
autonomy to a few villages via the Household Responsibility System. Local managers were made
responsible for the profits and losses of an enterprise. Bolstered by positive results from this


                                                    35
experiment, the State Council (cabinet) introduced in 1984 the Contract Responsibility System.
Communes were decollectivized and divided into plots assigned to individual farmers, though without
ownership rights. Farmers could grow whatever they chose if they also met (greatly reduced) state
production quotas.


Another parallel experiment began in factories in 1978. Six selected enterprises were allowed, after
making their production quotas, to keep a proportion of their profits for re-investing, employee bonuses
and other benefits. Previously, production targeted quotas and all revenues reverted to the state for
reallocation under the Central Plan, the enterprise retaining no profits. By the end of 1979, over 4,200
enterprises had joined the program. In 1980, 6,600 large and medium-sized state-owned production
units, accounting for 70% of industry output, were participating (China Labour Bulletin, 2007).


From 1984 to 1992, the Dual Track system was formalized. State owned factories, then the only
meaningful production unit, could sell their products at state-set prices in exchange for centrally-
controlled supplies to fulfill their obligations to the Central Plan, and could then sell any excess output at
unregulated prices, typically far higher. Initially, output sold outside the Plan could not exceed 20% of
the total, but the ceiling was gradually raised and then eliminated. State-owned factories met state
quotas, paid taxes, retained profits, made decisions, including hiring, firing and bonuses, and could even
borrow from the state-controlled People’s Bank of China. Yet many struggled with bureaucracy and
interfering Party cadres. Production and productivity nonetheless rose, and market transactions
expanded rapidly, eventually rendering state quotas all but irrelevant. The state still controlled
“strategic industries,” but Central Plan prices and quotas faded away over the subsequent decade
(Lawrence and Qian, 2000, Qian 2003).


The partial liberalizations of the 1980s also allowed the formation of Township and Village Enterprises
(TVEs) in rural areas. These filled market gaps, particularly in light industries (Naughton 2000). Many
TVEs, though collectively owned and sponsored by local governments, were effectively controlled and
run by individuals. Many were also financed with loans from state banks. Huang (2012) argues that,
“township and village enterprises from the inception have been private and that China undertook
significant and meaningful financial liberalization at the very start of reforms … [they] contribute to
China's poverty reduction, GDP growth driven by personal consumption ….and an initial decline of
income inequality.” However, most TVEs fell apart amid ill-defined property rights (Kuyng and Lin 2007).



                                                     36
Thus, from 1978 through to the late 1980s, China transitioned out of Soviet-style central planning with
the emergence of enterprises exercising decentralized decision-making and financed by the state bank.
This Dual System was popular for making goods and services more available. However, it also invited
abuse: some people grew wealthy obtaining goods at state prices and reselling them in free markets.
Some state-owned factories in the “planned” sector hid their true capacities and production, letting
factory managers pocket proceeds from selling the surpluses into the free market.


Rejoining the World

Before the 1978 reforms, the economy was tightly closed. Only a trickle of foreign trade by state-owned
factories existed, mainly flowing through Hong Kong. Keller, Li and Shiue (2011) link about 2% of global
trade to China before World War II, but find China’s share “fallen by the 1950s to around 1.7% and by
the 1970s to around 0.7%.” Data are sparse given China’s anti-economic and inward-looking political
atmosphere under Mao. Such trade as occurred was of agricultural products and raw materials such as
oil.


After 1978, foreign trade was gradually liberalized and increasingly market-driven. Reforms and
openness became a signature slogan of 1980s economic policies. Lardy (2003) writes “China undertook
(unilateral trade liberalization measures) during the reform period, even before its accession to the
World Trade Organization. By a number of measures China transformed its economy from one of the
most protected to perhaps the most open among emerging market economies.”


Special economic zones to facilitate trade were established in Guangdong (Shenzhen, Zhuhai, and
Shantou) and Fujian (Xiamen) after 1980. By 1984, 14 coastal cities featured such zones.19 By 1992,
China had 15 free-trade zones and 32 economic and technology development zones. All these zones
administered preferential policies promoting foreign trade, foreign technology, and foreign direct
investment, generally through joint ventures with Chinese partners. Until the mid-1980s, international
trade required government permits. Thereafter, tariffs and non-tariff barriers replaced permits to trade;
but the state retained control over trade by requiring permits to buy or hold foreign currencies and by
imposing artificially disadvantageous foreign exchange rates, with all sales of foreign currencies


19
     Dalian, Qinghuangdao, Tianjin, Yantai, Qingdao, Lianyungang, Nantong, Shanghai, Ningbo, Wenzhou, Fuzhou,
     Guangzhou, Zhanjiang and Beihai.


                                                        37
permitted only through the Bank of China.20 Still, if a factory earned foreign currencies from exporting,
these could be used to buy foreign machines. These measures encouraged market-driven exports while
regulating imports. Trade (exports plus imports) rose from 15% of GDP in 1980 to 21% in 1984 and 35%
in 1986.


China permitted inward foreign direct investment via joint ventures mainly to encourage the importing
of foreign technology and management practices. Although China entered into many bilateral
investment treaties in the 1990s, managed inward foreign investment for the advancement of China’s
growth remains the overriding policy. China’s 2001 accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) led
to considerable liberalization of service sector and further loosened restrictions on foreign investment.
Banking, financial services, insurance and telecommunications were opened to foreign investment,
albeit still subject to substantial restrictions. (Lee 2008). By 2013, additional reforms had greatly raised
the de minimus threshold for provincial government approval of foreign investment projects and
replaced merger notification discrimination against foreign investors with a national security review
process for cross-border M&As (Davies 2013).


Abandoning the Qing and Communist era aversion to foreign trade was arguably instrumental to China’s
economic recovery. A World Bank report states: “According to the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM),
foreign invested enterprises account for over half of China’s exports and imports; they provide for 30%
of Chinese industrial output, and generate 22% of industrial profits while employing only 10% of labour
– because of their high productivity.21 Evidence on technology spillovers is more limited, but industries
with higher FDI seem to have higher productivity increases than other industries, suggesting a positive
effect. Importantly, foreign investment has catalyzed China’s economic reform. Together, these
contributions have supported China in maintaining a record-high 10 percent growth rate during most of
the 1980-2010 period.”


Re-investment in Human Capital

Meiji Japan was an unusually literate society, and Syngman Rhee’s sole unambiguously positive legacy to


20
   The dual exchange rate was eliminated in 1995, but the officially pegged Yuan was substantially devalued: from
   6 yuan per dollar to 8 yuan per dollar, where it remained until almost 2004. China still tightly restricts
   individuals’ purchases of foreign currency.
21
   Foreign Direct Investment – the China Story, July 16th 2010.


                                                        38
South Korea was universal public education. In both countries, education made foreign technology and
ideas look more like opportunities than threats. China’s formal higher education has a relatively short
history. The Qing only established Peking University in 1898, under pressure from the Self-Improvement
Movement; though a quasi-university, the School of Combined Learning (Tongwen Guan) dated back to
1862. University education survived the civil wars and Japanese invasion, but ceased totally during the
Cultural Revolution from 1967 to 1976 (Chang 1974, Chandra 1987), Indeed, in 1976 even high schools
closed: China had over 930 million people but only about 48,000 high school students. China had long
neglected general education, and the Cultural Revolution only made things worse. China’s literacy rate
in 1981 is estimated at only 65.5%.22


Deng Xiaoping reversed these policies, reopening universities and resuming the National Higher
Education Entrance Examination (Gao Kao), in 1977. People responded enthusiastically, many resuming
studies interrupted years ago. In 1978, Deng made a strategic decision to send 3,000 students and
scholars abroad every year for further education, famously asserting “When our thousands of Chinese
students abroad return home, you will see how China will transform itself.” Pursuing higher education
overseas became the enthusiastic pursuit of many bright students. Although China’s universities were
also bolstered by foreign professors sent under the auspices of many countries’ foreign aid agencies,
studying overseas was soon seen as a golden ticket to prosperity. China’s living standards remained far
below those in the developed world, and many who studied abroad opted to stay. Confronting
complaints about a “brain drain”, General Secretary Zhao Ziyang responded that China was "storing
brain power overseas.” As China’s prospects improved in the early 21st century, many returned. By 2001,
returnees ran over 1,700 private firms in Shanghai alone (Zweig and Rosen 2003). Firm performance also
rises significantly upon hiring a returnee as a director (Giannetti, Liao and Yu 2015). These findings are
consistent with returnees bringing foreign technologies and entrepreneurship to China, and with Zhao’s
contention that their pursuit of self-interest would ultimately benefit the overall economy.


Financial Development Resumed

Chinese were now seeing life in the outside world, and foreign ideas and goods were flowing into China.
The Dual Track System had raised expectations, but created huge distortions, high inflation, and
widespread resentment about corruption. These grievances culminated in the 1989 Tiananmen Square

22
     World Bank, World Development Indicators.


                                                   39
incident. The “event” stalled reforms, which resumed only after Deng Xiaoping visited Shenzhen in Dec
1992 to reaffirm China’s need for further economic liberalization. Several major reforms ensued.


A key reform was the 1994 Company Law, under which state-owned factories were corporatized into
state-owned enterprises: limited liability companies with well-defined assets and liabilities. This was
designed to overcome the problem of ill-defined property rights that undermined TVEs a decade before.
In 1997, Premier Zhu Rongji announced a "grasp the big, let go the small" (zhua da fang xiao) reform:
letting small and medium-sized state-owned enterprises be restructured into private-sector firms
through employee buyouts, open sales, joint ventures, mergers, or bankruptcies; the state retaining
ownership of large state-owned enterprises. The reformers’ objectives were multifold: to divest small
and inefficient state-owned enterprises, to limit job losses by retaining control of state-owned
enterprises with large workforces; to retain control over the earnings of profitable SOEs such as those in
the resources sector, and to control SOEs with strategic implications for the scope of the Party’s ongoing
social and economic control, such as those in finance, infrastructure, energy, transportation, and heavy
industries (Qian 2000; Chiu and Lewis 2006; Brandt et al. 2008; Fan and Hope 2013; Li and Yamada
2015). The Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets, established in 1990 and 1991, now permitted
corporatized SOEs and even some privatized firms to raise funds by issuing shares (Allen, Qian, Shen and
Zhu 2015).


Another key 1994 reform created three state-owned Policy Banks: the Agricultural Development Bank of
China, China Developed Bank and Export-Import Bank of China. As mentioned above, a 1995 reform also
carved four new state-owned banks – the Bank of China, China Construction Bank, Agricultural Bank of
China and Industrial and Commercial Bank of China – out of the People’s Bank of China, which became
the central bank. City-level commercial banks were permitted in 1996 (Elliott and Yan 2013). Although a
few foreign bank established limited operations in China, the state’s direct control of the banking sector
remains overwhelming, easily exceeding 96% in 2009 (Deng et al. 2015, Table 3) Allen et al. (2005)
report China’s banks’ primary function to be the channelling of national savings into loans to SOEs.


State owned enterprises still commanded the heights of the economy. From 1998 to 2002 SOEs
accounted for over half of total assets and employment in industry enterprises (Gang and Hope, 2013,
Figure 1, p. 7). SOE inefficiency was a growing concern, as China’s GDP growth rate slowed from 14.3%
in 1992 to 7.6% in 1999. Some SOEs also had difficulties paying back loans to state-owned banks, whose
nonperforming loans rose to 20% and 22.5% of GDP in 2000 and 2001, respectively, levels far higher

                                                   40
than in the US, Japan, Korea, India, Indonesia or Taiwan (Allen et al. 2012).


A new round of reforms followed the 2002 16th National Party Congress, under Zhu Rongji. The State
Council formed the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commissions (SASACs) in 2003
to act as a single holding company owning all shares in all SOEs, except state-owned banks and to guide
and supervise further SOE reforms. (Deng et al. 2015). All non-performing SOE loans were moved at
book value into four asset management companies. Also in 2003, shares in state-owned banks were
purchased by the Central Huijin Investment Ltd, a branch of the State Association for Foreign Exchange
(SAFE), an administrative agency subordinate to the People's Bank of China (PBOC). This was organized
as a share purchase so the state could inject capital into the banks while offloading their nonperforming
loans. Huijin now serves as the state holding company for state-owned banks. In 2007, Central Huijin
Investment Ltd was corporatized as a subsidiary of CIC, China's newly formed sovereign wealth fund
(Pistor, 2010). Central Huijin's corporate charter specifies that its management and supervisory boards
be appointed directly by the State Council (Pistor, 2010). Bank regulation was assigned to the China
Bank Regulatory Commission (CBRC), founded in 2003.


An Investment Boom Begins

This new institutional framework gave the Party tight control over all large state-owned enterprises and
banks. The State Council directly oversees the SASAC, which in turn controls the SOEs. The party
reinforces this control via its Organization Department, which determines the salaries, appointments,
reappointments and promotion of all top executives at the SASAC and all SOEs (Deng e.t al 2015; Wu et
al. 2014). The People’s Bank of China, CBRC and the Ministry of Finance regulate and supervise the
state-owned banks, which are formally controlled by the CIC through Central Huijin Investments. Here
too, the Party, through the Organization Department, determines the compensation, appointment,
reappointment, and promotion of every top level executives of all of the above. Top executives at both
state-owned enterprises and banks, their Chief Executive Officers and Party Secretaries, therefore have
a strong incentive to put loyalty to the Party before corporate financial performance, even though
profitability is nevertheless a performance indicator (Deng et al. 2015).


Since the 1978 reforms, the Party has linked its legitimacy to delivering economic growth and social
stability. This means top executives at banks and nonfinancial SOEs are effectively enrolled in a country
wide promotion tournament for delivering tangible growth subject to a Party loyalty constraint (Li and


                                                    41
Zhou 2005, Wu et al. 2014). The Party leadership promotes GDP growth by ordering state-owned banks
to lend to SOEs to boost investment. Top executives at both, aspiring for promotion, comply. Large scale
investment spending has an immediate positive impact on GDP, and China’s industry and infrastructure
were so antiquated and deteriorated that virtually any investment seemed useful. Skyscrapers,
renovated town squares, high-speed trains, new airports, steel mills, auto plants, and all manner of new
physical assets sprouted everywhere. Deng et al. (2015) show that all of this provided the government
an effective short-term economic engineering mechanism for counteracting the 2008 global financial
crisis. Xu (2011) argues that this combination of institutions constitutes a “regionally decentralized
authoritarian system: the central Party leadership has control over key personnel, whereas subnational
governments make detailed implementation decisions: they “initiate, negotiate, implement, divert, and
resist reforms, policies, rules, and laws.”


Fiscal reforms starting in the 1980s reinforced the trend. Before 1980, the government financed itself off
the revenues and profits of SOEs, communes, and all other organizations, all of which accrued to the
various levels of government under central planning. Reforms letting these organizations retain much of
their earnings necessitated fiscal reforms. After 1994, the central government has collected all taxes,
corporate income taxes from financial institutions, and centrally controlled SOEs. Subnational
governments receive from the central government 25% of VAT revenues and were to collect business,
excise, and personal income taxes. However, local tax collection efforts proved ineffective. The changes
thus substantially increased the fiscal revenue of the central government while reducing those of
subnational governments, which turned to land lease sales to finance their operations (Gordon and Wei,
2012).


Previously, Chinese lived in grim state-owned housing projects administered by their work units.
Housing reforms started in 1978 which in essence gradually shifted free housing provided by states or
work units to self-owned or private rental arrangements. The government adjusted rents upwards in
multiple steps and encouraged people to buy their own houses and banks to offer mortgages. Mortgage
lending was regularized in 1997 and termination of work unit housing provision was announced in 1998.
These reforms led to a real estate development boom, which saw large numbers moving into modern
condominiums.


These reforms substantially elevated the market value of land. While all land remains state-owned, local
governments distributed or rented land parcels to developers at bargain prices until 2004. In 2004, the

                                                   42
central government stipulated that all leases of land parcels for development must be auctioned off and
that the proceeds serve as local governments’ fiscal income. This created a huge incentive for local
governments to invest in infrastructure. Party cadres running local governments could boost their odds
of promotions by upping infrastructure investment, which mechanically and immediately elevates GDP.
Infrastructure development raises the value of nearby land lots, boosting local governments’ revenues
from their land lease auctions, which in turn raises a government’s ability to make more investment
further contribute to GDP growth and further boost the promotion odds for the cadres responsible
(Deng et al. 2015). Real estate development also boosts local GDP directly, raises the auction value of
other land lots, and thus boosts local government revenues further, letting them finance yet more
infrastructure construction.


A real estate construction boom ensued. Like cadres running local governments, cadres running SOEs
could also boost their odds of being promoted by increasing their SOEs’ contributions to GDP growth.
Cadres running centrally-controlled SOEs soon saw real estate as a short cut (as compared to capital
spending in their own sectors) to generate earnings that would count towards GDP growth and boost
their promotion prospects. The banks, all state-controlled, were primed to lend to SOEs, so a massive
flow of borrowed funds passed through SOEs into real estate. SOEs in virtually all sectors plunged into
real estate development (Deng et al. 2015). In short, the Communist Party promoted an investment
boom by forcing cadres to compete for pay and promotion.


China’s State-led Big Push?

The system of incentives described above rapidly developed into an “investment for growth” frenzy. In
2003, investment surpassed 41% of GDP, and remained in this range for the subsequent decade. GDP
growth simultaneously surged and remained high. In this period, China became the second-largest
economy and the second largest trading nation in the world. However, Chinese per capita GDP is at
global middle-income levels and remains far below levels in high-income countries, including South
Korea and Japan (Morck and Yeung 2016). China’s high-income inequality, though typical of other
middle-income economies in Latin America and elsewhere, jars with its communist legacy. China’s GINI
coefficient rose from 30% in 1980 to 55% in 2012, far higher than the US figure of 45% but not greatly
different from Colombia’s figure of 53.5%. Regional income disparity and a growing rural-urban income
gap (Xie and Zhou 2014) also risk undermining the Party’s legitimacy. Rapid growth can counter these
problems by “lifting all boats,” but China’s investment-fuelled growth must ultimately end as

                                                  43
diminishing returns to capital set in. Further rapid growth must then depend on productivity growth,
and China lags the high-income countries in productivity growth (Hsieh and Klenow 2014).


This tide of state-engineered investment-for-growth coincided with substantial growth in sectors less
directly under state control and with further expansion of capital markets. A system of listing quotas for
ministries and province-level governments left minority public floats in their state-owned enterprises
comprising most of the market capitalizations of China’s two stock exchanges, Shanghai and Shenzhen.
Most of the shares in these SOEs were retained by the state and declared “non-tradable”, locking in
state-controlled corporate governance. In 2000, the quota system was removed and in 2005 the State
Council issued guidelines and principles (Carpenter et al. 2014) governing SOEs’ sales of formerly non-
tradable shares to public investors. The number of listed firms rose from 1,389 in 2000 to 2,994 in 2013
(Allen, Qian, Shan and Zhu 2015, Table IV).


Many private-sector firms also listed their shares during this period. The term “private-sector” can be
problematic because many firms so-classified are actually controlled subsidiaries of state-owned
enterprises or otherwise indirectly controlled by governments, government agencies or top Party
officials (Allen and Shen 2015; Allen et al. 2015). Still, the fraction of stocks classified as SOEs fell steadily
during the 2000s to about half by 2010 (Lardy 2014, p. 113). More recently listed firms are generally
smaller, so despite their declining relative numbers, state-owned enterprises remain dominant in value-
weighted indexes and account 86% of the revenue of all listed firms.


Party control of SOEs and firms classified as private-sector is further institutionalized in other ways.
Corporate governance in China had a veneer of global best practice regarding independent directors,
board committees, and the like. However, the CEO and board of directors of any firm employing four
Party members can be complemented by a Communist Party Secretary and Party Committee
(McGreggor 2010). These are generally not involved in detailed corporate policy making, and only
intervene to prevent the CEO and board from making mistakes. Increasing numbers of listed firms are
accepting Party Secretaries and Party Committees, and at least 288 of China’s 3,314 listed firms
amended their corporate charters to formalize the Leading Role of the Communist Party in their
corporate governance.23


23
     See “Private sector Party committees start to bloom” by Zhang Ye. Global Times July 10th 2016; “Chinese
     enterprises write Communist Party's role into charters” by Yu Nakamura, Nikkei Asian Review, Aug. 17th 2017.


                                                        44
Still, China has two well-functioning stock exchanges and many listed firms with a degree of separation
from the state. Chinese equity prices also appear to be more driven by information after the 2000
reforms (Carpenter et al. 2014). However, Chinese listed firms’ stock returns are low compared those in
developed and large emerging markets, and also to unlisted firms in China, even as China’s economic
growth outpaced the world (Allen, Qian, Shan and Zhu 2015). Should the government opt to fully
privatize more state-owned enterprises, the institutional infrastructure necessary for doing this is ready.


Lending to private-sector enterprises is also developing. Although Allen et al. (2005) show that formal
bank credit flowed largely to state-owned enterprises in the 1990s, a finding readily explained by the
incentive system described above; they report that informal financing, such as trade credit and other
lending by enterprises other than banks may render capital allocation more efficient.24 Furthermore,
Aayagari et al. (2017) show that, at the beginning of 2002, many private-sector firms were getting loans
from state-run banks and that these firms were growing faster and reinvesting more earnings than other
private-sector firms, though their productivity growth rates were statistically indistinguishable.25 By
2009, 26% of bank credit went to private-sector firms; and this rose to 33% by 2012 (Lardy 2013). Some
9% of loans also went to collectives both years. This may partly be because private-sector firms
outperformed state-owned enterprises (Lardy 2014, fig. 3.8), making the state’s credit guarantee for
SOEs a less overwhelming factor in state-run banks’ lending decisions. But, as with the stock markets,
the state has stopped well short of genuine liberalization. The government, for example, still enforced
interest rate “guidelines” through the 2000s. Still, China now has a set of large banks, each with an
increasingly sophisticated concentration of human capital. Should the state privatize these banks, they
may well be up to the challenge.


Changes are also taking place in China’s bond markets. These were long overwhelmingly markets for
trading bonds floated by the People’s Bank of China, interbank CDs, and central and subnational
government bonds. In 2009, corporate bonds had less than a 10% share. However, by 2015, this had



24
   However, large scale lending by non-banks precipitated South Korea’s “curb market lending” crisis, a major
   interruption in its financial development under General Park Chung-hee.
25
   Aayagari et al. (2017) using a survey of 2400 manufacturing and service firms in 2002 in 18 cities spread across
   the Coastal, Central, Northeast, Northwest and Southwest regions to show that bank financing is robustly and
   positively correlated with sales growth, profit reinvestment and productivity after controlling for firm size
   (dummies indicating a firm’s status as microscopic, small, medium, large, and very large) and age (dummies
   indicating young, mid-age and old).


                                                        45
grown to 25%.26 China thus also has a functioning bond market that is providing capital to corporations,
and could provide debt financing to private-sector firms or privatized state-owned enterprises should
reforms advance.


Private enterprise is most apparent in the small and medium-sized firm sector. Revisions in 2006 to the
Company Law reduced the minimum capital thresholds for limited liability firms to ¥5 Million for listed
firms and only ¥30,000 for unlisted private-sector firms. The number of registered private enterprises
expanded from 443,000 in 1996, when they accounted for less than a fifth of all enterprises, to
5,918,000 in 2012, some 70% of all firms (National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2013). Lardy (2014)
shows that, in the cities, almost all the 250 million new jobs created since 1978 were in the private
sector, broadly defined. Over 99% of the urban labor force worked for the state in 1978; by 2011 only
18% did. State-owned enterprises’ share of exports has fallen from two-thirds in 1995 to 11% in 2012.
The small and medium-sized enterprise sector has served as a hothouse for developing entrepreneurial
talent. This too improves China’s readiness for large firm privatizations and more complete
liberalization.


To date, China has cut its own development path, and may well be allocating capital more efficiently
than might be expected of such a state-dominated economy. This may follow from the Party shaping
cadres’ private career incentives to promote growth-enhancing investment by local governments and
SOEs. State-owned banks have clearly favored lending to SOEs, but are increasingly lending to other
firms, and may be developing credit evaluation and borrower monitoring capabilities. This may reflect
the career incentives confronting cadres running state-owned banks, which balance bank financial
performance and adherence to Party policy and thus encourage lending to credit-worthy firms, not just
SOEs.


Reforms to date have erected much of the financial machinery China would need to improve allocation
efficiency by more fully liberalizing its economy and launching a private sector-led growth phase. This
bodes well for a relatively painless shift from its recent surge of investment-led growth to a more
sustainable productivity-led growth, should China’s leaders elect to pursue this path. Japan and South
Korea ultimately did this, albeit as an absolute last resort when all other options were closed off. Or
China’s leaders may try to continue cutting a new path to high-income levels without compromising the

26
     Deutsche Bank: Investing in China’s Bond Market, July 2015


                                                         46
Leading Role of the Party and state control of the Commanding Heights of its economy. Entering such
uncharted territory would be a very daring move.




6.     An East Asian Model of Financial and Economic Development?

The successful development of Japan, South Korea and China suggests some common themes.


One commonality across all three countries is a profound weakening of traditional institutions
entrenching extractive elites before the era of rapid development. Japan’s traditional elite was
disgraced and marginalized after the Meiji Restoration put down samurai rebellions, leaving its
new leaders free to rebuild the country’s institutions along Western lines with little resistance
from entrenched elites. South Korea’s traditional elite was largely destroyed under Japanese
colonial rule, its colonial-era elite was largely marginalized after Japan’s surrender, and most
remaining capital assets were devastated during the Korean War. China’s traditional elite lost
legitimacy as dysfunctional policies imploded the Qing dynasty and then the Republic of China.
Mao’s ideological purges culminating in the Cultural Revolution largely finished the job. All
three countries thus became institutional blank slates, in the sense that their feudal
landowners, court noblemen, regional warlords, and other traditional extractive elites with
vested interests in blocking reforms were marginalized or eliminated in advance (Acemoglu et
al. 2002).

All three countries also boasted high levels of literacy early on. Meiji Japan was an unusually
literate society. Syngman Rhee, though his crony capitalism did little to raise living standards,
did leave South Korea with universal public education. China in the early years of its reforms,
perhaps recoiling from the anti-education excesses of Mao’s Cultural Revolution, gave priority
to reopening and restoring its schools and universities. Like Meiji Japan in the 1870s, China in
the 1980s began sending students abroad and inviting foreign educators and experts to its
universities. The marginalization of extractive elites may have paved the way for better general
education and openness to new ideas from abroad. Acemoglu et al. (2002, p. 1278) argue that


                                                   47
“low levels of human capital may have been a primary mechanism through which extractive
institutions delayed industrialization.” In all three countries, extensive investment in education
may also have helped mitigate problems that stunt legal and other institutional transplants
elsewhere (Berkowitz et al. 2003).

A third theme common to all three countries is a state-directed drive to transplant state-of-the-
art foreign technology into the domestic economy. In Meiji Japan and reform-era China, state-
owned enterprises served as the delivery mechanism. In Park Chunghee’s South Korea,
subsidies to privately-owned business groups charged with developing domestic heavy and
chemicals industries appear to have played this role. In Japan and Korea, this phase of
development was relatively brief because the cost to the state triggered severe financial crises.
China has so far sustained its state-owned enterprises, but its post-1978 reforms have brought
in Western technology and management approaches.


A fourth theme common across all three countries is the exposure of domestic firms to global
competition. In Japan, “unequal treaties” severely limited Japan’s scope for erecting trade
barriers, exposing the domestic economy to the Victorian era of globalization. Japanese firms,
forced to compete, became major global exporters by the end of the 19th century. In South
Korea, General Park kept accounts of firms’ exports to accumulate foreign exchange reserves,
necessary under the Bretton Woods system to finance strategically important imports,
especially those needed for military preparedness. Park awarded the CEOs of successful
exporters medals and honours, but more importantly, linked subsidies to export success.
China’s rapid growth phase also corresponded to an era of unprecedented, if incomplete,
openness to global economic competition. Chinese firms, like their Japanese and Korean
predecessors, became major exporters early on. Reallocating underemployed labor has made
China a global manufacturing center. Some Chinese firms have become globally competitive,
due in part to successful large-scale adoptions of state-of-the-art foreign technology as well as
their increasingly well-educated labor forces.

A fifth theme common across countries is the full-fledged embrace of free-market economics


                                                 48
only as a last resort of desperation. Japan privatized its SOEs in the 1880s only after their
ongoing losses had bankrupted the government, ruined its credit in London (then the global
financial center), and precipitated a severe financial crisis in Japan. Burned by the political
fallout from all this, Japan’s politicians adopted laissez-faire economic policies for the next
several decades. With the government refraining from interfering in the economy, corrupting
politicians became a low-return investment for a few decades at least. In Korea, Park
Chunghee’s Heavy and Chemicals Industry Drive, though done via subsidies to privately owned
firms rather than via SOEs, also bankrupted the country. Immediately before his assassination,
Park had decided to end all subsidies. His successor, Chun Doo-hwan, assessing the magnitude
of the fiscal disaster and forced to accede to the demands of multinational financial institutions,
followed through. He ended subsidies to business and presided over a thoroughgoing
liberalization of the economy. Park’s military ethos apparently kept corruption low; and Chun’s
ending subsidies lowered the return to influencing politicians for a time. In both Japan and
Korea, talented entrepreneurs were left to get on with getting rich and both economies began
to grow rapidly. Bequeathed the failures of central planning, China has introduced formats of
Western market institutions and liberalized its economy to an unprecedented extent. But, its
reforms are quite incomplete. The state still exercises a pervasive role in capital allocation and
governance, and continues to divert capital into its stable of state-owned enterprises.
Corruption also remains an important concern, though a 2012 reform may have had real
impact. The unleashing of free market forces seems important in that this forced firms to cut
wasteful resource misallocation and improve efficiency (Lin, Morck, Yeung Zhao, 2016).


A sixth theme is that all three economies developed mechanisms for coordinating the
development of firms in multiple industries, so that essential supplier and customer firms arose
to fill in missing supply chain links where necessary. During this phase of development, firms
necessary to other firms might sometimes have to operate at a loss or fail to exploit market
power for the sake of firms in other sectors. In both Meiji Japan and South Korea, large highly
diversified business groups arose to meet this challenge. The largest of Japan’s zaibatsu and
Korea’s chaebol business groups approached or achieved “full set” diversification – that is, they
each contained a firm in every significant industry in the economy. Because all the firms in each

                                                49
business group were controlled by the same ultimate controlling shareholder, member firms
could be restrained from exploiting their market power against each other and could be
coerced into subsidizing money-losing member firms with critical supply chain functions.
Because each major group also contained a member firm in each industry, firms outside the
group could not exercise market power against group member firms. Because the ultimate
controlling shareholder’s private wealth depended on the performance of the group as a whole,
and the business groups were competing with each other at the consumer retail level, the
business groups as collectives were forced to be efficient. China has retained state control over
huge sectors of its economy - notably banking, communications, construction, energy, heavy
industry infrastructure, mining, power and transportation. State planners might conceivably
implement a successful state-led Big Push. State planners in Japan and South Korea had to
abandon this approach after bankrupting their governments. China’s state planners might be
better, but high leverage and rising efficiency and employment in the non-state sector suggest
that China may not be different.


A seventh theme is that all three economies developed large functional equity markets when
rapid expansions took place. Japan’s stock markets facilitated its 1880s mass privatization. Up-
and-running stock markets also let Japan’s zaibatsu business groups and Koreas’ chaebol
business groups expand rapidly, raising equity financing to capitalize subsidiaries and then
subsidiaries of subsidiaries, and then subsidiaries of subsidiaries’ subsidiaries. The resulting
pyramidal structures let each group expand by issuing shares, a far more risk-tolerant source of
capital than bank loans. Business groups that relied on bank loans to expand proved financially
delicate, and failed during economic downturns in cascading bankruptcies that brought down
entire business groups. China’s stock markets have corporatized the bulk of its SOEs, and may
now be ready to handle large-scale share issues to public investors and thus to provide the risk-
tolerant capital needed to capitalize new and expanding firms to fill in missing links in the
economy.

An eighth theme is the importance of avoiding or counteracting elite capture. Many developing
economies become mired in a Middle Income Trap (Rajan and Zingales 2003; Morck, Wolfenzon

                                               50
and Yeung 2005), where a first generation of business tycoons grown rich off rapid early stage
industrialization seek to lock in their (or their heirs’) dominant economic, social and political
positions by blocking subsequent entrants. The issue here is transition. Economy spanning
corporate governance structures – Japan’s zaibatsu, Korea’s chaebols in Korea, or China’s state
machinery – sweeping enough to mobilize investment to finance and coordination a Big Push
(Ronsentein-Rodan 1943, Murphy et al. 1989) bring the economy only so far. Schumpeter
(1911) argues prosperous free market economies are rendered stable in the long-run by the
process of creative destruction. New innovative firms arise, destroying old non-innovative
giants. Firms are unstable so that capitalism becomes stable. Functionally efficient capital
allocation is critical to financing new innovative firms (Levine and King 1993). The Middle
Income Trap prevents the transition to growth through creative destruction by blocking
creative destruction. Development stalls or even reverses and the country stagnates – always
developing but never developed.


Japan’s zaibatsu families attained sweeping economic power by the 1920s, when Japan joined
the ranks of high-income economies. The democratic institutions the reformers had
transplanted into Japan provided a degree of protection against elite capture, but by the
beginning of the 20th century Japan’s political parties were undoubtedly being influenced by the
zaibatsu families (Kerbo and McKinstry 1995, p. 43). Ultimately, the elite families grown
wealthy amid Japan’s early-stage development were first subordinated to the military
dictatorship in the 1930s and then deprived of their business empires by the American military
government after Japan’s defeat in World War II. The post-war era then saw a wave of initial
public offerings capitalizing new firms, such as Sony and Honda, that would catapult Japan to
global technological leadership.


Korea’s chaebol families remain powerful both economically and politically. Their influence over
government policies is highly controversial and resented by many South Koreans. Past reforms
aimed at reducing the power of the chaebol families have been largely ineffective. However,
increasingly shocking scandals culminating in 2017 with the arrest of Lee Jae-yong, controlling
scion of the Samsung chaebol, in a bribery scandal that led to the impeachment, disgrace, and

                                               51
arrest of President Park Geun-hye, the daughter of General Park Chung-hee. Chaebol reform
became the top issue in the election to replace her, but skepticism remained.27 Efficient
resource allocation remains an issue. The chaebol may continue to appear “too powerful to
fail” giving their member firms privileged access to debt financing, thereby distorting capital
allocation away from other firms.


China’s prolonged state-control could either accentuate or mitigate such problems. On the one
hand, the Communist Party of China leadership now includes many “princelings”, descendants
of Mao-era communist revolutionary leaders, who some see becoming an elite with a vested
interest in the status quo (Brown 2014). On the other hand, China’s reforms to date may open a
path forward that prevents a first generation business elite from attaining the sort of power the
zaibatsu and chaebol families attained in Japan and South Korea. Business groups arise in early
stage development because they substitute intragroup transaction for inter-firm transactions
made costly or impossible by dysfunctional markets. Markets become dysfunctional if suppliers
or customers can exert market power either directly, by setting monopolistic prices, or
indirectly, for example by providing low-quality intermediate goods. If China’s government
bureaucrats oversee the establishment of enough firms in enough industries in enough
locations connected by good enough transportation and communication infrastructure, and let
those firms compete enough to keep prices competitive throughout all necessary supply chains,
China might not need zaibatsu or chaebol. China’s stock markets may be up to the challenge
and conditions are also ripe for the privatization of the large state-owned banks and non-
financial enterprises. This would necessitate the comprehensive corporatization and
privatization of SOES, the unrestricted entry of private sector firms, and rules and regulations
that run predictably and without selective Party intervention.


China’s leaders confront a dilemma. Accelerating the pace of reforms risks short-run volatility,
for which officials would not want to be blameable. But, slow-paced reforms risk strengthening
vested interests seeking to preserve the status quo as public sector and SOE debts accumulate.

27
     See e.g. “Chaebol reform at forefront of South Korea presidential campaign – again” by Hyunjoo Jin, Se Young
     Lee and Nichola Saminather. Reuters March 27, 2017.


                                                          52
China might then become a middle-income trap economy, its pace of development slowed to
preserve the economic and political power of its entrenched elites. Or, China may sacrifice fiscal
prudence to hasten further rapid development without allowing the sort of free market
competition and creative destruction that might threaten its elites. Such a path, in our opinion,
is hard to sustain, especially with its aging population and increasingly tight resource
constraints. The path ultimately forced the state to undertake comprehensive privatization and
liberalization in Meiji Japan and comprehensive liberalization (privatizations having occurred
earlier) in 1980s South Korea.


Comprehensive free market reforms were an absolute last resort in both Japan and Korea.
Moreover, China has yet to experience a financial crisis as severe as those that ended state-
directed development and unleashed free markets in Japan and Korea. If such a crisis ensues,
China’s leaders might likewise have no option but privatization and liberalization if it is to avoid
ensnarement in a Middle Income Trap of political rent-seeking. Or, China may find its own path,
perhaps a currently uncharted gradual ascent into the ranks of high-income economies.




                                                53
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson. 2002. Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the
          Making of the Modern World Income Distribution. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4)1231-1294.
Albuquerue, Rui and Neng Wang. 2008. Agency conflicts, investment, and asset pricing. Journal of Finance 63(1)1-
          40.
Allen, F. and Gale, D. (1999) Diversity of opinion and financing of new technologies. Journal of Financial
          Intermediation 8: 68–89.
Allen, Franklin, Hun QJ Qian, Susan Chenyu Shan, and Julie Lei, Zhu. 2015. Explaining the Disconnection between
          China’s Economic Growth and Stock Market Performance,. Memeo
Allen, Franklin, Jun QJ Qian, Chenying Zhang and Mengxin Zhao. 2012. China’s Financial System: Opportunities and
          Challenges. In Fan and Morck, eds. Nov Capitalizing China, U of Chicago Press
Allen, Franklin, Jun QJ Qian, Meijun Qian. 2005. Law, Finance and Economic Growth in China, Journal of financial
          economics 77(1)57-116
Allen, William and Han Shen, 2012. “Assessing China’s Top-down Securities Markets,” In Fan and Morck, eds. Nov
          Capitalizing China, U of Chicago Press
Almeida, Heitor; Kim, Chang-Soo; Kim, Hwanki Brian. 2015. Internal Capital Markets in Business Groups: Evidence
          from the Asian Financial Crisis. Journal of Finance 70(6)2539.
Almeida, Heitor; Park, Sang Yong; Subrahmanyam, Marti G; Wolfenzon, Daniel. 2011. The structure and formation
          of business groups: Evidence from Korean chaebols. Journal of Financial Economics 99(2)447.
Amiti, Mary; Weinstein, David E. 2011. Exports and Financial Shocks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4)1841.
Amsden, Alice. 1991. Diffusion of Development: The Late-Industrializing Model and Greater East Asia. American
          Economic Review 81(2)282.
Aoki, Masahiko & H. Patrick. 1994. The Japanese Main Bank System: Its Relevance for Developing and
          Transforming Economies. Oxford University Press
Aoki, Masahiko, Gregory Jackson & Hideki Miyajima. 2007. Corporate Governance in Japan: Institutional Change
          and Organizational Diversity. Oxford University Press
Aoki, Masahiko, Gregory Jackson & Hideki Miyajima. 2007. Corporate Governance in Japan: Institutional Change
          and Organizational Diversity. Oxford University Press
Aoki, Masahiko. 1988. Information, Incentives, and Bargaining in the Japanese Economy. Cambridge University
          Press, Cambridge.
Arikawa, Yasuhiro, and Yosuke Mitsusada. 2011. The adoption of poison pills and managerial entrenchment:
          Evidence from Japan. Japan and the World Economy 23(1)63-77.
Ayyagari Meghana, Asli Demirgilc, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2017. Formal versus Informal Finance: Evidence from
          China,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4465
Azariadis, Costas; Drazen, Allan. 1990. Threshold Externalities in Economic Development. Quarterly Journal of
          Economics 105(2)501.
Bae, Gil S; Cheon, Youngsoon S; Jun-koo, Kang. 2008. Intragroup Propping: Evidence from the Stock-Price Effects of
          Earnings Announcements by Korean Business Groups. Review of Financial Studies 21(5)2015-2060.
Bae, Kee-Hong Bae; Jun-Koo, Kang; Chan-Woo, Lim. 2002. The value of durable bank relationships: Evidence from
          Korean banking shocks. Journal of Financial Economics 64.2 (May 2002): 181-214.
Baek, Jae-Seung, Jun-Koo Kang & Inmoo Lee. 2006. Business Groups and Tunneling: Evidence from Private
          Securities Offerings by Korean Chaebols. Journal of Finance 61(5)2415-2449.
Barro, Robert J and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1978. Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the United
          States. Journal of Political Economy 86(4)549- 58.
Barry Naughton. 2007. The Chinese Economy, Transition and Growth (MIT Press, 2007).
Beason, Richard and Dennis Patrick Patterson. 2004. The Japan That Never Was: Explaining the Rise and Decline of
          a Misunderstood Country. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Beason, Richard and D. E. Weinstein. 1996. "Growth, Economies of Scale, and Targeting in Japan (1955-1990)."
          Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(2), 286-95.
Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine. "Stock markets, banks, and growth: Panel evidence." Journal of Banking &
          Finance 28.3 (2004): 423-442.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine.2003. Law, endowments, and finance." Journal of Financial


                                                       54
          Economics 70(2)137-181.
Bee Yan Aw; Chung, Sukkyun; Roberts, Mark J. 2003. Productivity, output, and failure: a comparison of Taiwanese
          and Korean manufacturers. Economic Journal 113(491)F485-F510.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. 2003. The transplant effect. American Journal of
          Comparative Law 51(1)163-203.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Hong Ma, and Shuichiro Nishioka. 2016. Recasting the Iron Rice Bowl: The Reform of China's
          State Owned Enterprises." Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming.
Bjuggren, Per-Olof, and Johanna Palmberg. "The impact of vote differentiation on investment performance in
          listed family firms." Family Business Review 23.4 (2010): 327-340.
Black, Bernard; Kim, Woochan.2012. The effect of board structure on firm value: A multiple identification
          strategies approach using Korean data. Journal of Financial Economics 104(1)203.
Bolt, J. and J. L. van Zanden. 2014. The Maddison Project: collaborative research on historical national accounts.
          Economic History Review 67(3)627–651.
Bolt, Jutta, Marcel Timmer and Jan Luiten van Zanden. 2014. GDP per capita since 1820, in Jan Luiten van Zanden,
          et al. eds. How Was Life? Global Well-being since 1820, OECD Publishing
Boot, Max. 2006. War Made New: Weapons, Warriors, and the Making of the Modern World. Penguin.
Boyd, J.H. and Smith, B.D. (1998) The evolution of debt and equity markets in economic development. Economic
          Theory 12: 519–560.
Brandt, L., Rawski, T. and Sutton, J. 2008. China's industrial development. in L. Brandt and T. Rawski eds. China's
          Great Economic Transformation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 569-632
Brandt, Loren, Debin Ma, and Thomas G. Rawski. 2014. From Divergence to Convergence: Reevaluating the History
          Behind China’s Economic Boom, Journal of Economic Literature 2014, 52(1), 45–123
Bransetter, Lee. 2008. China's embrace of globalization, in Brandt, Loren; Rawski, G. Thomas, China's Great
          Transformation, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, p. 655
Brown, James R., Gustav Martinsson, and Bruce C. Petersen. "Law, stock markets, and innovation." The Journal of
          Finance 68.4 (2013): 1517-1549.
Brown, Kerry. 2014. The New Emperors: Power and the Princelings in China. I.B.Tauris.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Michael Sockin and Wei Xiong. 2017. China’s Gradualistic Economic Approach and
          Financial Markets. American Economic Review, (May): 608-613.
Buruma, Ian. 2003. Inventing Japan: 1853-1964. Random House.
Byun, Hae-Young; Choi, Sunhwa; Hwang, Lee-Seok; Kim, Robert G. 2013. Business group affiliation, ownership
          structure, and the cost of debt. Journal of Corporate Finance 23(Dec.)311.
Campbell, Colin D; Tullock, Gordon. 1957. Some Little-Understood Aspects of Korea's Monetary and Fiscal Systems.
          American Economic Review 47(3)336.
Caprio, G. Jr., Levine, R. (2002). “Corporate governance in finance: Concepts and international observations”. In:
          Litan, R.E., Pomerleano, M., Sundararajan, V. (Eds.), Financial Sector Governance: The Roles of the Public
          and Private Sectors. The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, pp. 17–50.
Caprio, Gerard, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. "Governance and bank valuation." Journal of Financial Intermediation
          16.4 (2007): 584-617.
Carpenter, Jennifer N., Fangzhou Lu, and Robert F. Whitelaw. 2014. The Real Value of China’s Stock Market, Stern,
          NYU, mimeo.
Castro, Rui; Clementi, Gian Luca; MacDonald, Glenn. 2004. Investor protection, optimal incentives, and economic
          growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3)1131-1175.
Chandra, Nirmal Kumar. 1987. Education in China: from the Cultural Revolution to Four Modernizaitons Economic
          and Political Weekly 22(19/21)121-136
Chang, Parris H. 1974. The Cultural Revolution and Chinese Higher Education: Change and Controversy, The Journal
          of General Education 26(3)187-194
Chapin, Emerson. 1969. Success Story in South Korea. Foreign Affairs 47(3)560-574.
Chiu, B. and Lewis, M. 2006. Reforming China's State-Owned Enterprises and Banks, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd.,
          Cheltenham
Cho, Yoon-Je and Joon-Kyung Kim. 1997. Credit Policies and the Industrialization of Korea. Korea Development
          Institute.
Choe, Hyuk; Bong-Chan Kho; René M. Stulz. 2005. Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge? The Trading Experience of

                                                        55
          Foreign Investors in Korea. Review of Financial Studies 18(3)795.
Choe, Hyuk; Bong-Chan Kho; Stulz, Rene M. 1999. Do foreign investors destabilize stock markets? The Korean
          experience in 1997. Journal of Financial Economics 54(2)227-264.
Choi, Jongmoo Jay; Hiraki, Takato; Landi, James A. 2014. The value of multinationality and business group for
          Japanese firms. Journal of Corporate Finance 29 (Dec)88.
Choi, Jongmoo Jay; Park, Sae Woon; Too, Sean Sehyun. 2007. The Value of Outside Directors: Evidence from
          Corporate Governance Reform in Korea. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42(4)941.
Collins, Susan M. 1990. Lessons From Korean Economic Growth. American Economic Review 80(2)104.
Cooney, John W, Jr; Hideaki Kiyoshi Kato; Schallheim, James S. 2003. Underwriter Certification and Japanese
          Seasoned Equity Issues. Review of Financial Studies 16.3 (Autumn 2003): 949-982.
Davies, K. 2013. China Investment Policy: An Update, OECD Working Papers on International Investment, 2013/01,
          OECD Publishing.
Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Maksimovic, V. (2002) Funding growth in bank-based and market-based financial systems:
          evidence from firm-level data. Journal of Financial Economics 65: 337–363.
Deng Yongheng, Wu Jing, Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung. 2015. China’s Pseudo Monetary Policy. Review of
          Finance 19, 55-93.
Domar, Evsey D. 1946. Capital expansion, rate of growth, and employment. Econometrica, 137-147.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997. Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic divisions. Quarterly Journal of
          Economics 112 1203-1250.
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. "The European origins of economic development." Journal of Economic Growth
          21.3 (2016): 225-257.
Easterly, William. 2006. The Big Push déjà vu. Journal of Economic Literature 44(1)96-105.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Maoyong Fan, Michael Greenstone, Guojun He and Peng Yin. 2015. Growth, Pollution and Life
          Expectancy: China from 1991-2012, American Economic Review, (May) 226-231.
Ebenstein, Avraham. 2012. The Consequences of Industrialization: Evidence from Water Pollution and Digestive
          Cancer in China, the Review of Economics and Statistics, (Feb): 186
Elliott, Douglas J. and Kai Yan. 2013. The Chinese Financial System, the John L. Thornton China Center at Brookings
Elliott, Mark C., (2001) The Manchu Way: The Eight Banners and Ethnic Identity in Late Imperial China, Stanford
          University Press, ISBN 978-0-8047-4684-7.Fan, Gang, and Nicolas C. Hope. 2013. The role of State-Owned
          Enterprises in the Chinese Economy,
Fairbank, John K., Alexander Eckstein, and L. S. Yang. 1960. Economic change in early modern China: an analytic
          framework. Economic Development and Cultural Change 9(1)1-26.
Fan, Joseph, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung. 2012. Translating Market Socialism with Chinese Characteristics
          into Sustained Prosperity. In Joseph Fan and Randall Morck, eds. Capitalizing China. University of Chicago
          Press.
Feenstra, Robert C; Markusen, James R; Zeile, William. 1992. Accounting for Growth with New Inputs: Theory and
          Evidence. American Economic Review 82(2)415.
Flath, David. 1993. Shareholding in the Keiretsu, Japan's financial groups. Review of Economics and Statistics
          75(2)249.
Fohlin, Caroline. 2005. The history of corporate ownership and control in Germany. In Randall Morck, ed. A history
          of corporate governance around the world: Family business groups to professional managers. University
          of Chicago Press, 223-282.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Hannes F. Wagner. "The Survival of the Weakest: Flourishing Family Firms in
          Germany." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 27.4 (2015): 27-35.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Hideaki Miyajima. "The ownership of Japanese corporations in the 20th century."
          Review of Financial Studies 27.9 (2014): 2580-2625.
Franks, Julian; Mayer, Colin; Miyajima, Hideaki. 2014. The Ownership of Japanese Corporations in the 20th
          Century. Review of Financial Studies 27(9) 2580.
Gan, Jie. 2007. The Real Effects of Asset Market Bubbles: Loan- and Firm-Level Evidence of a Lending Channel.
          Review of Financial Studies 20(6)1941.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, Guanmin Liao and Xiaoyun Yu. 2015. The Brain Gain of Corporate Boards: Evidence from
          China. Journal of Finance, 1629


                                                         56
Gompers, Paul Alan, and Joshua Lerner. The venture capital cycle. MIT press, 2004.
Gordon, Roger H. and Wei Li, 2012, “Provincial and Local Governments in China: Fiscal Institutions and
         Government Behavior,” In Fan and Morck, eds. Nov Capitalizing China, U of Chicago Press
Gormley, Todd A; Johnson, Simon; Rhee, Changyong. 2015. Ending "Too Big To Fail": Government Promises Versus
         Investor Perceptions. Review of Finance 19(2)491.
Goto, Akira. 1982. Business Groups in a Market Economy. European Economic Review 19, 53-70.
Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart. 1986. The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of Vertical and Lateral
         Integration. Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719
Haber, S.H. 2004. Political competition and economic growth: Lessons from the political economy of bank
         regulation in the United States and Mexico. Mimeo. Stanford University.
Haber, S.H. 2005. “Mexico’s experiment with bank privatization and liberalization, 1991–2004”. Journal of Banking
         and Finance.
Haggard, Stephan, Byung-kook Kim, and Chung-in Moon. 1991. The transition to export-led growth in South Korea:
         1954–1966. The Journal of Asian Studies 50(4)850-873.
Haggard, Stephan, David Kang, and Chung-In Moon. 1997. Japanese colonialism and Korean development: A
         critique. World Development 25(6)867-881.
Haggard, Stephan, Wonhyuk Lim, and Euysung Kim, eds. Economic crisis and corporate restructuring in Korea:
         Reforming the Chaebol. Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Hanazaki, Masuharu and Akiyoshi Horiuchi. 2000. “Is Japan's Financial System Efficient?” Oxford Review of
         Economic Policy 16(2), 61-73.
Hanazaki, Masuharu and Akiyoshi Horiuchi. 2001. “A Vacuum of Governance in the Japanese Bank Management.”
         In H. Osano and T. Tachibanaki (eds.), Banking, Capital Markets and Corporate Governance. Palgrave, 133-
         180.
Harrod, Roy. 1939. An Essay in Dynamic Theory. Economic Journal 49(193)14–33.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. "Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm." Journal of political economy 98.6
         (1990): 1119-1158.
Hauser, Shmuel, and Beni Lauterbach. 2004. The value of voting rights to majority shareholders: Evidence from
         dual-class stock unifications. Review of Financial Studies 17(4)1167-1184.
Henrekson, Magnus & Jakobsson, Ulf. 2003. The transformation of ownership policy and structure in Sweden:
         convergence towards the Anglo-Saxon model?” New Political Economy 8(1)73–102.
Hideaki Kiyoshi Kato; Lemmon, Michael; Luo, Mi; Schallheim, James. 2005. An empirical examination of the costs
         and benefits of executive stock options: Evidence from Japan. Journal of Financial Economics 78(2)435-
         461.
Historical Materials of Shanghai qianzhuang (上海钱庄史料: Shanghai qianzhuang shi liao). 1961. Zhongguo Renmin
         Yinhang Shanghai fenghang, Jinrong Yanjiu Suo (Institute of Financial Studies, Shanghai Branch, People’s
         Bank of China), ed.,1961, Shanghai (reprint, Shanghai, 1978)
Ho, Jun Seong. 2014. Monetary authority independence and stability in medieval Korea: The Koryŏ monetary
         system through four centuries of East Asian transformations, 918-1392. Financial History Review
         21(3)259-280.
Hodder, James E; Tschoegl, Adrian E. 1985. Some Aspects of Japanese Corporate Finance. Journal of Financial and
         Quantitative Analysis; Seattle20.2 (Jun 1985): 173.
Hofstede, Geert, and Michael Harris Bond. 1988. The Confucius connection: From cultural roots to economic
         growth. Organizational Dynamics 16(4)5-21.
Högfeldt, Peter. 2005. The History and Politics of Corporate Ownership in Sweden. In Randall Morck ed., A History
         of Corporate Governance around the World. Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. University
         of Chicago Press.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap. 2001. Corporate Finance & Governance in Japan: The Road to the Future. MIT
         Press.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. 1990. The role of banks in reducing the costs of financial distress
         in Japan. Journal of Financial Economics 27(1)67-88.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. 1991. Corporate structure, liquidity, and investment: Evidence
         from Japanese industrial groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(1)33-60.
Hoshi, Takeo; Kashyap, Anil K. 2004. Japan's Financial Crisis and Economic Stagnation. Journal of Economic

                                                         57
          Perspectives 18(1)3-26.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow. 2009. Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India, Quarterly
          Journal of Economics 74(Nov.)1403-48.
Huang Jianhui. 1992. Shanxi piaohao shi. Taiyuan: Shanxi jingji chubanshe.
Huang, Yasheng. 2012. How did China Take Off? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3,147-170.
Huybens, Elisabeth, and Bruce D. Smith. "Inflation, financial markets and long-run real activity." Journal of
          Monetary Economics 43.2 (1999): 283-315.
Jae-Seung Baek; Jun-Koo, Kang; Kyung Suh Park.2004. Corporate governance and firm value: evidence from the
          Korean financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 72(2)265-313.
Jeong, Kap-Young; Masson, Robert T. 1990. Market Structure, Entry, and Performance in Korea. Review of
          Economics and Statistics 72(3)455.
Jackson, Gregory. 2001. The Origins of Bank-based and Market Based Financial Systems in Japan, Germany and the
          United States. In Wolfgang Streeck and Kōzō Yamamura, eds. The Origins of Nonliberal Capitalism:
          Germany and Japan in Comparison. Cornell University Press.
Joh, Sung Wook.2003. Corporate governance and firm profitability: evidence from Korea before the economic
          crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 68(2)287-322.
Johnson, Chalmers. 1982. MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The growth of industrial policy 1925-1975. Stanford
          University Press.
Jun-Koo, Kang; Shivdasani, Anil; Yamada, Takeshi. 2000. The effect of bank relations on investment decisions: An
          investigation of Japanese takeover bids. Journal of Finance 55(5)2197-2218.
Kajima, Morinosuke. The emergence of Japan as a world power, 1895-1925. Tuttle Publishing, 1967.
Kandel, Eugene, Konstantin Kosenko, Randall Morck, and Yishay Yafeh. 2017. The great pyramids of America: A
          revised history of US business groups, corporate ownership and regulation, 1930-1950. National Bureau of
          Economic Research working paper 19691.
Kaplan, Steven and Bernadette Minton 1994. Appointments of outsiders to Japanese boards: Determinants and
          implications for managers. Journal of Financial Economics 36(2)225-258.
Karmel, Solomon. 2017. Research Notes: Emerging Securities Markets in China: Capitalism with Chinese
          Characteristics. In Michael Dillon, ed. Key Papers of Chinese Economic History since 1949, pp. 1253-1273.
          Koninklijke Brill: Leiden.
Kato, T. 1957. History of Banks in Japan (Honpo ginkoshiron), (in Japanese), University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo.
Kee-Hong Bae; Jun-Koo, Kang; Jin-Mo, Kim. 2002. Tunneling or value added? Evidence from mergers by Korean
          business groups. Journal of Finance 57(6)2695-2740.
Keller, Wolfgang, Ben Li and Carol Shiue. 2011. China’s Foreign Trade: Perspectives From the Past 150 Years The
          World Economy, Wiley Blackwell, vol. 34(6)853-892.
Kerbo, R. and John McKinstry. 1995. Who Rules Japan? The Inner Circles of Economic and Political Power. Praeger.
Kim, Hyung-A. 2004. Korea's Development under Park Chung Hee. Routledge.
Kim, Jae-on and B. C. Koh. 1972. Electoral behavior and social development in South Korea: An aggregate data
          analysis of presidential elections. Journal of Politics 34(3)825-859.
Kim, Ryoonhee. 2017. Financial Weakness and Product Market Performance: Internal Capital Market Evidence.
          Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 51(1)307.
King, R.G. and Ross Levine. 1993a. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right. Quarterly Journal of Economics
          108: 717–737.
King, R.G. and Ross Levine. 1993b. Finance, entrepreneurship, and growth: theory and evidence. Journal of
          Monetary Economics 32: 513–542.
King, Robert G., and Ross Levine. 1994. Capital fundamentalism, economic development, and economic growth.
          Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. Vol. 40. North-Holland.
Kohli, Atul. 1999. Where do high-growth political economies come from? The Japanese Lineage of Korea’s
          Developmental State. In Merideth Woo-Cummings, ed. The Developmental State. Cornell University Press,
          c. 4.
Kornai, James. 1986. The soft budget constraint. Kyklos 39(1)3-30.
Kornicki, Peter Francis. 1998. The Book in Japan: A Cultural History from the Beginnings to the 19th Century
          (Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 5: Japan). Brill.
Kung & Lin. 2007. The Decline of Township-and-Village Enterprises in China’s Economic Transition. World

                                                        58
          Development 35(4).
Kunt, Asli Demirguc and Ross Levine. 2001 Financial structure and economic growth: a cross-country comparison of
          banks, markets, and development. MIT Press.
Kuo, Ting-Yee and Kwang-Ching Liu. 1978. Self-strengthening: the Pursuit of Western Technology. In John K.
          Fairbank, ed. Cambridge History of China, Vol 10: Late Chi’ing 1800-1911: Part 1, e 491-542, Cambridge:
          Cambridge University Press.
Kutsuna, Kenji. 2004. Why Does Book Building Drive Out Auction Methods of IPO Issuance? Evidence from Japan.
          Review of Financial Studies 17(4)1129-1166.
Kutsuna, Kenji; Smith, Janet Kiholm; Smith, Richard L. 2009. Public Information, IPO Price Formation, and Long-Run
          Returns: Japanese Evidence. Journal of Finance 64(1)505.
Kwon, Jene K; Paik, Hoon. 1995. Factor price distortions, resource allocation, and growth: A computable general
          equilibrium analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics 77(4)664.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Zamarripa, G. (2003). “Related lending”. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. "The economic consequences of legal origins."
          Journal of economic literature 46.2 (2008): 285-332.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. Government ownership of banks. Journal of
          Finance 57()1)265-301.
Laeven, L. (2001). “Insider lending: The case of Russia”. Journal of Comparative Economics 29, 207–229.
Laeven, L., Levine, R. (2005). “Is there a diversification discount in financial conglomerates?”. Journal of Financial
          Economics.
Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine. 2009. Bank governance, regulation and risk taking." Journal of financial economics
          93(2)259-275.
Lardy, Nichalas. 2014. Markets over Mao: The Rise of Private Business in China. Peterson Institute of International
          Economics.
Lardy, Nicholas. 2003.Trade Liberalization and Its Role in Chinese Economic Growth IIE – Paper prepared for an
          International Monetary Fund and National Council of Applied Economic Research Conference A Tale of
          Two Giants: India's and China's Experience with Reform and Growth New Delhi, November 14-16
Larsson, Mats & Tom Petersson. 2017. Tradition and renewal – business groups in Sweden. In Asli Colpan and
          Takashi Hikino, eds. Diversified Business Groups in the West: History and Theory, forthcoming.
Lawrence J. Lau, Yingyi Qian, Gerard Roland. 2000. An Interpretation of China’s Dual-Track Approach to Transition.
          Journal of Political Economy (2000): 120-143.
Levine, R. (2002) Bank-based or market-based financial systems: which is better? Journal of Financial
          Intermediation 11: 398–428.
Levine, R. and Zervos, S. (1998) Stock markets, banks, and economic growth. American Economic Review 88: 537–
          558.
Levine, Ross. "Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda." Journal of economic literature
          35.2 (1997): 688-726.
Lewis, W. Arthur. 1954. Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour. Manchester School 22(2)139-
          191.
Li, David D; Li, Shan. 1996. A theory of corporate scope and financial structure. Journal of Finance 51(2)691.
Li, Hongbin and Li-an Zhou. 2005. Political Turnover and Economic Performance: The Incentive Role of Personnel
          Control in China, Journal of Public Economics 89(9/10)1743-72.
Li, Zhaohua, Takeshi Yamada. 2015. Political and Economic Incentives of Government in Partial Privatization.
          Journal of Corporate Finance (Jun) 169.
Lim, Wonhyuk, and Joon-Ho Hahm. 2006. Turning a Crisis into an Opportunity: The Political Economy of Korea’s
          Financial Sector Reform. From Crisis to Opportunity: Financial Globalization and East Asian Capitalism
          (2006): 85-121.
Lim, Wonhyuk. 2000. The Origin and Evolution of the Korean Economic System. Seoul: Korea Development
          Institute Press.
Lim, Wonhyuk. 2003 The Emergence of the Chaebol and the Origins of the Chaebol Problem. In Wonhyuk Lim,
          Stephan Haggard, and Euysung Kim, eds. Economic crisis and corporate restructuring in Korea: Reforming
          the chaebol, 35-52.
Lim, Wonhyuk. 2012. Chaebol and industrial policy in Korea. Asian Economic Policy Review 7(1)69-86.

                                                         59
Lin Chen, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung and Xiaofeng Zhao, (2016), Anti-Corruption Reforms and Shareholder
         Valuations: Event Study Evidence from China,” NBER Working Paper 22001, Feb 2016.
Love, I. (2003). “Financial development and financing constraint: International evidence from the structural
         investment model”. Review of Financial Studies 16, 765–791.
Lü, Xiaobo. 2000. Cadres and Corruption: The Organizational Involution of the Chinese Communist Party. Stanford
         University Press.
Luintel, Kul B., Mosahid Khan, Philip Arestis, and Konstantinos Theodoridis. "Financial structure and economic
         growth." Journal of Development Economics 86, no. 1 (2008): 181-200.
McGregor, Richard. 2010. The Party: The Secret World of China's Communist Rulers. Penguin.
Mehrotra, Vikas, Randall Morck, Jungwook Shim, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang. 2013. Adoptive Expectations:
         Rising Sons in Japanese family firms. Journal of Financial Economics 108(3)840-854.
Mehrotra, Vikas; van Schaik, Dimitri; Spronk, Jaap; Steenbeek, Onno. 2011. A Creditor-Focused Corporate
         Governance: Evidence from Mergers and Acquisitions in Japan. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
         Analysis 46(4)1051.
Meissner, Christopher M. & John P. Tang. 2017. Upstart Industrialization and Exports, Japan 1880-1910. NBER wp
         23481.
Minetti, Raoul; Yun, Sung-Guan. 2015. Institutions, Bailout Policies, and Bank Loan Contracting: Evidence from
         Korean Chaebols. Review of Finance 19(6)2223.
Mitchener, Kris James & Ohnuki, Mari, 2009. Institutions, Competition, and Capital Market Integration in Japan.
         Journal of Economic History 69(01)138-171,
Miyajima, Hideaki. 2004. Economic History of Industrial Policy and Corporate Governance: Micro Analysis of
         Japanese Industrial Development. Tokyo
Mo, Jongryn, and Barry R. Weingast. 2013. Korean political and economic development: crisis, security, and
         institutional rebalancing. Harvard University Asia Center.
Morck, Randall. 2005. How to eliminate pyramidal business groups: the double taxation of intercorporate
         dividends and other incisive uses of tax policy. Tax policy and the economy 19(1)135-179.
Morck, R. and M. Nakamura. 1999. "Banks and Corporate Control in Japan." Journal of Finance, 54(1), 319-39.
Morck, R. and M. Nakamura. 2007. Business Groups and the Big Push: Meiji Japan's Mass Privatization and
         Subsequent Growth. Enterprise & Society, 8(3), 543-601.
Morck, R. K. and M. Nakamura. 2005. A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean a History of Corporate
         Ownership in Japan. In Randall Morck, ed. History of Corporate Governance around the World, University
         of Chicago Press, pp. 367-465.
Morck, R.; M. Nakamura and A. Shivdasani. 2000. Banks, Ownership Structure, and Firm Value in Japan. Journal of
         Business, 73(4), 539-67.
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, 2005. Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment and
         Growth. Journal of Economics Literature 43(3)657-722.
Morck, Randall, M. Deniz Yavuz, and Bernard Yeung. 2011. Banking system control, capital allocation, and economy
         performance. Journal of Financial Economics 100.2 264-283.
Morck, Randall, M. Deniz Yavuz, and Bernard Yeung. 2011. Banking system control, capital allocation, and economy
         performance." Journal of Financial Economics 100( 2)264-283.
Morck, Randall, and Fan Yang. 2011. The Shanxi Banks: The Rise and Fall of the Rishengchang Bank Model Limiting
         Shareholder Influence to Attract Capital. In Origins of Shareholder Advocacy, pp. 187-212. Palgrave
         Macmillan.
Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung. 2016. China in Asia, China Economic Review, (40) 2016, 297-308.
Morikawa, Hidemasa. 1992. Zaibatsu: the rise and fall of family enterprise groups in Japan, University of Tokyo
         Press, Tokyo.
Morris-Suzuki, Tessa, and Takurō Seiyama, eds. 1989. Japanese capitalism since 1945: critical perspectives. ME
         Sharpe.
Murphy, K. M.; A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny. 1989. Industrialization and the Big Push. Journal of Political Economy,
         97(5), 1003-26.
Noguchi, Yukio. 1998. The 1940 system: Japan under the wartime economy. American Economic Review 88(2)404-
         407.
Norton, Roger D. Planning with Facts: The Case of Korea. American Economic Review 60(2)59.

                                                        60
Okazaki, Tetsuji. 1994. “The Japanese Firm under the Wartime planned Economy.” In Masashiko Aoki and Ronald
         Dore (eds.), The Japanese Firm – Sources of Competitive Strength. Oxford University Press.
Okazaki, Tetsuji; Sawada, Michiru. 2007. Effects of a bank consolidation promotion policy: evaluating the 1927
         Bank Law in Japan. Financial History Review 14.1 (Apr 2007): 29-61.
Olson, Mancur. 1986. Rapid Growth as a Destablizing Force. Journal of Economic History 23(4)529-52.
Park, Seung-Rok; Kwon, Jene K. 1995. Rapid economic growth with increasing returns to scale and little or no
         productivity growth. Review of Economics and Statistics 77(2)332.
Park, Sooyoung. 2009. Analysis of Saemaul Undong: a Korean rural development programme in the 1970s. Asia-
         Pacific Development Journal 16(2)113.
Park, Yung Chul. 1990. Development Lessons from Asia: The Role of Government In South Korea. American
         Economic Review 80(2)118.
Peek, Joe & Eric Rosengren 2005. Unnatural Selection: Perverse incentives & the misallocation of credit in Japan.
         American Economic Review 95, 1144-66.
Peek, Joe; Rosengren, Eric S. 2005. Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the Misallocation of Credit in
         Japan. American Economic Review 95(4)1144-1166.
Prowse, Stephen D. 1990. Institutional Investment Patterns and Corporate Financial Behavior in the United States
         and Japan. Journal of Financial Economics 27(1)43.
Qian, Yangyi. 2000. The process of China's market transitions: evolutionary, historical and comparative
         perspective, Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 156, 151–171
Qian, Yingyi. 2003. How Reform Worked in China. In Dani Rodik, ed. In Search for Prosperity Analytic Narratives on
         Economic Growth. New Jessy: Princeton University Press, 143-168.
Rajan, R.G. and Zingales, L. (1998) Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88: 559–586.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 2003. Saving capitalism from the capitalists. New York: Crown Business, 2003.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 2003. The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the
         twentieth century. Journal of financial economics 69(1)5-50.
Ramazani, Reza M; Maskus, Keith E. 1993. A test of the factor endowments model of trade in a rapidly
         industrializing country: The case of Korea. Review of Economics and Statistics 75(3)568.
Reischauer, Edwin O. 1988. The Japanese Today: Change and Continuity. Harvard University Press, Cambridge: MA.
Rosovsky, Henry. 1961. Capital Formation in Japan: 1868-1940. Free Press of Glencoe.
Schrecker, John E. (2004) The Chinese Revolution in Historical Perspective, Greenwood Publishing Group.
Seth, Michael J. 2002. Education fever: Society, politics, and the pursuit of schooling in South Korea. University of
         Hawaii Press.
Sheard, Paul. 1991. The economics of interlocking shareholding in Japan. Richerche Economiche 45, 421 448.
Sheard, Paul. 1994. Interlocking Shareholdings and Corporate Governance. In Masahiko Aoki and Ronald Dore
         (eds.) The Japanese Firm: Sources of Competitive Strength. Oxford University Press.
Sussman, N., & Yafeh, Y. 2000. Institutions, reforms, and country risk: Lessons from Japanese government debt in
         the Meiji era. Journal of Economic History 60(2)42-467.
Takahashi, Hidenori. 2015. Dynamics of bank relationships in entrepreneurial finance. Journal of Corporate Finance
         34(Oct)23.
Teranishi, Juro. 2005. Evolution of the Economic System in Japan. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Triade, Victor. 2005. The Big Push, Industrialization and International Trade: The Role of Exports. Journal of
         Development Economics 76(Oct.)22-48.
Uchida, Hirofumi; Nakagawa, Ryuichi. 2007. Herd behavior in the Japanese loan market: Evidence from bank panel
         data. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16(4)555-583.
Wang, Shaoguang. 2006. Openness and Inequality: The case of China. In Lowell Dittmer and Guoli Liu, eds. China's
         Deep Reform: Domestic Politics in Transition. Rowman & Littlefield, 285-302.
Weber, Max. 1915. Konfuzianismus und Taoismus. Tübingen, JCB Mohr.
Weinstein, David E., and Yishay Yafeh. "On the costs of a bank‐centered financial system: Evidence from the
         changing main bank relations in Japan." Journal of Finance 53.2 (1998): 635-672.
Weinstein, David E; Yafeh, Yishay. 1998. On the costs of a bank-centered financial system: Evidence from the
         changing main bank relations in Japan. Journal of Finance 53.2 (Apr 1998): 635-672.
Weiss, Tim and Klaus Weber. 2017. Globalization in action: Templates, tensions and strategies of action In Kenyan
         technology entrepreneurship. Northwestern University Working paper.

                                                         61
Woo, Jung-en. 1991. Race to the Swift: State and Finance in Korean Industrialization. Columbia University Press.
World Bank, 1992. China: Implications and Option of Urban Housing Reforms. Washington DC.
Wu Jinglian and Renwei Zhao. 1987. The Dual Pricing System in China’s Industry, Journal of Comparative
         Economics, 11(3)309-318
Wu, Jing, Yongheng Deng, Jun Huang, Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung, 2014. Incentives and Outcomes: China’s
         Environmental Policy. Capitalism and Society 9(1)2.
Xie, Yu and Zhou, Xiang. 2014. Income Inequality in Today’s China. Proceedings of the National Academy of
         Sciences 111(19)6928-33.
Xu, Chenggang. 2011. The Fundamental Institutions of China's Reforms and Development, the Journal Economic
         Literature (Dec.)1076-1151
Yafeh, Y. & Khanna, T. 2007. Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites? Journal of Economic
         Literature 45(2)331-373
Yafeh, Y. & Khanna, T. 2005. Business Groups and Risk Sharing around the World. Journal of Business 78(1)301-
         340.
Yang, Yung Y; Hwang, Min. 1994. Price behavior in Korean manufacturing. Review of Economics and Statistics 76.3
         (Aug 1994): 461.
Yasuda, Ayako. 2007. Bank relationships and underwriter competition: Evidence from Japan. Journal of Financial
         Economics 86(2)369.
Young, Alwyn. 1995. The tyranny of numbers: Confronting the statistical realities of the East Asian growth
         experience. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3)641.
Zheng Siqi and Matthew Kahn. 2013. Understanding China’s Urban Pollution Dynamics, Journal of Economic
         Literature (Sept.)731-772.
Zheng, Siqi and Matthew Kahn. 2017. A New Era of Pollution Progress in Urban China? Journal of Economic
         Perspectives, Winter, 71-92
Zhu Ning. 2016. The Guaranteed Bubble. Feb 2016
Zweig, David and Stanley Rosen. 2003. How China trained a new generation abroad. Science and Development
         Network 22/05/03.




                                                      62
