                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE IMPACT OF MONETARY TARGETING
                          IN THE UNITED STATES: 1976-1984




                                   Car] E. Walsh




                              Working Paper No. 2384




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1987




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or the Federal Reserve System.
This research was partially supported by the National Science Foundation. I would
like to thank Marvin Goodfriend, James Hoehn, Dick Kopcke, Lee Ohanian, Steve
Sheffrin and seminar participants at U.C. Berkeley, U.C. Davis, U.C.L.A., and
U.C. Santa Cruz for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2384
                                               September 1987




                    The Impact of Monetary Targeting
                    in the United States: 1976-1984




                               ABSTRACT



     This paper attempts to assess empirically the impact on output and
inflation of monetary policy in the U.S. during the period of Ml targeting
from 1976 to 1984. The impact of policy shocks on output and inflation,
and the impact of aggregate demand, aggregate supply and money demand shocks
on Ml and the Fed's target path, are examined through the use of impulse
response functions. These response functions are based on an
orthogonalization of VAR residuals derived from an estimated structural
model. The VAR specification reflects the finding that Ml and the Fed's
target for Ml are cointegrated.

     The evidence suggests that money supply shocks and shocks to Ml target
have accounted for little of the observed volatility of output or
inflation. However, the induced policy response to aggregate demand and
supply shocks has contributed to subsequent inflation.




                                           Carl E. Walsh
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Crown College
                                           University of California
                                           at Santa Cruz
                                           Santa Cruz, CA 95064
                                           (408) 429—4082
 I.    Introduction

       From the first quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986, Ml grew

 at a 14 percent annual rate while nominal GNP growth averaged only

 5.1 percent. This divergent behavior has been interpreted by many as a

 breakdown in the relationship between money and nominal income, and it has

 led the Federal Reserve to at least temporarily abandon Ml targeting as a

guide to monetary policy. This brings to an end a period during which

monetary policy in the U.S. was generally framed in terms of Ml growth

targets. It would seem, then, that now would be an opportune time to

examine the impact of monetary targeting on both monetary policy and the

economy during the 1976 to 1984 period of Ml targeting. During these

years, the Fed was criticized both for adhering too closely to strict

monetarist policies and for not   adhering sufficiently tightly to such
policies. It has even been questioned whether the monetary targets

established by the Fed had any impact on the actual conduct of monetary

policy at all. The frequent deviations from target paths that the Fed

tolerated, as well as the Fed's practice of always using actual Ml as the

base for establishing new target paths no matter how far from the old path

actual Ml might be, led many to blame the Fed for excessive average

inflation and inflation volatility.

      The purpose of this paper is to assess empirically the impact of the

Fed's monetary policy on real output and inflation during the period of Ml

targeting. After briefly reviewing some aspects of the Fed's targeting

procedures, section II discusses the criticisms the Fed's procedures have

received. This discussion suggests ways in which empirical evidence can be

used to determine whether monetary policy contributed to economic

instability.
                                  —2—
    The basic approach to determining the impact of monetary policy

involves an examination of impulse response functions and variance

decompositions obtained by using an estimated structural model to

orthogonalize VAR residuals. A general description of this approach is

contained in section III, together with a discussion of the structural

model and the estimation procedure. Section IV presents the empirical

results, while section V contains a brief summary of the paper.

     Several interesting conclusions emerge from the analysis. First,

neither shocks to money supply growth nor to the target path seem to

account for much output growth or inflation volatility during this period.

This implies that what contribution monetary policy made to the volatility

of these two variables was not due to autonomous policy shocks. Second,

the induced response of monetary policy to economic shocks does seem to

have contributed to higher inflation.

     These conclusions must be viewed as very tentative because of several

limitations from which the empirical analysis suffers. Most important of

these is the shortness of the sample period. This has prevented an

adequate treatment of the possible policy regime shifts that occurred

during the 1976 to 1984 period. This is potentially a serious problem

since several empirical relationships seem to have shifted in response to

changes in Fed policy procedures. For example, Roley and Walsh [19851

report that the response of interest rates to weekly money supply

announcements changed in response to changes in the Feds operating

procedures, and Huizinga and Mishkin [1986] find that the stochastic

process describing real interest rates shifted in October 1979 and October

 1982, both dates of monetary policy shifts.1"
                                       -3—
       Sufficient evidence exists to question the estimation of a single

 model over the entire 1976—1984 period. The scarcity of observations

 combined with the plethora of regimes, implies that one must be cautious

 when drawing conclusions from the empirical results presented in this

 paper. Hopefully, a model estimated over the entire period can still

 provide some useful information about the average impact of policy
                                                                      during
 this period.




 II. Monetary Targeting

      The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve System

has publicly announced target growth ranges for monetary aggregates since

the passage of House Concurrent Resolution 133 in 1975. From the first

quarter of 1976 until the passage of the Full Employment and Balanced

Growth Act of l978, the practice of the FOMC was to announce every

quarter a target growth rate range for each monetary aggregate that would

apply over a four quarter period. Thus, in February 1976, the FOMC set a

target range of 4% -   7%   for Ml growth to apply to the period from 1975:4

to 1976:4. This target range was calculated from a base equal to the

actual level of Ml during 1975:4. Three months later, the FOMC announced a

four quarter target range, again 4+% — 7% to apply to the period 1976:1 to

1977:1. The base for this target range was the actual level of Ml during

1976: 1.


     This method of calculating the growth targets for Ml and the broader

monetary aggregates resulted in quarterly base drift: each quarter, the

base for the new growth ranges shifted to equal the actual level of money

in the previous quarter. The effect of such base drift is to male

permanent any deviations of actual money from the target path and introduce

a unit root into the money supply process.
                                  —4—
    Under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act of 1978, the FOMC was required to

establish target growth ranges every February for the calendar year. The

FOMC would establish target ranges to apply from the fourth quarter of the

previous year to the fourth quarter of the current year, calculated from a

base equal to the actual value of the aggregate in the fourth quarter of

the previous year. Thus, in February 1979, the FOMC announced a target

range of 1% - 4% growth for Ml starting from the actual value of Ml in

1978:4. This new procedure replaced automatic quarterly base drift with

automatic annual base drift.

     The FOMC also reviewed its target ranges at mid-year and occasionally

adjusted either the base or the target growth rate ranges. For example, in

July of both 1983 and 1985 the FOMC responded to rapid Ml growth during the

first six months of the year by using second quarter Ml as its new base for

calculating growth paths and by adjusting the growth rate ranges.1'

     The behavior of the log of Ml during the 1976 to 1984 period is shown

by the solid line in Figure 1. The average annual growth rate from the

fourth quarter of 1975 to the fourth quarter of 1984 was 7.4%.The dashed

line in the Figure illustrates a hypothetical path for Ml derived from the

successive midpoints of the target ranges set by the FOMC but maintaining

the base at the actual level of Ml in 1975:4. This "no drift" series for

Ml grew at an average annual rate of 5.5% from 1975:4 to 1984:4. The

cumulative gap between these two lines represents one measure of the effect

on the money supply of allowing base drift to occur. This measure is shown

in Figure 2 as the dashed line. By the fourth quarter of 1984, Ml was

roughly 15% higher than it would have been if it had always grown at the

midpoint of the FOMC's successive growth rate ranges.

     The solid line in Figure 2 plots the difference between actual Ml and

the value implied for Ml by the midpoint of the then current target range.
                                    -5—
 Positive values reflect quarters when actual Ml was above the target

 midpoint; the series is negative when Mi was below the target midpoint. Ml

 exceeded the target midpoint in every quarter except one from 1976:4

 through 1981:1. Another string of positive deviations occurred between

 1982:2 and 1984:2, including the two largest target overshoots of the

 period in 1982:4 and 1983:1. Under the FOMC's policy of automatic base

 drift, each quarter's deviation prior to 1979:1 permanently affected the

 subsequent Ml path. After 1979:1, only fourth quarter deviations were

 impounded automatically into the target path.

      The FOMC has frequently been criticized for allowing Ml to deviate

 from the midpoint growth rate implied by the target ranges ——   particularly
when Ml ended a target period outside the ranges altogether - and for then

allowing target deviations to become permanent by using actual Ml as the

base for subsequent target paths.1 Automatic base drift implies that the

money stock will follow a random walk process, and such a process would

seem to be inconsistent with a policy of price stabilization. It has also

been claimed that, since base drift makes permanent any short-run

deviations from target, it hinders the achievement of both stable money

growth and stable prices over longer periods. Broaddus and Goodfriend

[19841 discuss three major objections to base drift. First, it reduces the

public's confidence in the Fed's commitment to maintaining stable, steady

expansion of the money supply over the long—run. Second, by automatically

"forgiving" any target misses, base drift greatly reduces the incentives

for the Fed to hit its targets. Missing a target in one year imposes no

penalty on the Fed in subsequent years since each year automatically starts

on target. Third, temporary disturbances that cause money to deviate from

target are allowed to permanently affect the money stock and, therefore,
                                  -6-
the price level. This leads to increased uncertainty about the future

price level and reduces one of the advantages of monetary targeting.'

    Goodfriend [19861 has recently argued that the non—trend stationarity

of both the money supply and the price level arises from the Federal

Reserve's attempts to smooth nominal interest rates.' The manner in

which an interest rate smoothing objective by the monetary authority leads

to a non—trend stationary price level can be illustrated by considering the

impact of a random price level shock that leaves the real rate of interest

unchanged.Z' Any attempt to move the price level back to its initial level

will generate non—zero expected inflation, thereby leading to nominal

interest rate movements. The monetary authority can prevent nominal rates

from moving by keeping the expected rate of inflation equal to zero.

Hence, in this example, smoothing nominal interest rates is similar to

smoothing expected inflation. In such an environment, the monetary

authority can keep expected inflation always equal to zero as long as all

price level movements are expected to be permanent. Thus, a disturbance

that would otherwise result in a temporary price fluctuation will end up

having a permanent effect on the price level because of the induced effect

of monetary policy. In contrast, Goodfriend shows that, with price level

smoothing objectives alone, the optimal price level is trend stationary.

     The implications of Goodfriend's analysis can be illustrated in the

following simple stochastic model:"


                                                                           (1)
           R=Ep÷1_pt+r;


           mt —   Pt
                       =   - R;                                             (2)
                                               —7—
                =
                    8t1 + a.           0 < e     1;                                             (3)




                =                  —                  o
                    olat + (et         62et1),            <         1;                          (4)




                =
                    e1 +     ct.                                                                (5)




The ex—ante real rate of interest is assumed to be equal to a constant, r,

so the nominal rate Rt is given in equation (1) as r plus the expected rate

of inflation. Equation (2) gives the demand for real money balances as a

function of the nominal interest rate and a stochastic component,
                                                                                          c, whose
generating process is specified by equation (3).                    at is assumed to be a

white noise disturbance term. For 0 <            e    <    1,      follows a stationary

stochastic process with finite unconditional variance a/(1 —                       82);   for 8 =

1, cx follows a random walk. A simple policy rule for the nominal money

supply that assumes m can contemporaneously respond to the stochastic

component of money demand is given by equation (4).                      e is a random walk

control error where Ct in (5) is a white noise disturbance assumed to be

uncorrelated with at. The parameter 62 is taken to be a choice variable of

the monetary authority (as is 6i) that allows the policymaker to affect the

degree of persistence the control error has on the level of the nominal

money supply.

     If bubble solutions are ruled out, it is straightforward to show that

the equilibrium price level is given by


                     (6i —   1)                                62
                                       +               +
          Pt = 1 +
                       8(1_el)             (l_d2)e            1 + 8 (et -   eti)                6)
                                                -8-
and the nominal Interest rate is equal to



             (6i_1)(e_1)                 62                                              (7)
       Rt= l+8(lO)                    1+B (et_eti)+r.


      Equations (6) and (7) show the potential conflict that exists between

interest rate smoothing and price level statlonarity. It Is clear that

money demand disturbances should always be completely accomodated (61 = 1)

since that reduces the one step ahead forecast error variances of both Pt

and Rt. However, interest rate smoothing also requires that 62 =                0,   while

price level stationarity requires that 62 = 1.

      A choice of 62 = 0 ImplIes that                  is non—trend stationary, so one

could characterize the nonstationarity of p as caused by the

nonstationarity of m. However, nonstationarity of in is neither necessary

nor sufficient to generate price level nonstationarity. For example, If

o = 1 but      =   0,       p will be nonstatlonary whether or not in Is.

      An alternative perspective that will prove useful in the empirical

analysis is to note that if the unit root in p is induced by the unit root

in m when 62 =     0,       then real money balances should be stationary. From (4)

and   (6),

                        1   +
                              618(1_6)        + 862
        m - Pt     =
                        1   + 8(1-0)           1-.;: (et
                                                           -
                                                               eti)
                       1 +
                           6i8(1_O) a          862                                        (8)
               =
                        1 + 8(1—8)       t     1+8 t
                                           -9-

 Equation (8) shows that e         1 is both necessary and sufficient for real

 money balances to be stationary. This result holds regardless of the

 values taken by the policy parameters           and 62.
      If e <   1   and 62 =   0, both p and m are nonstationary while m - p   will

 be cointegrated (Engle and Granger [l986]).V This is a testable

 hypothesis and will be examined in Section II. Evidence that cointegration

can be rejected would indicate that the real demand for money is subject to

permanent shocks (e =     1).    In this case, a policy of steady growth in the

money supply would still generate a random walk component to the price

level as prices adjust to keep the real supply of money equal to real

demand in the face of permanent shifts in demand. Nonstationarity of p

would arise in this case even if the monetary authority placed no weight on

interest rate smoothing as an objective of policy, and, instead, followed a

constant growth rate rule for the money supply.

     While the Fed's toleration of frequent target misses and its procedure of

introducing a unit root into the money stock would certainly seem to create at

least a priori grounds for attributing inflation volatility, price level

uncertainty and the non—trend stationarity of the price level to Federal Reserve

policy, a non—trend stationary money stock can also arise even when the central

bank's only concern is price stability if real money demand is nonstationary.

Minimizing price forecast error variance requires that 61 =    =        1.    In this
                                                            62
case, p is stationary, but the nominal money supply, and real money balances

will be nonstationary if e =       1.   The money stock will itself follow a difference

stationary process. However, the unit root in money, rather than inducing a

unit root in prices, would in this case, prevent prices from having a random

walk component.12' Evidence that Fed•policy has introduced a unit root into the
                                          - 10   -

                                                                     that base
money supply rocss is not, therefore, sufficient to support the view

drift has contributed to inflation volatility arid price level uncertainty.

     The joint behavior of money, the Fed's target for Ml, and major macro

variables can provide evidence on the impact of monetary policy during the

targeting period. If the Fed has introduced a unit root into money in an

attempt to limit the price adjustment required by persistent velocity and income

shocks, money and prices will not be cointegrated. In addition, both velocity

and output shocks should lead to adjustments in the target path and the actual

money stock only to the extent that such shocks are persistent.      Thus, evidence

that temporary velocity or output shocks produce permanent movements in the

target path would provide evidence that the FOMC's targeting practices have

contributed to price instability.

     Because a monetary policy concerned with price stability should offset

money supply control errors (&2 =   1),    a finding that money supply shocks lead to

persistent money supply and price movements would also indicate that Fed policy

has contributed to price instability. Further evidence that the FOMC has,

through its policy actions, contributed to inflation uncertainty would be a

finding that either innovations to the, target path or to the money supply itself

account for a significant fraction of inflation volatility.

     In assessing the impact of monetary policy, an important distinction must

be made between the effects of policy shocks and the effects of induced policy

responses. For example, a monetary authority might maintain perfect control

over the money supply and eliminate all unpredicted money supply movements

 (i.e., no money shocks are allowed to occur), but still contribute to output and

 inflation volatility through its systematic reaction to economic disturbances.

The opposite extreme would be a policy that allows no money supply movements in

response to economic events but which, because of poor control techniques,
                                      - 11   -


 permits frequent random shocks to the money supply. In judging an historical
 episode, it is useful to know whether the major effects of monetary policy arose

 through the systematic reaction of the monetary authorities to movements in

 income, inflation and interest rates or through unpredicted shifts in the

monetary targets or the money supply itself.

     This discussion suggests that a Vector Autoregression (VAR) incorporating

the FOMC's monetary target, the actual money supply, and the aggregate price

level, plus other macro variables, can shed light on the validity of the

criticisms of FOMC procedures. Impulse response functions derived from an

estimated VAR system can indicate whether the FOMC has allowed temporary output

shocks or money demand shocks to produce persistent movements in money and

prices. The contribution of money shocks and policy target shocks to inflation

volatility can be assessed by examining the variance decomposition of

inflation forecast errors.

     To provide really useful information, however, it is necessary to

identify orthogonalized money supply shocks, policy target shocks, etc.

from the VAR residuals. The method by which a structural interpretation

for the orthogonalized innovations is achieved is discussed in the next

section, together with a description of the variables included in the VAR

system and a discussion of the implications of cointegration for the

specification of the variables in the VAR.



III. Empirical Specification

    A.   Cointegration and Stationarity

     In order to investigate the impact of the FOMC's target paths, the

approach to structural estimation used recently by Blanchard and Watson

[1985J, Bernanke [19851, Sims [19861, and Blanchard [19861 is adopted.
                                  - 12   -


This approach combines a Vector Autoregression with restrictions imposed by
a structural model in order to avoid the assumption, implicit in the

standard calculations of variance decompositions and impulse response

functions, that the variables in the system are related by a recursive

structure.

     Quarterly, seasonally adjusted data on five variables are incorporated

in the empirical work: the natural log of real GNP (Y), the log of the GNP

Price Deflator (P), the three—month Treasury bill rate (R), log Ml (M), and

the log of a measure of the Feds target for Ml (T). Tt is defined as the

midpoint of the target range for log Mlt+i as calculated from information

known at time t. T is thus a forward looking measure of the target path,

and it is constructed by applying the midpoint of the target range for t+1

in effect during t to the target base then in effect. For example, suppose

the FOMC in February of year t announces a target range for Ml of 4% - 7%

from a base of actual Ml in the fourth quarter of year t-1. Then, in July,

suppose they revise the range to 3% — 6% for the rest of the year, but do

not revise the base. Then, in the second quarter of year t, T would equal

log Ml for the fourth quarter of year t—1 plus .04125 (the midpoint of 4%—

7% growth for nine months expressed at a quarterly rate). For the third

quarter, T would equal log Ml for the fourth quarter of year t—1 plus .0275

(six months growth at the midpoint of 4% - 7% plus .0225 (six months growth

at the midpoint of the new 3% — 6% range). Refering to Figure 2 the solid

line is equal to Mt -

     A number of recent empirical studies have suggested that most

macroeconomic variables are better represented as difference stationary,

and not trend stationary, processes.U' It has become common, therefore,

to specify VAR's in first difference form. However, Engle and Grangër
                                        - 13   -

 [1986] point out that such a specification is incorrect if the system is

 cointegrated. A vector x is said to be cointegrated of order (1,1) if all

 elements of x are stationary in their first difference and there exits a

 nonzero vector   such that &x is stationary)1" Before specifying the

 form of the VAR, it is necessary to consider the possibility that such a

 cointegrating vector   exists.

      Three pairwise comparisons involving likely candidates for

cointegration were examined -    real   money balances (M—P), the real value of

the target variable (T—P), and the difference between the target and the

current money stock (T—M). For each pair, the null hypothesis that the two

variables are not cointegrated is tested.

     The testing procedure can be illustrated with respect to M and P.      If

real money balances are stationary, then M and P are cointegrated with

known cointegrating vector       =   (1,—i).   A test of the null of no

cointegration can be obtained by regressing the change in M-P on a constant

and the lagged level of M—P. The test statistic is just the F—statistic

for the joint significance of the two estimated coefficients. Under the

null hypothesis of no cointegration, this test statistic does not have an F

distribution, but Dickey and Fuller [1981] provide significance levels

based on Monte Carlo results. A high value of the test statistic indicates

rejection of no cointegration.

     The Dickey—Fuller test statistics for M—P, T-P, and T-M are reported

in part I of Table 1. At a 5% significance level, we cannot reject the

null hypothesis that M—P and 1—P are not cointegrated. This result casts

doubt on the argument that the Fed generates non—trend stationarity of P

and M while M—P is stationary. In contrast, the hypothesis that T-M is not

cointegrated can be rejected. This reflects the fact that next quarter's
                                         - 14   -


                         never stray too far from the current level of Ml. Note
target   for Ml
                  cart
that this is consistent with a policy that keeps the target path fixed and

returns M to the target path whenever it deviates from it, and with a

policy that employs base drift so that the target is adjusted to ensure

that it never gets too far from the actual money supply. The latter

interpretation would seem to more closely describe Fed behavior.

     As a check on these results, cointegration was tested under the

additional hypothesis that the cointegration vector is unknown. That is,

the null hypothesis is that, for example, M—aP is not cointegrated, with a

unknown.    Engle and Granger [19861 discuss several alternative tests based

on the regression of M on P. This regression is called the cointegrating

regression by Engle and Granger. Part II.A of Table 1 shows that for each

of the three cointegrating regressions, the estimated a       is   essentially

equal to

     Three of Engle and Granger's test statistics are reported. The first,

reported in part II.A, is just the Durbin—Watson statistic from the

cointegrating regression. Under the null of no cointegration, the

residuals will be nonstationary and the O—W will approach zero. Thus, a

large O—W implies rejection of no cointegration. Based on Monte Carlo

results, Engle and Granger report a 5% critical value for the D—W of 0.386.

Only for T.-M can the null be rejected. The second test regresses the

change in the residuals from the cointegrating regression on their lagged

level, and the test statistic is the t—statistic for the coefficient on the

lagged residual term. This is reported in the row headed             in part II.B

of Table 1. The null can again be rejected only for T—M. Finally, the row

headed      reports the t-stattstic on the lagged residual from the

cointegrating regression in a regression with the change in the residual as
                                    — 15 —

 the dependent variable and that includes, in addition to the lagged level,

 four lagged changes in the residual. This statistic provides the only

 conflicting results as it suggests the null cannot be rejected for any of

 the three cases.

      The evidence clearly indicates that real money balances and the real

 value of the target variable are nonstationary. The pairs (M, P) and (T,P)

 are not cointegrated. However, three of the four tests indicate that I and

M are cointegrated, and, for the subsequent analysis, this will be assumed

to be the case..

      It can be argued that the apparent non-trend stationarity of real

money balances results from the positive income elasticity of the demand

for real balances. The presence of a unit root in real income then induces

nonstationarity in real money balances)-" This suggests that M—P and V

should be cointegrated with cointegrating vector (1 —a) where a is the

income elasticity of real money demand. The estimate of a obtained from

the cointegrating regression of M-P on Y, together with three test

statistics for the null hypothesis of no cointegration are given in

Table 2. The evidence appears consistent with the null of no

cointegration.1"

     These results have interesting implications for interpreting the

implications for the prive level process of a policy that makes M follow a

trend stationary process. The evidence that neither real money balances

nor real balances adjusted for income are stationary suggests the demand

for money is nonstationary. Therefore, the price level will be non-trend

stationary even if the nominal money supply were to follow a constant

growth rate path)
                                  - 16   -


     As previously mentioned, it has become common to enter variables in

VAR systems in first differenced form in order to ensure stationarity. The

evidence that T and M are cointegrated suggests specifying the VAR in terms

of the first differences of the logs of output, the price level, the

interest rate, and the money supply and the level of the target minus the

money supply. Table 1 has provided evidence that T—M is stationary. Tests

were also conducted for the presence of a unit root in the first

differences of Y, P, R, and M.' The null hypothesis of a unit root can

be rejected at the 5% level for -'l'-i Rt_Rt , and Mt_Mt_i. However,

this hypothesis is not rejected for the first difference of the price

level. This evidence of a possible second unit root in the price level (a

unit root in the rate of inflation) may explain the failure to reject the

absence of cointegration for M and P since the tests were based on the

assumption that Mt_Mt_i and P-i were stationary. Economic theory,

however, would not imply a unit root in inflation if the growth rates of

money and output are stationary. Regressing the inflation rate on a

constant, a time trend and four lagged values of the inflation rate yielded

a coefficient on the time trend with a marginal significance level of .062.

Since neither money growth nor output growth have trends, this result is

also hard to reconcile with standard aggregate models)" It is worth

noting, however, that all these tests may have little power, given the

shortness of the sample period.



     B. VAR Specification

     On the basis of the tests for cointegration and stationarity reported

in Section III.A, two alternative specification for the VAR system are

suggested. One specification would include the first differences of Y, R,
                                                   - 17   -

 M   and the rate of inflation and the level of I - M.                  The second would

 include' the first differences of Y, R, M and P, the level of T-M, and a

 time trend. Only the empirical results obtained using this second

 specification will be presented, since it provides a more natural parallel

 treatment of all the variables. However, the VAR estimation and the

 structural model estimation (to be discussed below) were repeated using the

 second difference of p and excluding a time trend. The results obtained

 from this specification are presented in the appendix.IV

       Define Z' =                                                       denotes the first
                                                  AMt, Tt_Mt) where
 difference. It will be assumed that these five variables are linked by a

 set of structural equations of the form



            AZt =                +
                    B(L)Zt   1       ut                                                       (9)




where A is an invertable 5 x 5 matrix, and B(L) is a 5 x 5 matrix of

polynomials in the lag operator L. The vector                        is a vector of

independently distributed, serially uncorrelated "structuraP disturbance

terms with diagonal covariance matrix                         In the present context, the

equations in (9) can be thought of as an aggregate demand equation, an

aggregate supply equation, a money demand equation, a money supply

equation, and a target setting equation.

      Premultiplying both sides of (9) by A1 yields



                Zt =                     +
                       D(L)Zt        i       Vt                                              (10)


where 0(L) =   AB(L)    and v =
                                          A4ut.      Equation (10) is in the standard form

of a VAR, and it canbe estimated by OLS to obtain consistent estimates. of
                                    - 18    -


the VAR residual v. In the present application, the estimation period
for the VAR was 1977:1 -1984:4. A lag length of four was used, and a

constant and time trend were included in each regression equation.'1 In

addition, a dummy variable equal to one from 1979:4 to 1982:3 and zero

otherwise was included in a crude attempt to represent the effects of the

period during which the Fed employed a nonborrowed reserve operating

procedure.
      The objective, however, is to obtain estimates of the response of

each variable in Z to innovations in the structural disturbances u.         The

VAR residuals are equal to a linear combination of the structural

disturbances given by Av =    u.   The now standard procedure for generating

impulse response functions and variance decompositions involves

orthogonalizirig the VAR residuals using the Choleski decomposition of the

sample covariance matrix M =    (1/T)vv'.       If S is a lower triangular matrix

such that SS' = M, the transformed orthogonalized residuals with unit

variance are given by S4v. If Q is the unique positive diagonal matrix

such that QQ' =   ) (i.e.,   the diagonal elements of Q are just the standard

errors of the ui's), then the structural model implies that the VAR

residuals should be orthogonalized and scaled by premultiplying v by Q1A.

Q1A will generally not be lower triangular unless the structural

relationships represented by the matrix A imply a recursive structure, so

variance decompositions and impulse response functions derived from a

Choleski decomposition will not give the effects of the structural shocks

 (the ui's) on the variables of the system.-"

      In order to use a decomposition that allows for a structural

 interpretation, it is necessary to estimate the unknown elements of A and

    • From (9) and (10), vv' =   A uu' A1. Equating population moments
with sample moments,
                                       - 19   -



                   M1=   AA''.                                              (11)



Since M contains 5*6/2 = 15 bits of sample information, equation (11) gives

 15 nonlinear simultaneous equations in the unknown elements of A and

Thus, if there are 15 or fewer elements to estimate in A and ,       the
information in (11) can potentially be used to obtain estimates of the

structural parameters of the model. Since there are 5 variances in

there must be 10 or fewer nonzero elements of A.

       Given a specification of the zeros in A, the actual estimation

procedure employed is that of Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).' Let

0 be   the 15 x 1 vector consisting of the stacked elements of M on and below

the diagonal. Let e(o) be the corresponding vector of elements of

A 'A'' 4, where 8 denotes the k x 1 vector of unknown parameters in A

and          Parameter estimates are obtained by minimizing the quadratic form



                            (e—e(o)) 'W(o—e())



with respect to the elements of o, where the weighting matrix W is given by



       w =



In   this notation, the typical element of e would be of the form

(l/T)zv1tv.t, while the corresponding element of       is           The

asymtotic covariance matrix of the parameter estimates is estimated by




                         {E(o-)/aoJ 'W[a(o-e)/ao]}
                                             - 20   -


Under fairly general assumptions, the GMM estimators are consistent and

asymtotically efficient.

     In order to implement this procedure it is necessary to impose a

priori restrictions on the elements of A and                The covariance matrix

is taken to be diagonal. The elements of A are chosen to represent a

fairly standard, ad—hoc aggregate model. Let v' =            (y,   p, r, m t-m) be the

residuals from the VAR system. By definition, Avt =                   These five
                                                               Ut.
equations, reflecting the contemporaneous relationships in the structural

relationships, are assumed to take the following form:



        -
            Q(r -                     + p)   =
                                                 uit                                (12)




     Pt -   t                                =
                                                 u2.                                (13)




     rt -          - 4(mt         -          = u3t                                  (14)




                   -          -              =




                            t
        -
            a5Yt       a6rt           a7pt       u4                                 (15)




             -
                 a8yt
                        -              -     = u5.                                  (16)




     Equation (12) gives aggregate demand as a function of the expected

real rate of interest. In the definition of the expected real interest

rate, P'+ denotes the effect of the current realization of v on

expectations of                   This can be calculated using the coefficients from

the estimated VAR.'. The structural disturbance u1. has the

interpretation of an aggregate demand shock. Equation (13) is a Phillips

Curve type relationship, with u2. equalling an aggregate supply             shock.'
                                   - 21   -


     Equation (14) is a simple inverted money demand equation. Suppose the
basic money demand equation takes the form M -        P =          +
                                                            a3Y        a4R, ignoring
lagged terms and the disturbance term. The resulting relationship among

the VAR residuals takes the form a3y +
                                          a4r   -(m—p) =
                                                              t.       Normalizing on the

interest rate yields equation (14) with         =                  =            and u3 =
                                                    -a3/a4,             1/a4,
t/a4.   u3 is interpreted as a money demand shock.

     Equations (15) and (16) capture the actions of the Federal Reserve in

setting monetary policy. Equation (15) represents a money supply

relationship that assumes the Fed allows nominal money supply growth to

respond to income growth, nominal interest rate changes and inflation with

u4 equal to a money supply shock. The money target set for period t-i-1 is

assumed to depend on current money growth, income growth, and inflation.

u5 has the interpretation of a shock to next quarter's money target.

     It may appear that the model structure is recursive with respect to

the target variable, since t only occurs in equation (16). However, this

is not the case. Variations in t, the target for                       can, in principle,

influence the expected rate of inflation. Through the real rate channel in

equation (12), t can contemporaneously affect                     rt and mt.



IV. Empirical Results

     It is useful to recall the questions motivating this study before the

empirical results are examined. A major criticism of targeting as

practiced by the FOMC is that monetary volatility contributed to output and

price instability, and that allowing base drift let temporary control

errors have permanent effects on prices. Evidence relevant for an

evaluation of this critique would be provided by estimates of the impact of

innovations in the target path and in the money supply on the subsequent
                                  - 22   -


path of money and prices, by estimates of the contribution of target
uncertainty and money uncertainty to the volatility of output and prices,

and by evidence on the induced policy response to aggregate demand shocks,

money demand shocks and aggregate supply disturbances.

     The first step in estimating the impact of target and money

disturbances involves the estimation of the structural model outlined in

the previous section using the residual covariance matrix obtained from the

unrestricted VAR estimates. The residual covariance and correlations are

reported in Table 3. The significant cross correlations indicate that

impulse response functions and variance decompositions derived from a

standard Choleski decomposition of the residual covariance matrix are

likely to be sensitive to the chosen ordering. In order to employ an

orthogonalization that allows a structural interpretation, equations (12) —

(16) were estimated.
     The GMM estimates obtained for the parameter of the structural model

are presented in Table 4. In general, the estimates are relatively

imprecise as judged from their asymptotic standard errors. However,

several are statistically significant (9 of 15) and the signs of the

estimates accord with a priori expectations.

     The estimated contemporaneous effect of the expected real interest

rate on output is essentially equal to zero. This implies that real output

is predetermined with respect to the other contemporaneous variables of the

system. In particular, there will be no contemporaneous effect of money or

target shocks on output via the channel of expected future inflation.

     A zero value for    has two important implications for the current

analysis. First, it implies that the model has a block recursive structure

in which y is exogenous with respect top, r, m, and t—m, while p is
                                    — 23 —

 exogenous with respect to r, m, and t—m. In turn, this implies that the

 variance decompositions and impulse response functions derived by using the

 structural estimates to orthogonalize the VAR residuals will show effects

 of y and p shocks equivalent to those obtained using a standard Choleski

 decomposition with y and p placed first and second in the ordering.

 However, the Choleski decomposition assumes a recursive structure among all

 the variables of the system, while the exogeneity of y in the present model

 is estimated from the data. Table 4 gives the estimated matrix used to

orthogonalize the VAR residuals and it shows that r and m are

simultaneously related.

     Second, c = 0 implies that the expectations channel by which the

future money target might affect current output is nonoperative. Changes

in next quarter's Ml target may influence expected inflation and real

interest rates, but there is no contemporaneous output effect.

     The estimated equation for the money supply shows a strong response to

nominal interest rate movements (ci5 =   3.01).   This seems consistent with

the general perception that, even while expressing its goals in terms of

monetary targets, the Fed has attempted to smooth interest rate

movements.W Money supply growth also appears to show little response to

real output changes, but an increase in inflation tends to reduce it. The

target variable seems to depend mainly on actual money and inflation. The

negative coefficient on m might indicate some attempt by the FOMC to

offset monetary control errors by adjusting down the target for money

relative to m if current money growth has been high.

     Of particular interest are the estimated variances of the structural

disturbance terms, since these disturbances each have an intuitive

interpretation.
                                     - 24   -


     Aggregate           shocks are estimated to have the largest variance,
                 dmand
althoug'h the asymptotic standard error is huge (886.0).     The variance of

aggregate supply shocks is only one eighth that of aggregate demand shocks,

while the other variances are even smaller. Of particular interest is the

fact that money supply shocks have a relatively small variance even though

Table 3 shows that the variance of the one—step ahead forecast error for

money in the VAR is second only to that for output.     This implies that most

of the one-step ahead forecast error in Ml growth is due, not to money

supply shocks, but to the endogenous response of money to output,

inflation, and interest rates.

     The finding of a small variance for money demand shock would seem to

contrast with the usual Fed emphasis on the importance of such

disturbances. However, a32 is defined in terms of an equation normalized

on the interest rate (equation .(14)). The implied variance of the money

demand function written with real money balances as the dependent variable

is          This approaches the variance of aggregate demand shocks in

magnitude and is more consistent with the standard Fed view.

     The impact of monetary policy and monetary targeting on output and

inflation will be studied in two steps. First, the effect of independent

money supply shocks and disturbances to the target path will be examined.

Second, the effect of the endogenous policy response to macro disturbances

will be estimated. This distinction between policy disturbances and

induced policy actions is important in assessing monetary policy.




A.   Money Supply and Target Shocks

      Using the estimated structural parameters, together with the VAR

 system, it is possible to examine the role played by money supply .shocks
                                    - 25   -

 and shocks to th? target path in the determination of
                                                       output growth and

 changes in the rate of inflation. Information on the importance of these

 disturbances can be gained from an examination of the variance

 decompositions implied by the model. The variance decompositions show the

 fraction of the forecast error variance of a variable attributable to each

 of the innovations in the system at various forecast horizons. As the

 forecast horizon approaches infinity, these equal the proportion of the

 unconditional variance of the variable due to each innovation source. The

 variance decompositions are presented in Table 5.

      The variance decompositions indicate that independent money supply and

 target disturbances account for little of the forecast error variance of

either output or inflation. These two disturbances explain less than 15

percent of the output growth forecast error variance at 24 quarters, and

 little more than 1 percent at a forecast horizon of 2 quarters.

Interestingly, shocks to the target for future money seem more important

than money supply shocks. Money supply and target shocks account for even

less of the forecast error variance of inflation changes.
                                                            Again, however,

target shocks accounts for more of the inflation forecast error than do

money supply shocks.

     The variance decompositions for money and the target produce some

interesting results. The Fed usually attributes deviation of money from

target to the presence of money demand shocks, and Table 5 shows that money

demand disturbances are important in explaining the variance of money

forecast errors. In fact, almost 40 percent of the one-step ahead forecast

error in money growth is attributed to money demand disturbances. But

aggregate demand disturbances are even more important.   The structural

model attributes little of the target variance to money supply shocks and
                                    - 26   -


much more to aggegate demand, aggregate supply, money demand, and target

disturbances.

    The impulse response functions showing the effects of money supply and

target shocks are shown in Figure 3. Panels 3a and 3b illustrate the

impact on the levels of Y, P, M and T of a one—standard deviation

realization of u4. In 3a, a positive money supply shock tends to produce

an output expansion with a three quarter lag. This is very quickly

reversed, however, and output appears to cycle around the no—shock path.

In contrast, the price level begins to rise after 8 quarters. The positive

slope of the price level path after 2 years indicates that money supply

shocks have permanent effects on the rate of inflation.

     Panel 3b shows why a money supply shock tends to raise the rate of

inflation. Money supply shocks during the period of monetary targeting

were not subsequently reversed. As 3b shows, there is some initial offset

to the shock so that the level of M moves back towards its no—shock value.

However, after four quarters, this offset ends, and the rate of growth of M

seems to be left permanently higher." The target path appears to follow

the upward trend in money, although it exhibits large cycles around an

upward trend.

     Panel 3c shows that target shocks, like money supply shocks, initially

generate a positive output response, followed by cycles in the level of

output around the no-shock level.    In contrast, the price level is above

the no—shock path for five quarters following the shock to the target

variable. Then, however, the price level appears to drift downward,

suggesting a permanently lower rate of inflation. As shown by panel 3d,

the lower rate of inflation is paralleled by a reduction in the rate of

growth of the money supply. Somewhat paradoxically then, during this
                                     - 27   -


 period   of monetary targeting, upward shocks to the level of the target path

 ultimately were followed by a reduced rate of growth of the money supply

 and a fall in the rate of inflation.

      Two general Conclusions seem to emerge from this empirical analysis.

 First, innovations to the target path and to money growth explain little of

 the forecast error variance of output and prices. Second, positive money

 supply shocks do seem to generate higher rates of inflation. In contrast,

 positive target shocks lead to a somewhat lower subsequent rate of

 inflation.

      These conclusions, however, do not shed light on the criticism that

 the Fed's induced response to economic disturbances has contributed to

 output and inflation volatility. Aggregate demand shocks, for example, may

 account for a large fraction of inflation forecast error variance precisely

because of the Fed's attempt to dampen interest rate movements. It is

necessary, therefore, to examine the induced effects of disturbances on

money supply growth and the target growth rate.



B.   Endogenous Policy Responses

     In order to determine whether output, inflation, and money demand

disturbances have induced monetary policy responses that have contributed

to price instability, impulse response functions from the structural model

are presented in Figures 4 —   6.

     The estimated effect of an aggregate demand shock is shown in Figures

4a and 4b. An aggregate demand shock has a strong positive impact on

output growth that is subsequently only partially reversed. The

contemporaneous response of money growth is positive, but after one quarter

money growth turns negative, reflecting perhaps a delayed attempt at
                                    - 28   -

stabilization   PoilcY. There appears to be no systematic long—run effect on

either the growth rate of money or the level of M. The rate of inflation

is also not permanently affected, but the price level is left higher by the

aggregate demand shock.

    The impact of an aggregate supply (inflation) shock, shown in Figure

5, provides evidence that the induced monetary policy response contributed

to the inflationary impact of such shocks. Panel 5a shows that an

aggregate supply shock causes the price level to grow at a roughly constant

rate relative to the no-shock path. This permanent effect on the rate of

inflation is mirrored by a permanent positive effect on the rate of money

growth. Panel 5b shows that the money supply initially falls in response

to the supply shock, but after 4 quarters, M has returned to its no—shock

level and then exhibits a sustained increase in its rate of growth. The

target reacts in a similar fashion, although the initial fall In the level

of the path is larger than the fall in the actual money supply.

     Figure 6 shows that money demand shocks are initially accommodated by

a rise in the money supply. This is only partially offset; M and I are

left permanently higher. Panel 6a shows that output reacts positively to a

money demand shock. This may reflect the persistent positive money supply

response to a temporary money demand disturbance. Initially, the money

demand shock is offset by accommodative monetary policy. However, because

the expansion in M is not subsequently reversed, there is a net

expansionary effect on output. In addition, the price level rises and

remains at a level slightly above the no shock path.

     In the case of inflation shocks and money demand shocks, the evidence

that emerges from these impulse response functions suggests that the

induced response of the money supply contributed importantly to subsequent
                                   - 29   -


price   and output movements. Only in the case of aggregate demand shocks

was there no long—run response of the money supply. In all cases, the

target path tends to follow the path of actual money. This reflects the

fact the two variables are assumed to be cointegrated.



V.   Summary and Conclusions

     This paper represents a first step towards an evaluation of the

conduct of monetary policy during the decade of monetary targeting. The

empirical analysis found that neither money supply nor monetary target

shocks seemed to account for much of the forecast error variances of output

growth and inflation. The induced response of money growth to aggregate

demand shocks also did not appear to contribute to higher inflation but the

response to aggregate supply shocks did. The response of monetary policy

to money demand shocks led to a permanently higher price level with no

long-run effect on the rate of inflation.

     While the results suggest that the Fed's response to economic

disturbances contributed to inflation, this does not imply that steady

money growth during this period would have induced stationary behavior in

the price level. The failure to reject the null hypothesis that Ml and

prices are not cointegrated indicates that the real demand for money is

nonstationary. Thus, a nonreactive monetary policy that keeps Ml growing

at a constant rate would also have produced nonstationary behavior in the

price level.

     It may be prudent to conclude by reviewing the limitations of the

analysis that force any results to be viewed as preliminary in nature. The

chief limitations arise from the shortness of the sample period together

with the changes in Federal Reserve operating procedures which occurred in
                                        - 30   -


    October 1979 and October 1982. Even without such policy shifts, the
    empirical analysis relies on identifying restrictions imposed on the

    contemporaneous relations between the one-step—ahead forecast errors of the

    variables in the VAR system. These exclusion restrictions may be

    questioned, and the results might change if an alternative structure is

    imposed.

         Despite the fact that there were changes in operating procedures, the

-   period   under study was one in which Ml targeting did provide a conceptual

    framework that guided monetary policy. For this reason, it is hoped that

    the empirical results obtained here may provide some indication of the

    impact of monetary policy between 1976 and 1984.
                                    - 31   -




                                   Footnotes



 1.    Walsh [1987a1 discusses a potential problem with F1uizinga and

      Mishkin's method of identifying real rate shifts.

 2.   This Act is better know as the Humphrey—Hawkins Act.

 3.   Each year, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis publishes in its

      Review a useful analysis of the FOMC deliberations on setting targets

      during the previous year.

4.    In one of the earliest attacks on base drift, Poole [19761 suggested,

      as an alternative procedure, that the midpoint of the previous year's

      target range, and not actual MI, be used as the new base. This

      recommendation was also proposed in the 1985 Economic Report of the

      President. In Figure 1, theaashed line is derived by applying this

      procedure. Deviations from target would no longer have permanent

      effects on the path of the money stock if this recommendation were

      adopted.

5.    The Shadow Open Market Coninittee (19851 has recommended the

      elimination of base drift. See also M. Friedman [1982, 19851 and

      McCallum [19841.

6.    For evidence that most macroeconomic time series are difference

      stationary, and not trend stationary, see Nelson and Plosser [1982].

7.    The intuition behind this example differs somewhat from that developed

      by Goodfriend.

8.    The main difference between this model and Goodfriend's are the

      simplier form of the policy rule used here, the assumption that       is

      contemporaneously observed, and the assumption about the stochastic

      properties of      Barro [19871 uses a similar model to analyze

      interest rate smoothing policies.
                                     — 32 -




9.    Two variables x and y are said to be cointegrated of order (1,1) if

      the first difference of both are stationary and there exists a nonzero

        such that x + ay is stationary. Cointegration is discussed in

      Section II.A below.

10.   This point Is developed more fully in Walsh [19861, and the optimal

      degree of base drift is derived as a function of the stochastic

      properties of income and velocity.

11.   For example, see Gould, Miller, Nelson and Upton [19781, Nelson and

      Plosser [1982], Kim [19851, and Campbell and Mankiw [1986].

12.   A useful sunuuary of the theory of cointegration can be found in

      Campbell and Shiller [19861.

13.   Engle and Grarger also suggest estimating       from the error—correction

      regression of AM or P on lagged changes in M and P and lagged levels

      of M and P. The estimated values for     are obtained as the ratio of

      the coefficient on lagged M to that on lagged P (when AM 15 the

      dependent variable).

      The following results were obtained from the error—correction

      regressions:

                             Dependent
                Model        Variable           a

                M -   P:       AM             0.985

                M - aP:        AP             2.38

                I -   P:       AT             1.025

                I — ciP:       AP             2.38

                I - ciM:       AT             1.011

                T - aM:        AM             0.998
                                      - 33   —




14.   Iri terms of of the model f Section I, income would be one of the

      factors giving rise to a nonstationary process for

15.   Since the income elasticity of real money demand is often assumed to

      equal one, the null hypothesis of no cointegration among M, P. and V

      with known cointegration vector (1 —1 —1) was also tested and the null

      could not be rejected. This agrees with ealier studies that have

      found velocity to be non—trend stationary. See the references cited

      in footnote 9.

16.   The nonstationarity of velocity may in part be attributable to

      monetary policy induced volatility so that under a steady growth rate

      rule velocity would no longer be nonstationary. However,

      technological shocks and shifts in tastes that produce non—trend

      stationary behavior of real output are generally assumed to be

      invariant with respect to the money supply process. A constant growth

      rate rule for the money supply with no base drift would, in this case,

      still result in nonstationary price level behavior.

17.   The test statistic is the F—statistic for the null hypothesis that

      =    = 0 in the regression x -
                                        x1       =
                                                     + i x, where x is the
      first difference of V. R, P and M. The 5% critical value,

      interpolated from Oickey and Fuller [19811, is 5.1, and the values of

      the test statistics were 7.9 for V. 1.6 for P, 12.7 for R, and 14.9

      for M.

18.   Stock and Watson [19871 find that the rate of inflation is stationary

      around a time trend during the 1960 - 1979 period. However, for the

      longer 1960 - 1985 period, they find that no trend is necessary to

      induce stationarity in the rate of inflation.
                                    - 34   -




19.   Ii a previous version of this paper, only the results using the first

      difference of the inflation rate were presented. While the papers

      basic conclusions hold using either specification, I have used the

      model that enters P in first difference form and includes a time trend

      for two reasons. First, the structural model has a more easily

      interpreted form when all variables are differenced in the same

      degree. Second, the impulse response functions in the model using the

      first difference of the rate of inflation often show permanent effects

      of shocks on the rate of inflation even in the absence of any long—run

      effect on the rate of money growth. Such seemingly implausible

      results did not arise when the first difference of the price level and

      a time trend were used.

20.   Because of the shortness of the sample, a longer lag length was not

      tried. A lag length of three was rejected when tested against a lag

      length of four (2(25)     45.7, marginal significance level =   0.007).
21.   For a discussion of the problems in drawing structural conclusions

      from VARs, see Cooley and LeRoy [1985].

22.   For a discussion of these estimators, see Hanson and Singleton [19821

      or Chamberlain [19831.

23.   See Bernanke [19861. If b' is the lxS vector of estimated

      coefficients on      in the VAR equation for APt then b'vt gives the

      revision in the expectation of Pt÷i due to the observation of Vt.

24.   Note that (3) is consistent with either a Lucas—type supply curve or

      with the type of aggregate supply curve implied by the presence of

      overlapping wage contracts as in Fischer [1977] and Taylor [1979],

      since Pt jS equal to a one step ahead forecast error.
                                               - 35   -




25.   By way of comparison, the matrix used to orthogonalize the residuals

      using a Choleski decomposition with ordering ,y, p. r, in, t—m is equal

      to

           0.0215         0.0            0.0               0.0      0.0

           0.0040         0.0030         0.0               0.0      0.0
           0.0037         0.0043        0.0063             0.0      0.0

           0.0078         0.0051        -0.0025            0.0054   0.0
           0.0011        -0.0033       -0.0004            —0.00     0.0042


26.   The coeffiient
                          a6
                               Is   the one most likely to have shifted over the

      sample   period   -in response to changes in Fed operating procedures.

      Consequently, the estimated value may not adequately reflect the true

      response during any particular policy regime. Barro [1987] finds

      evidence that the stochastic process followed by the fionetary base in

      the U.S. during the postwar period is consistent with interest rate
                                                                          -
      smoothing behavior by the Fed.

27.   To be comparable with Table 4, this has been multiplied by 1000.

28.   In Walsh [1986], it is noted that base drift is positively correlated

      with the subsequent midpoint of the growth rate range the FOMC sets

      for Ml. That is, positive target overshoots tended to be followed by

      upward revisions in the target growth rate range.
                                         - 36   -




                                       References


Barro,   Robert 3..   "Interest-Rate   Smoothing." mimec, February 1987.

Blanchard, Olivier 3., "Empirical Structural Evidence on Wages, Prices and
     Employment in the U.S. mimeo, May 1986.

Blancharci, Olivier 3. and Mark W. Watson, "Are Business Cycles All Alike?",
     NBER Working Paper No. 1392, June 1984.

Bernanke, Ben S., "Alternative Explanations of the Money-Income
     Correlation", Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
     25 (Autumn 1986), 49-99.

Broaddus. Alfred and Marvin Goodfriend, "Base Drift and the Longer Run
     Growth of Ml: Experience from a Decade of Monetary Targeting",
     Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, Nov./Dec. 1984, 3-
     14.


Brunner, Karl, "The Politics of Myopia and Its Idelogy", in Shadow Open
     Market Committee Policy Statements and Position Papers, Graduate
     School of Management, University of Rochester, Sept. 1983.

Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw. "Are Output Fluctuations
     Transitory?" NBER Workinq Paper No. 1916, May 1986.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, "Cointegration and Tests of
     Present Value Models", NBER Working Paper No. 1885. April 1986.

Chamberlain, Gary, "Panel Data", in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 2, 7.
     Griliches and M.D. Intriliqator (eds.), North-Holland, 1984, 1247-
     1318.

Cooley, Thomas F. and Stephen F. LeRoy. "A Theoretical Macroeconomics: A
     Critique," Journal of Monetary Economics, 16 (3). Nov. 1985, 283-308.

Dickey, David A. and Wayne A. Fuller, "Likelihood Ratio Statistics for
     Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root," Econometrica 49(4).
     July. 1981. 1057-1072.

Engle, Robert F. and C.W.J. Granger, "Cointegration and Error Correction:
     Representation, Estimation and Testing", Econometrica Forthcoming.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, various issues.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the
     Optimal Money Supply Rule". Journal of Political Economy, 85(1), Feb.
     1977, 191-205.

Friedman, Milton, "Monetary Policy: Theory and Practice", Journal of Money
     Credit and Banking, 14(1), Feb. 1982, 98-118.
                                    - 37   -




 Friedman. Milton "Monetary Policies in the 1980's", in To Promote
      Prosperity J. H. Moore (ed.). Hoover Institution Press. 1984.

 Friedman, Milton, "The Fed Hasn't Changed its Ways". Wall Street Journal.
      Aug. 20, 1985.

 Goodfriend, Marvin. "Interest Rate Smoothing and Price Level Trend-
      Stationarity, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

 Gould, J.P., M.H. Miller, C.R. Nelson, and C.W. Upton, "The Stochastic
      Properties of Velocity and the Quantity Theory of Money", Journal of
      Monetary Economics, 4(2), April 1978, 229-248.

 Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Generalized Instrumental
      Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models",
      Econometrica, 50(5), Sept. 1982, 1269-1286.

 Huizinga, John and Frederic S. Mishkin. "Monetary Policy Regime Shifts and
      the Unusual Behavior of Real Interest Rates", Carnegie-Rochester
      Conference Series on Public Policy, 24 (Sp. 1986), 231-27&

Kim. J.C., "Random Walk and the Velocity of Money: Some Evidence from
     Annual and Quarterly Data", Economic Letters, 18, 1985, 187-190.

Loeys. Jan and Herb Taylor. "Optimal Revision of Monetary Targets: Some
     Empirical Estimates." mimeo. Nov. 1986.

McCallum, Bennett T.   "Credibility and Monetary Policy". Federal Reseve
     Bank of Kansas City Price Stability and Public Policy 1984.

McCallum, Bennett T., "On Consequences and Criticisms of Monetary
     Targeting", Journal of Money, Credit. and Banking, 17 (4), Nov. 1985.
     Part 2, 570-597.

Nelson, Charles R. and Charles I. Plosser, 1'Trends and Random Walks in
     Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications", Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 10, Sept. 1982, 139-162.

Poole, William. "Interpreting the Fed's Monetary Targets". Brookings Papers
     or, Economic
                  Activity, 1976:1, 247-259.

Poole, William, "Fiscal and Monetary Policy Overkills", in Shadow Open
     Market Committee Policy Statements and Position Papers, Graduate
     School of Management, University of Rochester, March 1986.

Roley, V. Vance and Carl E. Walsh, "Monetary Policy
                                                    Regimes, Expected
     Inflation, and the Respnnse of Interest Rates to Money Announcements".
     Quarterly Journal of Economics. 100. 1985 Supplement. 1011-1039.

Shadow Open Market Committee. "Policy Statement", Center for Research in
     Government Policy and Business. Graduate School of Management.
     University of Rochester, Mar. 198.
                                  - 38   -



Sims, Christopher A., "Are Forecasting Models Usable for Policy Analysis?",
     Federal Reerve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Winter 1986, 2—
     16.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, "Interpreting the Evidence on Money-
     Income Causality," mimeo, Feb. 1987.

Taylor. John B., "Stagciered Wage Setting in a Macro Model", American
     Economic Review, 69(2), May 1979, 108-113.

U.S. President. Economic Report of the President, 1985.

Walsh, Carl E., "In Defense of Base Drift", American Economic Review, 76
     (4). Sept., 1986. 692-700.

Walsh, Carl E., "Testina for Real Effects of Monetary Policy Regime
     Shifts", NBER Working Paper No. 2116, January 1987a.

Walsh, Carl E., "Monetary Policy and Inflation", Federal Reserve Bank of
     San Francisco. Economic Review, Winter 1987b.
                                                    FIGURE 1

                                   fit   - THE EFFECT OF DRIFT
     6 'I—




     6 2—




     60—




     s   e—




     S   6—
              'I I   2 3 9   I 2 39 I 2 3 9 I 2 3 9 12 3 9 I 2 3 9 I 2 3 1 I 2 39 I 2 3 9
                      76         77      78    7        60            82           83    89
                                                                              Iio&,i         —


                                                   FIIGIJRE 2

                                   MEASURES        OF BASE DRIFT
P        16


C

N
T        12




         6




         0




         -M
    xf 02       12 38 12 39 12 3912 3812 3 (2 3912 39 12 3112 39
                  76    77    78              79       80       81   #2           83    88
                                                                           i;Io
                                                               FIGURE 3
    3A RESPONSES TO A MONEY SUPPLY SHOCI\                                       38 RESPONSES TO A MONEY SUPPLY SKO'


                                                                     II —



                                                                     0,—


                                                                     07 —




                                                                     0:

                                                                     OI




     I    I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I     I                I    I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I
I    3 M S 6 7 6 5 10 II 12 13 I IS 16 Il II 15 20 21 22 23 2M xjO —              M 5 6 7 5 1 10 II 12 13 IM IS 16 17 Ia is 20 21 22 23 3M
                                                                                                                              In         —
                                                                                                                              IT




         3C RESPONSES To A TARGET SHOCK                                               30 RESPONSES TO A TARGET SHOCK




              6 7 6 5 10 II 12 13 IM IS IS 17 15 IS 20 21 22 23 2M          I         M 5 6 7 5 1 10 II 12 13 IM IS 16 17 16 IS 20 21 22 23 3M
                                                                                                                                   lii
                                                                                                                                   IT
                                                                                                                                           —
                                            FIGURE 4

               HA RE3FUN3E TO AN AirREc,ATE DEMAND H':'cI\
      I,




                     I   I          I   I   I   I   I       I   I   I   I       I   I         I
'[0
           I                    I                       I                               I


                   956       7 8 9 10 11 12 13 19 IS 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 29
                                                                            P               —
                                                                            Y               ---




           HE RESPONSES TO AN AC,GF;EI:ATE OEMFtNO SHOCI\




  00




<1:
                                                                            T
                                                     FIGURE 5
          5A           RE'3FONE5 Ti) AN AciRECATE HJFFL' 5HOf'




          I                                      I                       I                       I       I
xlO   —
          L             'I   56 73               10 11 12 13 IM 15 16 17 18 1 20 21 22 23 2'4
                                                                               P         —
                                                                                                                 -——
                                                                                     Y




          5B FiE3FUNSE3 TO AN AGGRECATE SUPPLY SHOCK




          I    I   I     I   I   I   I       I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I       I   I       I       I
x1O   —
                        956              8       tO IL 12 13 (H 15 16 17 18 1 20 21 22 23 2M
                                                                                     L
                                              FIGURE 6
                            6A REFIJN3E5 TO A M'JNE' DEMANO SHC'CI\
        30 —




    25 —




       20 —




       IS




                       /
                           /f                                                     N

                   I


                                15678I
                                I   I              Ii          I     111.1         I


                                          10 11 12 13 11 15 16 17 18 L 20 21 22 23 21
                                                                           P     —
                                                                           Y     ---


                           66 RESPONSES TO Fl MONEY OEMAND            S HOC




    2




  —1




xI0 -          I                IS678    10 11 12 13 19 15 IS 17 L8 1320 2 222329
                                                                      II
                                                                      I
                                              Table 1

                    Tests for Cointegration: 1976:1 — 1984:4




I.    Cointegrating Vector: (1 —             1)'.
           X.f -
                   xti       =   aO + aiXtl; H0         :     =
                                                                  a1
                                                                       =    0


                                             Variable

                                   M-P         T-P            T-M               5% Critical Value

Test Statistic:                   0.44         0.36           5•97*                    5.1




II. Unknown Cointegrating Vector: (1 —a)'

      A.   Cointegrating Regression Xt = a0                 + 't +
                                                                       c.



                                           Variable Pair

                                 M and P 1 and P            1 and M             5% Critical Value

                                  1.01         1.01           1.00

Test Statistic (DW):              0.13        0.20            1.07*                    0.39




                — ct_i   =
                              ut_i   + ? 1i     ti —        ctji)
                                        Residuals from
                                   Cointegrating Regression

Test Statistic                   M and P     1 and P        1 and M             5% Critical Value


     2 (q=0)                      0.29        0.51            3.52*                    3.37

     F3 (q=4)                     1.84        0.90            2.33                     3.17




* Significant at the 5 percent level.
                                       Table 2

                    Tests for Cointegration between (M—P) and V




A.   Cointegrating Regression: M-P =               +Y   +



                                            OW                      5% Critical Value

                0.14                        0.13                          0.39



B.      - ct1   =
                    ut-i +      i   (ct-i    - ctji)
                             2 (q=0)                        (q=4)

Test Statistic               0.71                       1.86                      •
(5% Critical Value)        (3.37)                   (3.17)
                                     Table 3

                        Residual CovarianCeS from VAR*




                                                          m_       t—m
                             _____               p

                                                         0.167    -0.024
                             0.086             0.079
y              0.462
                                                         0.046    —0.014
                             0.025             0.028
r
                                                         0.035    -0.021
                                               0.072
p
                                                         0.122    —0.025
m
                                                                   0.030
t-m



                             Residual Correlatifl

                                                                    t-rfl
                _____             r_                 p    _____

                                                           0.70     -0.20
                 1.00           0.80             0.43
y
                                                           0.84     -0.52
                                1.00             0.65
    r
                                                           0.37     —0.46
                                                 1.00
    p
                                                           1.00     -0.41
    m
                                                                      1.00
    t-m




    Entries multiplied by 1000.
                                       Table 4

                    Prameter Estimates for the Structural Model




                   cxi
                         =   0.000                        = 3.010
                         =   0.157                        =
                  a2
                         =   0.225                        = 0.086
                  cx3
                         =                                =
                  a4
                         = -0.083
                  15                                 cxlO =




                 Estimated Variances of Structural Disturbances**

                         =   0.480                        =   0.022*

                   2
                         = 0.057*                     2
                                                          = 0.014*

                         = 0.014*




        = 0.0219              0.0        0.0        0.0             0.0
           0.0034             0.0075     0.0        0.0             0.0
           0.0040             0.0013     0.0024    -0.0006        -0.0000
           0.0085             0.0004     0.0071     0.0030        -0.0000
          -0.0008            -0.0017    -0.0017    -0.0007



 * Asymptotic    t—statistic greater than 1.96.
** TImes 1000.
                                   Table 5

                            Variance Decomposition
                 (Decomposition Based on Structural Model)




                                Output Growth


Innovation to:      Money                     Aggregate        Money     Aggregate
                  Supply(M)    Target(T)      Demand(Y)      Demand(R)   Supply(p)

Quarter:    2       0.11          1.10          91.80          6.57         0.41
            4       3.13          0.84          72.88         10.38        12.77
            8       2.48          8.49          58.34         10.00        20.70
           12       2.40         11.08          54.76          8.77        22.98
           24       2.33         12.56          49.74          9.69        25.68



                                  Inflation


            2        0.16         1.59          19.76          2.11        76.39
            4        0.14         1.55          20.52          2.67        75.12
            8        0.39         6.19          19.64          1.88        71.89
           12        0.54         6.83          19.05          3.25        70.33
           24        0.57         8.09          16.42          3.53        71.38



                                 Money Growth


            2        3.17          0.98         67.47          22.56        5.82
            4        3.53          8.72         63.33          19.12        5.30
            8        2.24         14.17         40.79          15.41       27.39
           12        2.33         15.69         38.79          16.70       26.49
           24        2.10         16.90         33.94          17.58       29.48



                       Future Target —     Current   Money

            2        2.10         42.09         33.95           10.59      11.27
            4        1.84         27.91         39.83           12.68      17.74
            8        1.61         27.60         35.69           17.43      17.67
           12        1.55         25.26         31.13           14.19      27.87
           24        1.36         24.07         22.27           11.37      40.93
                                         - A-i -


                                        Appendix


     An alternative specifications of the VAR system was estimated based on

the potential presence of a second unit root in the price level.

denotes the rate of inflation from t-1 to t, the alternative specification

included the first differences of V, r, R, M and the level of I - M.         A

constant and the dumy for 1979:4 — 1982:3 were included In each equation,

but a time trend was not included.

     Letting (y, ,       r,   m, t-m) denote the residuals from the VAR system,

the structural model corresponding to equations (12) -        (16) took the form:


                =
                    u(r - tlrt+1) +
            lit =       +



            r   =
                        + c14(mt —      + u3t


            m =     5y + a6rt + a7lrt + U4t
            tt_m =            +      + amt   +



     In   the definition of the expected real interest rate,            denotes

the effect of the current realization of           on expectations of        In

addition, equation (14) requires some explanation. Suppose the demand for

real money balances is given, in levels, by Mt_Pt =      +
                                                    a3Yt   a4R, or Pt = Mt
—      -
  a3Y arRt. In order to express this in terms of the variables
                                           - A-2   -




incorporated    In the VAR, premultiply by (1—L)2 where L is the lag operator:

                       -             -                  +                                  +
(1_L)2Pt =   (1_L)Mt       (1L)Mti        a3(1_L)Yt         a3(1L)Yt   1 -     a4(1L)Rt
                This implies that one of the equations in (9) takes the form
a4(1_L)Rti.
                           +              -             =                  +               1 -
a3(1_L)Yt +    a4(1-L)Rt       (1-L)2Pt       (1_L)Mt       a3(1L)Yt   i       a4(1_L)Rt
               Note that because money demand is a demand for real money
(1_L)Mti.
balances, restrictions are placed on the coefficients of the lagged first

differences of Y, R, and M. These restrictions on the lag were ignored in

the VAR estimation.

     Parameter estimates are given In Table A.1, and the variance

decompositions are reported in Table A.2.

     The Impulse response functions tend to imply conclusions similar to

those reported In the text with one important exception that is best

illustrated by Figure A.1. This figure shows the impact on the level of V

and H and the rate of Inflation of an aggregate supply shocks. The effect

on   is similar to that implies by Figure 5a; inflation shocks leave the

rate of inflation permanently above the no—shock path. However, Figure A.1

shows no long—run Increase in the rate of money growth. Only the level of

H appears to be left higher. Similar results were found in response to

money demand and supply shocks. In each case, the specification using the

first difference of the inflation rate implied the somewhat implausible

result that permanent increases In the inflation rate were not accompanied

by any changes in the growth rate of money.
                                      Table A.1

                   Parameter Estimates for the Structural Model




                            0.000
                                                     a6
                                                             = 2.911*
                        =   0.0149                           =
                  2                                  z-
                            0.088                            = 0.143
                  a3                                 aB
                        = .-0.151
                        = -0.053
                                                     c       =
                                                             =
                  c15




                 Estimated Variances of Structural Disturbances**


                  a1
                        =    .                       a       = 0.0
                   2                                     2
                  a2
                        = 0.074*                             = 0.015*
                                                     a5

                   2    =   0.028*




        = 0.0267             0.0        0.0         0.0              0.0
          0.0040             0.0086     0.0         0.0              0.0
          0.0025            0.0015      0.0036     -0.0003           0.0001
          0.0028            -0.0010     0.0113      0.0020           -0.0008
          0.0036            0.0015     -0.0032     —0.0006           0.0041




 * Asymptotic    t—statistic greater than 1.96.

** Times 1000.
                                  Table A.2

                            Variance Decomposition
                 (Decomposition Based on Structural Model)




                                Output Growth


Innovation to:      Money                    Aggregate       Money     Aggregate
                  Supply(M)    Target(T)     Demand(Y)     Demand(R)   Supply()

Quarter:    2       0.00          0.95          91.75        0.50         6.79
            4       0.86          1.56          82.79        4.22        10.57
            8       0.65          8.58          72.66        5.40        12.71
           12       0.58         10.26          71.56        5.00        12.61
           24        0.55        11.02          69.14        5.48        13.81



                               Inflation Change


            2        0.02         1.29          14.51        0.92        83.26
            4        0.02         1.64          27.93        0.78        69.63
            8        0.13         1.88          37.25        1.04        59.71
           12        0.15         1.82          37.38        1.95        58.70
           24        0.16         2.58          37.11        2.78        57.36



                                 Money Growth


            2        1.05         0.40          53.03        37.29        8.24
            4        0.92         5.20          55.11        32.39        6.38
            8        0.66        12.50          48.72        24.11       14.02     •




           12        0.63        .12.96         48.57        23.38       14.45
           24        0.59        12.93          50.14        21.51       14.82



                       Future Target -     Current Money

            2        0.53         19.35         66.72         10.86       2.54
            4        0.43         14.83         73.88          8.28       258
            8        0.37         14.18         70.27          8.90       6.28
           12        0.36         15.91         67.90          8.56       7.28
           24        0.35         16.55         65.74          8.70       8.66
                                                                                      FIGURE A.1

                           RESPONSES TO AN AGGREGATE SUPPLY SHOCK
      1   0—


          8—          '.




                                                    S            S
                                    •           S



          6   —                •'           :'          ''               —


                                                                                 • •,/       '                .'
                                            :                                                    S
                                                                                                         gi                    —




                  I        I    I       I       I       I    I       I       I    I      I           I         I   I   I   I       I   I   I   •I   I   I

x1O                        2 3 M 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 i'i IS
                  1                                                                                                        16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 2M
                                                                                                                                               Sr           —
                                                                                                                                               op           ---
