                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WHAT GOES UP MAY NOT COME DOWN:
                 ASYMMETRIC INCIDENCE OF VALUE-ADDED TAXES

                                      Youssef Benzarti
                                       Dorian Carloni
                                        Jarkko Harju
                                      Tuomas Kosonen

                                     Working Paper 23849
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23849


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                        September 2017, Revised November 2018




Previously circulated as “Do Prices Respond Differently to Increases and Decreases in
Consumption Taxes?” The views expressed in this paper are the authors' and should not be
interpreted as those of CBO, LIER, VATT, or National Bureau of Economic Research. We are
thankful to five anonymous referees, Alan Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Stefano DellaVigna, Itzik
Fadlon, Naomi Feldman, Xavier Gabaix, Al Harberger, Jim Hines, Hilary Hoynes, Henrik
Kleven, Wojciech Kopczuk, Peter Kuhn, Camille Landais, Maurizio Mazzocco, Pascal
Michaillat, Magne Mogstad, Ryan Oprea, Emmanuel Saez, Joel Slemrod and Alisa Tazhitdinova
for their helpful suggestions and comments. Tero Hokkanen, Jen Kades and Carolina Kansikas
provided outstanding research assistance. Harju gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the Foundation for Economic Education.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Youssef Benzarti, Dorian Carloni, Jarkko Harju, and Tuomas Kosonen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Goes Up May Not Come Down: Asymmetric Incidence of Value-Added Taxes
Youssef Benzarti, Dorian Carloni, Jarkko Harju, and Tuomas Kosonen
NBER Working Paper No. 23849
September 2017, Revised November 2018
JEL No. H20,H22,H23

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper shows that prices respond more to increases than to decreases in Value-Added Taxes
(VATs). First, using two plausibly exogenous VAT changes, we show that prices respond twice
as much to VAT increases than to VAT decreases. Second, we show that this asymmetry results
in higher equilibrium profits and markups. Third, we find that firms operating with low profit
margins are more likely to respond asymmetrically to the VAT changes than firms operating with
high profit margins. Fourth, this asymmetry persists several years after the VAT changes take
place. Fifth, using all VAT changes in the European Union from 1996 to 2015, we find similar
levels of asymmetry.

Youssef Benzarti                              Jarkko Harju
Department of Economics                       VATT
University of California                      Arkadiankatu 7
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                       P.O.Box 1279
and NBER                                      00101, Helsinki
youssef.benzarti@gmail.com                    Finland
                                              jarkko.harju@vatt.fi
Dorian Carloni
Congressional Budget Office                   Tuomas Kosonen
Dorian.Carloni@cbo.gov                        VATT
                                              Arkadiankatu 7
                                              P.O.Box 1279
                                              00101, Helsinki
                                              Finland
                                              tuomas.kosonen@labour.fi
1       Introduction
Value-Added Taxes (VATs) affect a large share of the world’s economies: all
member countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD), except for the United States, have adopted some form of VAT.
In the European Union (EU), VATs raise 30% of total tax revenue or 12% of
GDP, which amounts to the largest source of government revenue. U.S. politi-
cians and think tanks have often mentioned using the VAT as a national sales
tax or as a replacement for the corporate tax.1 For these reasons, understand-
ing the mechanisms underlying the incidence of VATs is both economically and
policy-relevant.
    In a standard incidence model, the direction of a tax change does not matter
for incidence, as supply and demand elasticities are sufficient to determine the
proportion of the tax borne by each agent. In this paper, we question the premise
that prices respond symmetrically to variation in VATs by empirically showing
that there is a consistently higher pass-through to prices for tax increases than
for tax decreases.
    We perform the analysis at two different levels. First, we focus on two re-
forms that are plausibly exogenous to underlying economic conditions. We use a
14 percentage point decrease in the VAT rate applied to Finnish hairdressing ser-
vices in January 2007 and a subsequent 14 percentage point increase in the same
sector in January 2012.2 We document – using European Commission Council
Directives – that the two reforms were part of a VAT experimentation program,
and therefore the timing of the reforms and the choice of sector are plausibly
exogenous. Using micro price and corporate tax data, we compare hairdressing
services to a control group consisting of beauty salons – which were unaffected
by the VAT changes – and find five main results.
    First, we find that prices respond twice as much to the 14 p.p. VAT increase
    1
     During the 2016 US presidential election, two Republican candidates (Senators Ted Cruz
and Rand Paul) proposed adopting a VAT. It was also considered by the Obama administration
as a possible source of funding for health care costs (Reported in Washington Post, May 27,
2009 ).
   2
     Kosonen (2015) analyzes the effect of the January 2007 VAT cut on profits, costs and prices
as well as other firm level outcomes. We reproduce some of these results and highlight them in
more detail in Section 2.2.



                                               1
than to the 14 p.p. VAT decrease. Second, we find that this asymmetry persists
several years after the VAT cut is repealed, suggesting that equilibrium prices
depend on the history of tax changes. Third, we find that the asymmetric pass-
through is reflected in both markups and profits: both respond asymmetrically
to VAT changes and end up at a higher equilibrium level once the VAT cut is re-
pealed. Firm profits and markups increase following the VAT decrease. However,
they decrease by half as much following the VAT increase and remain higher than
their pre-reform level relative to the control group. Fourth, we uncover an addi-
tional layer of asymmetry: the underlying distribution of price changes following
the VAT increase is substantially different from that of the VAT decrease. Fol-
lowing the VAT decrease, 60% of the population of hairdressers keep their prices
unchanged, while 40% decrease their prices with no specific target. Following
the VAT increase, the distribution is bi-modal, with approximately 50% of hair-
dressers targeting 100% pass-through, 25% keeping their prices unchanged, and
the remaining 25% passing through between 0% and 80% of the VAT increase
with no specific pass-through target. Fifth, we find that the asymmetric pass-
through can be explained, in part, by firm profit margins. Firms operating with
low profit margins are more likely than firms operating with high profit margins
to respond asymmetrically to VAT changes.
    The second level of analysis broadens the scope of our findings by considering
every VAT change that occurred in the Member States of the EU from 1996 to
2015. Using these reforms, we are able to perform several tests of the asymme-
try. Because the VAT reforms we consider cover all sectors of the economy, we
show that the asymmetry is not specific to small labor-intensive sectors (such as
hairdressers) but exist in most other industries regardless of their size. Second,
we find asymmetric pass-through both for sector-specific VAT changes and for
changes in the main VAT rate, which affects most commodities in the economy,
further generalizing our findings.
    The Finnish hairdressing reforms were part of a VAT experimentation pro-
gram and are, therefore, plausibly exogenous to economic conditions. The re-
forms that we use in the second level of analysis, however, were initiated by
Member States. We address the concern that these reforms might be endogenous
to economic conditions in several ways. First, we find no significant pre-trends in


                                        2
prices prior to the reforms. Second, we regress the timing of reforms for both VAT
increases and decreases on the main economic indicators at the country level, in-
cluding GDP and unemployment rate. We find no correlation between the timing
of VAT changes and the economic conditions leading up to the reforms, which
mitigates our concern that VAT changes are endogenous to economic conditions.
Third, we use matching estimators to match VAT increases and decreases over
several key characteristics of the reforms and estimate pass-through on the sub-
set of matched reforms and find similar levels of asymmetric pass-through. This
mitigates the concern that VAT increases might be intrinsically different from
VAT decreases, which presumably could affect pass-through.
    Our findings are important for four main reasons. First, although the VAT is
one of the taxes that raise the most revenue, there is limited work analyzing it.3
This paper contributes to our understanding of its effect on the economy, along
with other papers such as Feldstein & Krugman (1990), Hines & Desai (2005),
Naritomi (2018), Benedek et al. (2015), Benzarti & Carloni (Forthcoming), Koso-
nen (2015), Pomeranz (2015) and Kleven et al. (2016).4 Second, because the
asymmetry is present for a large set of countries and commodities, the results
suggest a gap in an essential part of standard tax incidence analysis and the need
to introduce dynamics when assessing the welfare effects of taxation. Incidence
theory treats changes in tax rates symmetrically, and, as a consequence, incidence
formulas are derived using increases and decreases in tax rates interchangeably.
If responses depend on the direction of tax changes, this should be accounted
for when defining tax incidence. For this reason, our empirical findings call for
future research to account for dynamics in optimal tax models, in the spirit of
Golosov et al. (2011). If asymmetric responses to taxes are prevalent, as docu-
mented in our paper, then dynamic models would be key in both assessing the
welfare implications of taxation and deriving optimal taxes. Third, our results
suggest that reform-based estimates of incidence may be systematically biased if
   3
     A Proquest search of the expression “Value-Added Tax” returns 17,979 scholarly peer-
reviewed articles, while “Income Tax” returns 140,408 such articles.
   4
     Notably, Benedek et al. (2015) estimate the pass-through of VATs to prices using the same
sources of data as we do. While we focus on providing evidence that prices respond asymmet-
rically to variation in VAT rates and estimate the magnitude of the asymmetry, Benedek et al.
(2015) estimate the pass-through of VATs. There are also some significant differences in the
two approaches, as we consider a larger set of commodities, countries and years.


                                              3
they consider either a tax increase or a tax decrease but not both. Fourth, given
that prices adjust upwards but not downwards, using temporary VAT cuts to
stimulate demand may have the opposite effect, resulting in a higher equilibrium
price once the VAT cut is repealed and benefiting mainly firm owners at the
expense of consumers.
    This paper also contributes to a growing public finance literature that doc-
uments non-standard responses to consumption taxes – such as in Chetty et al.
(2009), Marion & Muehlegger (2011), Li et al. (2014), Feldman & Ruffle (2015),
Taubinsky & Rees-Jones (2018), Harju et al. (2018) and Kopczuk et al. (2016).
More broadly, it is related to a literature in public finance that estimates tax
incidence.5 Our paper is the first to provide systematic evidence on the asym-
metric pass-through of taxes and to show that prices consistently respond more
to increases than to decreases in tax rates. Our paper is related to Carbonnier
(2008), but our findings are different.6 While we show that prices respond sys-
tematically more to VAT increases than to decreases, Carbonnier (2008) finds
that prices in some industries respond more to VAT increases, while in others
they respond more to VAT decreases.7 Our paper goes beyond two limitations of
Carbonnier (2008) which could explain the differences in our findings. First, we
consider the entire set of commodities traded in each Member State of the EU,
whereas Carbonnier (2008) considers only 11 commodities in France. Second, we
examine all VAT changes across all Member States of the EU over a period of 20
years, with substantial variation in the magnitude of the VAT changes, some be-
ing as large as 15 percentage points. In contrast, Carbonnier (2008) uses two VAT
changes: a two percentage point VAT increase and a one percentage point VAT
decrease. Our results also contrast with those of Doyle & Samphantharak (2008),
who find symmetric responses of prices to a 120-day temporary moratorium on a
5% gasoline tax in 2000. There are two possible explanations for the symmetric
response found in Doyle & Samphantharak (2008). First, the moratorium was
   5
     Kotlikoff & Summers (1987) and Fullerton & Metcalf (2002) provide a survey of the tax
incidence literature.
   6
     The published version is in French: see the working paper version (Carbonnier (2005)) for
an English translation.
   7
     Politi & Mattos (2011) is another paper that considers asymmetric responses of prices to
VAT reforms. It suffers from the same shortcomings as Carbonnier (2008) – namely, small
sample size and small tax changes.


                                              4
implemented by the Governor of Indiana during an election year because he was
concerned about the effect of soaring gasoline prices on his re-election. For this
reason, gasoline retailers were likely to be under both scrutiny and pressure to
reduce prices. Second, because the moratorium lasted only 120 days, asymmetric
price changes would have been relatively easy to detect and could have resulted
in substantial consumer antagonism.
    Our findings are also related to a literature in industrial organization that
tests for asymmetric pass-through of input costs.8 There is a fundamental differ-
ence between the asymmetry we document and the input cost asymmetry: prices
tend to show a timing asymmetry when responding to cuts in input costs and
typically converge to symmetry over time. The asymmetry lasts for one month
in Borenstein et al. (1997) and three to five months in Peltzman (2000). Instead,
we observe that prices respond immediately to VAT cuts and find no evidence of
convergence over time. Further, two main distinctions between changes in costs
and changes in consumption taxes make the latter better suited for identification.
First, variation in costs can affect different firms differently: for example, an in-
crease in the price of produce is likely to affect fast food restaurants more than it
does Michelin star restaurants. Conversely, changes in VATs affect all restaurants
similarly, as taxes are a percentage of the final price. Second, variation in VAT
rates is directly observable. This is important because some of the most convinc-
ing explanations of the asymmetric pass-through of input costs – such as Benabou
& Gertner (1993) – are based on consumer uncertainty over current and future
levels of input costs. This fact has also led this literature to focus on goods that
have one predominant input that experiences large cost variations. For exam-
ple, Peltzman (2000) notes that his finding of asymmetric pass-through of input
costs relies on a “possibly unrepresentative sample of low-tech, low-value-added
items.” Peltzman (2000) further notes that this context can lead to spurious
asymmetries. Because input costs are not observable, they are measured with
error, and if this error is stronger for cost decreases than for increases – possibly
because of inflation – that could create spurious asymmetries. Third, changes in
VATs do not affect the price of other intermediate inputs, while it is conceivable
that changes in the main intermediate input used for identification can affect the
  8
      See Meyer & Cramon-Taubadel (2004) for a survey of this literature.


                                               5
price of other intermediate inputs, further weakening identification. These fun-
damental differences could be some of the reasons that tax incidence analysis in
the public finance literature seldom considers the possibility of asymmetric pass-
through of taxes, despite the evidence presented in the industrial organization
literature.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the institutional details
and the data we use for the analysis. Section 3 focuses on the Finnish hairdressing
services reforms. Section 4 provides evidence of the asymmetry, using all VAT
reforms that occurred in the European Union from 1996 to 2015. Section 5
discusses possible mechanisms. Section 6 offers policy implications and concludes.


2       Data and Institutional Background
2.1     Value-Added Taxes
VATs apply to the value-added of goods and services sold and is included in con-
sumer prices in the EU. Firms remit the VAT that they collect from consumers
to the government and claim credits for the VAT they pay on input costs, which
implies that only value-added is taxed. Final consumers, who are the last com-
ponent of the chain, cannot claim any tax credit and, therefore, pay the tax on
the final value of goods purchased.
    Member countries of the EU generally have several VAT rates in place, includ-
ing a standard rate that applies to the majority of commodities and a reduced
rate for basic necessities such as food, heating and passenger transport, while
some commodities are tax-exempt and others zero-rated.9


2.2     Finnish Hairdressing Sector VAT Reforms
Institutional background. While the European Commission restricts exces-
sive VAT changes to avoid VAT competition, it allows Member States to ex-
periment with reduced VAT rates for a small sample of labor-intensive services,
    9
    Producers of zero-rated commodities can claim credits for VATs paid on intermediate in-
puts, while producers of VAT-exempt commodities cannot.




                                            6
with the explicit goal of analyzing the incidence of VATs on prices and employ-
ment.10 The European Commission established the full set of services with which
countries are allowed to experiment and explicitly listed them in European Com-
mission (1999). While the list includes hairdressing services, it excludes other,
very similar services, such as beauty salons. This makes hairdressing services a
natural treatment group, and beauty salons a plausible control group. Finland
took part in the second wave of the experimentation program, which was set
to start in January 2007 (Council Directive 2006/112/EC). It was agreed on in
November 2006 that the rate would subsequently revert to its original level. This
resulted in a reduction in the VAT rate on hairdressing services from 22% to 8%
in January 2007 and a subsequent increase from 9% to 23% in January 2012.11
Because the timing, magnitude and commodities affected by this reform were set
by the European Commission, the reforms are plausibly exogenous to economic
conditions.
     Hairdressing services are particularly suited to our analysis. First, firm size
is relatively small, and there are no large buyers, which mitigates concerns that
the asymmetry could be driven by large monopoly or monopsony power. Second,
there is nothing particular about the hairdressing sector in Finland that is likely
to threaten the external validity of the reforms. For example, there are no spe-
cific business or licensing requirements imposed on hairdressers that could create
barriers to entry. Similarly, the sector does not benefit from any particular status
relative to other sectors in the Finnish economy.12
     Importantly, Kosonen (2015) has analyzed the first leg of the reform and we
are replicating some of his results in this paper. In particular, Kosonen (2015)
has considered the pass-through distribution of the VAT cut (Panel a. of Figure
3) and estimated the effect of the VAT cut on profits (years 2000 to 2009 in Figure
5a). While the paper also documents the effect of the VAT cut on costs, it does
not break it down by fixed versus variable costs.13
  10
     See European Commission (1999) and European Commission (2006).
  11
     The reduced and standard VAT rates were both increased by one percentage point in July
2010.
  12
     See Kosonen (2015) for a detailed description of the hairdressing industry.
  13
     Kosonen (2015) also considered the effect of the VAT cut on other variables (turnover and
quantity) and other dimensions of heterogeneity (firm size), which we do not consider in our
paper.


                                              7
Datasets. We use price data collected by surveyors from a random sample of
the full population of hairdressers before and after each VAT change. Prices
for nine types of services were collected: short-hair haircuts, long-hair haircuts,
children’s haircuts, complicated haircuts, short-hair permanent waves (perms),
long-hair permanent waves, short-hair coloring, long-hair coloring and compli-
cated coloring. The prices collected are the “menu” prices rather than transaction
prices, but we also have information on whether coupons or discounts are offered
in each particular location. The dataset contains 2,822 price observations for the
decrease reform originating from 427 firms and 2,106 price observations for the
increase reform stemming from 347 firms. We also use micro and aggregate price
data from Statistics Finland for haircuts, other hairdressing services and beauty
salons to analyze the long-term effects of the reforms.
    We supplement the price data with corporate tax data covering the entire
population of firms in Finland. The data are annual and contain information on
every line of profits and losses, thus allowing us to observe turnover, fixed and
variable costs separately, as well as the number of employees.14


2.3     European VAT Reforms
Institutional background. There are three types of VAT changes in our sam-
ple of reforms: (1) standard VAT rate changes that affect most commodities in
the economy; (2) reduced VAT rate changes that affect commodities that are
considered necessities; and (3) sector-specific VAT changes.

Price data. We use price data from Eurostat’s Harmonised Indices of Con-
sumer Prices (HICP). The dataset contains monthly non-seasonally adjusted
information on commodity prices across European countries for the period 1996-
2015.15 The HICP provides monthly price data by Classification of Individual
Consumption According to Purpose (COICOP) and is assembled according to a
harmonized approach that makes cross-country information comparable.16 These
  14
     Appendix Table D.3 shows summary statistics for hairdressers and beauty salons.
  15
     Eurostat is an organization of the European Commission responsible for collecting and
harmonizing data to provide statistical information about Member States of the EU.
  16
     Appendix Tables D.4 and D.5 list all the COICOP categories used in our analysis.



                                            8
data represent the single most reliable source of information on prices across EU
countries. They do not contain information on the prices of intermediate goods.

Historical VAT rates. Information on VAT rates by commodity and country
is provided directly by the European Commission (EC) in its annual report: VAT
Rates Applied in the Member States of the European Community. The report
contains detailed information on the VAT rate applied to each commodity in
each European country, as well as the exact date of the VAT reforms. It covers
all commodities subject to VATs.
    Because the reports contain only information on current EU members we
consider 27 European countries: (1) since 1996: Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
France, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom; (2) since 2004: Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia,
Slovenia; (3) since 2007: Bulgaria and Romania. We exclude Croatia because it
became a member of the EU only in 2013.
    We drop Education because for-profit institutions are subject to VATs, whereas
not-for-profit institutions are exempt. The majority of institutions are not-for-
profit and, therefore, unaffected by the reforms, but we cannot differentiate for-
profit from not-for-profit institutions in the price dataset. We also drop Clothing
and Footwear, as prices exhibit strong seasonality, with most sales occurring in
January, which is also the month in which most VAT changes occur.
    Appendix Figures D.9, D.10 and D.11 plot the distribution of VAT increases
and decreases by commodity, country, economic conditions (unemployment rate
and GDP growth), size and time of the VAT changes, respectively. Overall, in
our sample of VAT changes, 28% are VAT decreases and 83% are economy-wide
VAT changes.17
  17
    We discuss some of the institutional reasons that explain that there are more VAT increases
than decreases in Section 4.3.




                                              9
3      Finnish Hairdressing Reforms
3.1     Price Response to VAT changes and Long-term Per-
        sistence
Figure 1 uses time series from Statistics Finland from January 2005 to November
2015 to show the evolution of hairdressing and beauty salon prices. Prior to the
January 2007 reform, the VAT rates for hairdressing services and beauty salons
were equal. In January 2007, the VAT was decreased by 14 percentage points for
hairdressing services and held fixed for beauty salons. In January 2012, the VAT
rate for hairdressing services was increased by 14 percentage points.
    Three main empirical patterns emerge from Figure 1. First, beauty salons
seem to be a natural control group for hairdressing services: pre-reform, the
price levels are similar and follow parallel trends throughout the entire 10-year
period. Second, the largest response of hairdressing prices is observed during the
first month for both the VAT decrease and increase. Third, after the VAT rate
for hairdressing services was returned to the same level as that for beauty salons,
hairdressing prices remained higher than beauty salon prices without any signs of
convergence. This suggests that the asymmetric responses of prices to VAT rates
persist over the long run – in this case, for at least 3.5 years. We also estimate
the VAT increase and decrease pass-through separately for each service offered
by hairdressers and controlling for costs and find similar levels of asymmetric
pass-through, whereby prices respond approximately twice as much to the VAT
increase as to the VAT decrease.18


3.2     Pass-Through Distribution
Short-Run Pass-Through Distributions. We use the micro-level price data
to plot the distribution of pass-through. We calculate pass-through by taking the
log difference of prices one month before and one month after the VAT reform:
ρi = log(paf ter ) − log(pbef ore ).19 Figures 3a and 3b plot the distribution of ρi
  18
    The pass-through estimates are reported in Appendix Table D.6.
  19
    Appendix Figure D.12 plots a version of Figure 3 that controls for inflation. The distribu-
tions are very similar but otherwise shifted to the left.



                                              10
for the VAT decrease and increase, respectively, for all nine types of services
combined. The pass-through distribution for VAT increases is bi-modal: 27%
of prices do not respond to the VAT increase, while 48% of prices increase by
80% to 120% of the VAT increase. The distribution of pass-through for the VAT
decrease is uni-modal: 61% of prices do not change in response to the VAT cut,
while the rest decrease but without targeting full pass-through (12% are located
within 20% of full pass-through).
    The asymmetry in pass-through distributions is not driven by specific services:
we systematically observe a bi-modal distribution following the VAT increase and
a uni-modal distribution following the VAT decrease for each of the nine services
offered by hairdressers.20 The observed heterogeneity can instead be explained by
firm heterogeneity. In Figure 2, we count the number of prices that are changed
by any magnitude, divide it by the number of services offered by each firm and
then plot the distribution of the resulting ratio. The distributions are bi-modal,
which suggests the presence of two types of firms: those that tend to change all
prices and those that keep all prices fixed. This finding is consistent with the
argument made by Kopczuk & Slemrod (2006) and Slemrod & Gillitzer (2013),
who insist on the importance of accounting for firm-level heterogeneity when
modeling tax behavior. We return to this in subsection 3.5 and show that it is
likely to be driven by firms having different profit margins.

Pass-Through Dynamics in the Medium Run. To explore the dynamics
of the pass-through distributions, we use a different price dataset, collected by
Statistics Finland because our dataset does not contain prices for longer horizons.
This dataset has three main drawbacks. First, prices are unlikely to be randomly
collected.21 Second, we cannot observe prices immediately after the reform.22
Third, we do not have access to the VAT increase periods.
    Figures 4a, 4b, 4c and 4d plot the distribution of ρi = log(pt ) − log(p0 ),
where p0 is price one month before the VAT change and pt is price measured
  20
     See Appendix Figures D.13, D.14, D.15 and D.16.
  21
     Statistics Finland over-samples larger firms and firms with prices that are easy to collect,
such as firms with online prices and firms in the Helsinki area.
  22
     The price collection is such that not all observations are updated immediately, and it can
take up to six months for a given price to be updated.



                                               11
t = {6, 12, 18, 24} months after the VAT decrease, using the Statistics Finland
dataset. These Figures show that most of the price adjustments occur within a
six month window, after which few prices are changed as the excess mass of inert
prices remains constant thereafter. The distributions look qualitatively similar to
the short-run distributions from Figure 3, with a mass at zero and the remaining
price changes being negative with no specific targeting of full pass-through. How-
ever, the size of the spike at zero, while constant over time, is different from the
one we observe in the short run in Figure 3, using our dataset. This is likely due
to the fact that the Statistics Finland dataset does not randomize the collection
of prices.


3.3     Asymmetric Response of Profits and Markups
Using the administrative corporate tax data on the full population of hairdressers
and beauty salons, we investigate the response of profits and markups to VAT
changes. We observe turnover, profits and variable and fixed costs, among other
variables. As a proxy for markups, we use turnover minus variable cost divided
by variable cost. This proxy is accurate as long as marginal costs are constant,
which seems reasonable for hairdressers. In addition, using the subset of firms
for which prices were collected, we compare changes in the markup proxy with
changes in prices and find that they are reasonably correlated.23
    Figure 5a plots the coefficients from a regression of log profits on year dummies
from 2000 to 2014 for hairdressers and beauty salons.24 The graph shows that
profits respond asymmetrically to the VAT changes: the VAT decrease results in
an increase in profits of 0.2 log points, while the VAT increase leads to a profit
decrease of 0.1 log points. Figure 5b shows a similar graph for markups that
increase by twice as much following the VAT decrease as they decrease following
the VAT increase. We observe no evidence of convergence of profits or markups
towards symmetry three years after the VAT reverts to its original level. In
contrast to Figures 5c and 5d, we observe no significant changes in variable and
fixed costs following the VAT changes, thus suggesting that quantities are not
  23
    See Appendix Figure D.17.
  24
    We exclude firms with less than e10,000 in turnover or e1,000 in profits to exclude small
firms that are exempt from remitting VAT.


                                             12
affected by the reform.25 These observations are consistent with firms using VAT
cuts to increase profits, while passing through VAT increases to prices to minimize
their impacts on profits.


3.4     Long-term Persistence of the Asymmetry
Figure 1 shows that, once the VAT rate applied to Finnish hairdressers is in-
creased back to its original level, prices remain higher than for the control group
3.5 years later in spite of the VAT rates being equal for both groups. This per-
sistence is also present in profits and markups, as shown in Figures 5a and 5b.
In Section 4.4, we provide evidence that asymmetric pass-through is persistent in
other markets and countries. This suggests that the market equilibrium depends
on the history of tax changes. If markets operate competitively, the rents gener-
ated by VAT changes should be reduced to zero. Our data suggest two possible
failures of competition that could explain the long-term asymmetry.
    The first is that we observe very little entry by new firms. Standard theory
predicts that firms would enter the market to capture the windfall generated by
the VAT decrease or to charge lower prices following the VAT increase. This
increased entry should reduce prices until they reach their competitive levels. We
detect no evidence of increased entry (or exit) in the hairdressing sector follow-
ing the VAT changes.26 This is especially puzzling because this sector is one in
which barriers to entry are relatively low in the Finnish economy. In Finland,
hairdressers face no particular institutional barriers to entry (they are not re-
quired to obtain a license or special training), and startup costs are relatively
low.
    The second failure of competition is that firms do not appear to react strongly
to one another’s prices. We calculate the density of hairdressers for each zipcode
and generate five quintiles, the first including zipcodes with the lowest density
of hairdressers and the fifth the most hairdresser-dense zipcodes. We then test
whether markups are more likely to respond differently to changes in VAT rates
  25
      We also plot the evolution of investment over time for hairdressers and beauty salons in
Appendix Figure D.18 and find no response.
   26
      The results are reported in Appendix Figures D.19 and D.20, which plot the number of
firms and entry and exit over time, respectively.



                                             13
in denser zipcodes. We find that hairdresser density does not affect the response
of markups to the reforms.27 Overall, both of these explanations suggest that,
in contrast to what standard incidence theory usually assumes, these markets do
not seem to be operating competitively.


3.5     Heterogeneous Firm Response
The main dimension of heterogeneity we uncover is that firms with low profit
margins at the time of the VAT change tend to pass through more of the VAT
increase than of the decrease, whereas firms with high profit margins are more
likely to behave symmetrically. We define profit margins as turnover minus oper-
ating costs divided by turnover, and to mitigate concerns of mean reversion, we
calculate a three-year average profit margin prior to the first VAT change (from
2004 to 2006) and break down our sample of hairdressers into five quintile groups
from the lowest profit margins to the highest.28 Figure 6a plots the change in
markup (as defined in subsection 3.3), in 2007 and 2012, for each quintile of profit
margins and shows that hairdressers in the lowest quintile take advantage of the
VAT cut to increase their markups, whereas firms in higher quintiles tend to
behave symmetrically. To further mitigate concerns of mean reversion, we carry
out two placebo tests: (1) Figure 6b plots the response of the same quintiles
in 2006 and 2011 and (2) Figure 6c plots the response of beauty salons in 2007
and 2012. We find that changes in markups are significantly more homogeneous
across quintiles in the placebo tests relative to the treatment quintiles.29
  27
     The results are reported in Appendix Table D.7. Except for an increase in markups for the
most dense zipcode following the VAT decrease – which seems to be due to a decrease in costs
– we find no significant effect of density on changes in markups.
  28
     Figures D.21a, D.21b and D.21c perform the same test using a different definition of the
quintile margins by using the 2004 to 2006 data for the 2007 reform and the 2009 to 2011 data
for the 2012 reform.
  29
     Further, and using our original price data linked to the corporate tax data, we correlate an
indicator variable equal to 1 if a firm does not pass-through the VAT cut with the log of profit
margins and find a negative correlation with a coefficient of -0.0589 (0.0265). This suggests
that firms with low profit margins are more likely to not pass-through the VAT cut and is
consistent with Figures 6a and D.17.




                                               14
4      European VAT Changes
4.1     Graphical Evidence
We use our full sample of VAT changes, as described in Section 2.3, to plot
unconditional means of the price index – without controlling for inflation – and
the VAT rate in the three months before and after the reform, normalizing the
series to 100 in the month before the reform.
    Figure 7a plots the unweighted average price of all commodities considered
in the full sample for VAT increases and decreases separately and the average
VAT changes. It shows that prices increase discontinuously in the month fol-
lowing a VAT increase but do not decrease as much when VATs decrease. The
observed asymmetry is not driven by a selected subset of commodities. Instead,
when we plot disaggregated versions of Figure 7a by three-digit COICOP groups
(in Appendix Figures D.22, D.23 and D.24), we find that all commodities ex-
hibit asymmetric pass-through, with the exception of Communication (COICOP
group number 8), for which pass-through of VAT decreases is 318%, and Fur-
nishings, Household Equipment and Routine Household Maintenance (COICOP
group number 5), for which pass-through is small for both VAT increases and
decreases.30
    In addition to testing the presence of asymmetric pass-through for sector-
specific VAT changes, as with the Finnish hairdressing reforms, the European
VAT changes allow us to test whether the asymmetry exists for economy-wide
VAT changes. The fact that the asymmetric pass-through of VAT changes holds
economy-wide mitigates several concerns, including the fact that the asymmetry
is a feature of small labor-intensive sectors (such as hairdressers) or is driven by
sector-specific lobbying.
  30
    Possibly because of sample size, trends do not appear to be parallel for two COICOP
categories: (1) Alcoholic Beverages, Tobacco and Narcotics and (2) Transport. While pass-
through is asymmetric in both of these cases, the violation of the parallel assumptions suggest
that we should be cautious in interpreting these two figures.




                                              15
4.2     Empirical Approach
To estimate the pass-through to prices of VAT increases and decreases, we follow
the approach of Evans et al. (1999), who estimate the pass-through of cigarette
taxes using different tax changes across US states over time. We run the following
fixed-effects regression:

        ∆ log(pict ) = β0 ∆ log(1 + τict )
                          k=10
                          X
                    +                βk ∆ log(1 + τic(t+k) ) + ∆λt + γ∆Xct + ∆ǫict ,   (1)
                        k=−10,k6=0


where i denotes the commodity, c the country and t the month in which the price
is observed, λt time fixed effects, pict the price, τict the tax rate and ǫict the error
term. We control for a given country’s nominal interest rate, GDP per capita and
unemployment rate with Xct . For each of xt = {log(pict ), log(1+τict ), λt , Xct , ǫict },
∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .
    In equation (1), β0 ∈ [0, 1] identifies the pass-through of a VAT change in the
month when the change occurs: for example, if β0 = 0, then the price does not
respond to a VAT change, and if β0 = 1, the price responds one-to-one to a VAT
change. The second term of the equation estimates any forward- or backward-
looking responses of prices to changes in VAT rates; β−5 , for example, estimates
the response of prices at time t to VAT changes that will occur at time t + 5.
    The fixed-effects regression generalizes a difference-in-differences regression
with multiple periods, commodities and countries, and its main identification
assumption is the same as that for difference-in-differences regressions: absent the
tax change, there would have been no change in the prices of the treated relative to
the untreated commodities. Figure 7a shows a sharp change in prices at the time
of the reform, with no pre-trends and no evidence of anticipatory behavior, which
lends support to this identification assumption. The identification is obtained
from within-country-specific commodity variation in VAT rates over time.
    The results of the fixed effects regression are reported in Table 1. Columns
(1) and (2) of Table 1 correspond to VAT increases and decreases, respectively.
The first row of each regression (labeled β0 ) corresponds to the pass-through of
the VAT change to prices one month after the reform; it takes values between


                                               16
0 and 1 and is equal to 0 for 0% pass-through and 1 for 100% pass-through.
β+i corresponds to the response of prices to VAT changes i months after the
reform, while β−i corresponds to the response of prices i months before the reform.
Figures 7b and 7c plot the coefficients from the fixed-effects regression for the
VAT increases and decreases, respectively, and show that the pass-through to
prices of VAT increases is equal to 34% while that of VAT decreases is equal to
7% one month after the reform, and both are statistically significant. There are
no significant price responses in any months within a 10-month window around
the VAT increases and decreases. We perform several robustness checks of our
main specification, including running specification (1) separately on reforms that
are classified as temporary and permanent and also including country-commodity
specific inflation controls and find similar levels of asymmetry.31


4.3     Endogeneity Concerns
This section addresses the concern that some of the VAT changes are likely to be
endogenous. First, we use economics and institutional knowledge to identify the
variables we expect, ex-ante, to be correlated with the timing of VAT changes.
Second, we empirically test the correlation between the timing of VAT changes
and economic conditions. Third, using different matching algorithms, we estimate
the pass-through for VAT increases and decreases of similar size, occurring in
similar countries, at similar times and for similar commodities.

Variables that are ex-ante expected to be correlated with VAT changes.
Ex-ante, and based on our analysis of the underlying reasons for VAT changes
and institutional details laid down below, we can expect VAT changes to occur
(1) for political reasons, such as electing more fiscal conservative governments; (2)
for institutional reasons, mainly because of the VAT harmonization efforts led by
the EU, and (3) for economic reasons, such as using VAT changes to counteract
changing economic conditions. We describe each of these below.
    First, there are reasons to expect the timing of VAT changes to be corre-
  31
    See Appendix Tables D.8 and D.9 for the regression estimates using temporary and perma-
nent reforms, respectively. And see Appendix Table D.10 for the estimates including country-
commodity inflation controls.


                                            17
lated with political variables, such as the strength of the governing coalition and
changes in the governing party. There is an empirical political economy literature
that analyzes the underlying reasons for tax reforms and finds that political rea-
sons are more likely to cause tax reforms than economic conditions. Castanheira
et al. (2012), for example, show that political variables (strength of the govern-
ing coalition and weakness of the opposition party) are more likely to predict tax
reforms than economic conditions (GDP and unemployment). Moreover, Haller-
berg & Scartascini (2017) show that electoral considerations are more likely to
drive VAT changes than economic considerations. Moreover, Foremny & Riedel
(2014) show that changes in local business taxes in Germany are driven by the
electoral cycle.
    Second, VAT changes could also be due to institutional reasons. The Euro-
pean Commission adopted legislation in 2006 that significantly restricted the abil-
ity of Member States to freely set their VAT rates. Council Directive 2006/112/EC
explicitly mandated that Member States should progressively start abiding by the
following rules: (1) increase the standard VAT rate above 15% and the reduced
VAT rate above 5%; (2) restrict the reduced VAT rate to a pre-specified set
of commodities, essentially preventing Member States from artificially reducing
VAT rates by reclassifying commodities from the standard to the reduced VAT
rate; (3) any reduction of VAT rates below 15% (or reclassification from 15% to
5%) was to be approved by all 28 Member States.32 Given these restrictions,
we can expect the following three patterns, after 2006: (1) fewer VAT decreases,
(2) VAT decreases of smaller magnitude, and (3) more VAT increases aimed at
bringing VAT rates above the 5% and 15% minima.
    Finally, the timing of VAT changes could be correlated with economic con-
ditions. Except for Council Directive 2006/112/EC, there are no other laws
that restrict Member States from using VATs to affect the economy. This could
threaten our identification if VAT increases occur at times when economic con-
ditions are particularly different from those of VAT decreases and prices respond
differently to VAT shocks during those different times. Since this could threaten
our identification strategy, we implement the following tests. First, we explicitly
  32
    The third rule is not explicitly laid out in Council Directive 2006/112/EC, but, procedurally,
any exemptions to a given Council Directive requires a vote by the 28 Member States.



                                               18
test for the correlation of economic conditions with the timing of VAT changes.
Second, we implement a matching procedure that identifies similar VAT changes
and run specification (1) on the subset of matched VAT changes.

The timing of VAT changes is not correlated with economic conditions.
The main threat to identification when using the EU VAT changes is that the
underlying economic conditions at the time of VAT increases are significantly
different from those during VAT decreases, since economic conditions can also
affect prices. While prior empirical research and institutional knowledge suggest
that some tax changes are likely to be driven by political and institutional consid-
erations rather than economic ones, we can directly test this using our datasets.
To do so, we estimate the correlation of the timing of increases and decreases
with measures of economic conditions. To proxy for economic activity, we follow
the National Bureau of Economic Research’s Business Cycle Dating Committee,
which, in the US, is the organization that dates recessions and expansions. The
main measures they consider are GDP and employment. The underlying reason-
ing is that GDP rises during periods of expansions, while unemployment falls,
and conversely GDP falls during recessions while unemployment rises. Fuest
et al. (2018), for example, is a paper that estimates the incidence of corporate
taxes using changes in corporate tax rates over time, and uses GDP and the
unemployment rate to show that corporate tax changes are not driven by eco-
nomic conditions. We use a similar approach, and test for the correlation of
VAT changes with GDP per capita and the unemployment rate in the 12 months
leading to a given VAT reform and find no significant relationship between VAT
reforms and these measures of economic activity. Formally, we run the following
regression:


                             t=−1
                              X                         t=−1
                                                         X
              Ref ormict =           βt log(GDPct ) +           γt log(U Rct )
                             t=−12                      t=−12

                         + λt + γc + πi + ǫict ,                                 (2)

where Ref ormict is equal to 1 if a VAT change occurs for commodity i in country
c in month t and 0 otherwise; GDPct is the per capita GDP of country c in month

                                           19
t; U Rct is the unemployment rate of country c in month t; λt are time (in months)
fixed effects; γc are country fixed effects; πi are commodity fixed effects; and ǫict
is the error term (clustered by month). We run this regression on the full sample,
on a subsample excluding VAT decreases and another subsample excluding VAT
increases. The outcome variable for the full sample is equal to one if there is a
VAT change and zero otherwise; the outcome variable for the sample excluding
VAT decreases is equal to one if there is a VAT increase and zero otherwise; and
the outcome variable for the the sample excluding VAT decreases is equal to one
if there is a VAT increase and zero otherwise.
    Appendix Table D.11 shows that there is no relationship between the timing
of VAT changes – whether increases or decreases – and the underlying economic
conditions leading up to the reforms. Using sector-specific measures of economic
conditions instead of GDP, such as turnover by sector, yields similar results, as
shown in Appendix Table D.12. This further mitigates our concern that VAT
changes are endogenous to economic conditions.

Pass-through is asymmetric for matched VAT increases and decreases.
While we show above that some of the underlying reasons for VAT reforms are
likely to be political rather than economic and that the timing of VAT changes
does not correlate with economic conditions, there still remains the concern that
we are never able to observe the effect of VAT increases and decreases at the same
time, for the same commodity and in the same country. We address this concern
by matching VAT increases to VAT decreases over several key characteristics in
order to ensure that these characteristics are not driving the asymmetry. This
matching approach allows us to compare similarly sized VAT reforms that occur
in similar countries, for the same commodities and at times of similar economic
conditions.
    Our matching procedure follows three steps. First, we employ two different
strategies to match VAT increases and decreases: (1) we compare similarly sized
VAT changes that occur in the same countries for the same commodities at times
of similar economic conditions, and (2) we compare similarly sized VAT changes
that occur in the same month and year for the same commodities across countries.
Therefore, in the first case, the matching focuses on within-country variation in


                                         20
VAT changes, and the second approach uses across-country variation in reforms
within time. We also include other key matching characteristics: the commodity
considered, the size of the VAT change, measures of economic conditions (GDP
growth, GDP per capita, unemployment rate and interest rate) and a dummy
for whether the reform happened before or after the Great Recession. Second,
we estimate propensity scores for all VAT increases and VAT decreases based on
the key characteristics we consider and exclude VAT reforms that are not good
matches, i.e. those with propensity scores that lie outside of the common sup-
port of the two distributions and those that are not matched by our matching
algorithms. Third, we run our main specifications, using equation (1), on the
subsample of reforms that are matched and are part of the common support to
estimate the VAT pass-through in each case. When implementing this matching
procedure, we need to make one additional important choice: the matching algo-
rithm we implement. In a survey of the matching literature, Caliendo & Kopeinig
(2008) suggest using a nearest neighbor matching algorithm, as they find it to
be the simplest and most commonly used algorithm. For this reason, our base-
line matching estimation uses a nearest neighbor matching algorithm, although
we also use other common algorithms: radius matching, kernel matching, local
linear regression matching and coarsened exact matching.
    Depending on the specification and algorithm used, the proportion of reforms
that are not found to be good matches and are dropped ranges from 28% to 51%
of our sample. Columns (1) and (2) in Table 2 report the results of running
specification (1) on the country matched subsample. Similarly, columns (3) and
(4) in Table 2 report the results of running specification (1) on the time matched
subsample. Both of these specifications, and all subsequent matching specifica-
tions we consider, report very similar levels of asymmetric pass-through to our
main fixed effects specification with no matching. This mitigates our concern that
the asymmetry is driven by inherently different characteristics of VAT increases
versus decreases.
    We also plot, in Appendix Figures D.9, D.10 and D.11 the distribution of all
VAT increases and decreases by country, commodity, time (year and month), size
of the VAT change, GDP growth rate and unemployment rate. These Figures
provide a non-parametric way of assessing how much overlap there is along these


                                       21
six dimensions. While the distributions of VAT increases and decreases are not
identical, there are substantial areas of common support.
    Finally, we implement several additional matching specifications by consider-
ing alternative sets of key matching characteristics. Appendix Section A provides
an exhaustive list of the 20 different specifications we consider and the results
they yield. Overall, all of these specifications generate very similar levels of
asymmetric pass-through.


4.4     Long-term Persistence of the Asymmetry
In subsection 3.4 we showed that the asymmetry in the pass-through of VATs per-
sisted for several years after the Finnish hairdressing reforms were enacted. In this
section, we show that this persistence is not a peculiarity of Finnish hairdressers:
we observe it in other sectors and countries. To provide additional evidence of
this persistence in asymmetry – and because we are considering long-run horizons
– we need large VAT changes and sectors in which prices are relatively stable;
otherwise, the VAT changes would be masked by natural variation in prices and
inflation. VAT reductions that would bring the rate below 15% are restricted
by the European Commission to avoid VAT competition. In addition to the ex-
perimentation program described above, the European Commission approved an
application to reclassify sit-down restaurants from the standard to the reduced
VAT rate.33 Both France and Finland took advantage of this new law. This led
to a 14 p.p. VAT cut for French sit-down restaurants and a 9 p.p. cut for Finnish
ones. While the VAT rate did not revert to its original level, we exploit smaller
increases in the reduced VAT rate: 1.5 and 3 p.p. increases in France and a 1 p.p.
increase in Finland. Figures 8a and 8b show that the asymmetric pass-through
persisted over several years both in Finland and in France. This evidence is to be
interpreted cautiously, in part because the VAT changes are not of the same size
and it is conceivable that the asymmetric pass-through is in part due to that.
    Next, we consider symmetric VAT changes in Hungary that do not suffer
from these issues. The Hungarian reforms also have the advantage of affecting
  33
    Following a campaign promise by then French President Jacques Chirac, France applied
for an authorization to reclassify sit-down restaurants from the standard to the reduced VAT
rate in 2002. The application was approved for all Member States in January 2009.


                                            22
a wide range of commodities beyond restaurants and hairdressers. Hungary cut
its standard VAT rate from 25% to 20% in January 2006 and increased it from
20% to 25% in July 2009. These changes were enacted as part of a set of cam-
paign promises preceding the 2006 parliamentary elections. Figure 8c shows the
response of commodities that were subject to the standard rate in Hungary com-
pared to a set of control countries.34 We find that the asymmetry persisted over
several years after the VAT rate was returned to 25%. Because the standard VAT
rate applies to a wide range of commodities, this mitigates our concern that the
long-term persistence of asymmetry exists only in specific sectors.


5      Mechanisms
In this section, we benchmark several explanations against the three empirical
patterns we observe in our data: (1) short-run asymmetry: prices respond asym-
metrically to VAT changes and the response is immediate (Figures 1 and 7a);
(2) long-run asymmetry: prices do not converge to symmetry in the medium run
(Figures 1, 8a, 8b and 8c); (3) heterogeneous response: firms respond heteroge-
neously to VAT changes (Figures 2 and 3) and this heterogeneity appears to be
driven by differences in profit margins (Figure 6a).


5.1     Standard Imperfect and Perfect Competition Models
We assume a Generalized Cournot Model, which is attractive because it covers
most standard symmetric imperfect competition models, as shown in Weyl &
Fabinger (2013), as well as perfect competition and tacit collusion.35
    We use the framework from Hamilton (1999), and assume that there are n
symmetric firms that produce a homogeneous good. Firm i produces y units
of the good and the aggregate industry output is given by Y = ny. P (Y ) is
the industry’s inverse demand function and its derivative is negative and defined
throughout its support. The profit function of firm i is given by Π = P (Y )y−c(y),
  34
     We included every commodity subject to the standard VAT rate, with the exception of
diesel and gasoline because of strong volatility. Details of the list of commodities and control
group countries can be found in Appendix Section C.
  35
     All formal derivations and calibrations are detailed in Appendix Section D.1.


                                              23
where c(·) is firm i’s cost function. We assume that marginal cost is constant.36
    We denote by δ = dY   dy
                              the response of aggregate output to changes in the
output of firm i. This key parameter is a sufficient statistic for the degree of
competition in the market. The degree of competition is negatively correlated
with δ ∈ [0, n], with δ = 0 corresponding to perfect competition and δ = n to
tacit collusion.
    Assume that the government levies an ad-valorem tax t, and define the marginal
pass-through to prices, i.e. the response of prices to a very small change in t, by
ρ. Further, define the average pass-through of a large change in the ad-valorem
tax rate T as:

                                                       T
                                           1
                                               Z
                                   κ(T ) =                 ρ(t)dt.                         (3)
                                           T       0


    Since the marginal pass-through rate, ρ(t), is defined for infinitesimally small
tax changes, marginal pass-through rates can never be asymmetric, by definition.
However, because elasticities are different along convex demand functions, larger
tax changes could generate some degree of asymmetric pass-through. For this
reason, we focus on the average pass-through rate, κ(T ). Intuitively, for average
pass-through rates to be as asymmetric as we estimate in Sections 3 and 4, we
need very different elasticities above and below a given tax rate. We show that
this is unlikely to hold for most demand functions.
    Formally, note that the average pass-through rates are asymmetric if κ(T ) >
κ(−T ). We show that this condition can only be satisfied with non-standard
demand functions both in the cases of perfect and imperfect competition.

Imperfect Competition. As shown in Appendix Section D.1.2 and in Hamil-
ton (1999), the marginal pass-through to prices under imperfect competition is
given by:
  36
     We make this simplifying assumption for two reasons: (1) it simplifies the derivations and
makes the condition for asymmetric pass-through more transparent, (2) it allows us to focus on
asymmetric pass-through generated by demand functions which are more commonly studied in
the literature than supply functions. However, we address non-constant marginal cost functions
in the perfect competition case, where this assumption does not add significant complexity to
the derivations.



                                              24
                                                 n
                                   ρ(t) =                ,                                 (4)
                                            n + δ(1 − ǫ)

where ǫ = − PYPYY Y is a measure of the convexity of demand and is a function of t.
    In Appendix Section D.1.2, we show that the condition that the average pass-
through is asymmetric, i.e., κ(T ) > κ(−T ), rules out most commonly used de-
mand functions including exponential and constant elasticity demand functions,
irrespective of what degree of competition, δ, we assume. More generally, this
condition rules out the most common class of demand functions, which is the one
for which consumer valuations are drawn from Generalized Pareto Distributions
(GPD), as shown in Ausubel et al. (2014). Therefore, this implies that either
(1) standard imperfect competition models cannot rationalize our asymmetric
pass-through results, or (2) most standard demand functions used in economics
are an inaccurate description of consumer behavior.37

Perfect Competition. In the case of perfect competition, the standard for-
mula for marginal pass-through is:


                                                S ′ (·)
                                     ρ=                    ,                               (5)
                                          S ′ (·) − D′ (·)

    where S(·) and D(·) are the supply and demand functions, respectively.38
Similarly to the imperfect competition case above, the condition for average pass-
through to be asymmetric is κ(T ) > κ(−T ).
    While this condition rules out common demand functions in the case of imper-
fect competition, it is not as strong in the case of perfect competition. To assess
the degree of asymmetric pass-through this generates in the perfect competition
case, we consider commonly used demand and supply functions and calibrate
κ(T ) − κ(−T ), in Appendix Section D.1.4. We find that demand elasticities in
  37
     In Appendix Section D.1.2, we further consider the condition under which functions for
which consumer valuations are not drawn from GPD can predict asymmetry. We show that
this condition is relatively stringent as it imposes a strict relationship between the relative
magnitudes of the first, second and third derivatives of the demand function.
  38
     We re-derive this equation in Appendix Section D.1.

                                              25
excess of 100 are needed to generate the asymmetric pass-through rates we ob-
serve using the European VAT changes. Large VAT changes, such as the Finnish
hairdressing sector 14 percentage point changes, require smaller elasticities to
generate asymmetric pass-through, but still much larger than commonly esti-
mated. Our calibration shows that we need demand elasticities in excess of 15 to
generate the degree of asymmetry we estimate in the Finnish hairdressing case.
This is inconsistent with (1) commonly estimated demand elasticities, such as
in DellaVigna & Gentzkow (2017) where their demand elasticities fall between
two and three and (2) the fact that previous research has estimated an elasticity
of 0.2 in the case of Finnish hairdressing services, as shown in Kosonen (2015).
We also show, in Appendix Section D.1.4, that commonly used supply functions
predict very small levels of asymmetric pass-through.


5.2    Alternative Explanations
Adjustment cost models can generate some degree of downwards price rigidity.
We consider two such models, and show that while they can predict short run
asymmetric pass-through, they are less successful at matching the long run dy-
namics. First, we consider a model similar to Ball & Mankiw (1994), which uses
trend inflation along with menu costs to generate downward price rigidity. Intu-
itively, if inflation and menu costs are high enough, firms might not pass-through
costs or tax decreases, but instead keep their nominal prices fixed and wait for
inflation to decrease real prices. In Appendix Section D.2.1, we calibrate a simple
version of this model and show that, even for large menu costs, we cannot gener-
ate the type of medium-run asymmetry we find in the Finnish VAT hairdressing
reforms. Intuitively, for long enough horizons, the difference between posted and
optimal prices is large enough that it always justifies bearing the adjustment cost
rather than keeping prices fixed.
    Second, we consider binding capacity constraints as a possible explanation.
We show, in Appendix Section D.2.2, that while capacity constraints can generate
downwards price rigidity, they also predict incremental and lagged price decreases
following the VAT cut, as the capacity constraints are being relaxed. This is in-
consistent with the fact that we observe parallel trends in prices post-VAT cut for
our treatment and control groups in the Finnish hairdressing experiments, sug-

                                        26
gesting no lagged responses to the VAT cut. Second, binding capacity constraints
are inconsistent with the persistence of the asymmetry we observe in Figures 1,
8c, 8a and 8b. Finally, explaining the European evidence with binding capac-
ity constraints seems implausible as it would imply that most of the economy is
operating at capacity.
    Given that our empirical evidence seems to fit poorly with standard economic
theory, non-standard models could be potential explanations. For example, while
untestable in our setting, models where customers and/or firms deviate from
rationality could generate asymmetric pass-through. In a recent paper, Eyster
et al. (2017), using evidence from Kahneman et al. (1986a), show that fairness
and pricing norms can explain some of our evidence.39 It is also conceivable for
firms to have biased beliefs over the future path of VAT changes, mistakenly
predicting, for example, mean reversion in VAT rates, which would justify not
adjusting prices downward.40 Coibion et al. (2018) shows, for example, that firm
managers hold biased beliefs over key economic parameters.


6      Conclusion
In this paper, we show that prices respond asymmetrically to VAT changes. First,
prices respond more to VAT increases than to VAT decreases. Second, this asym-
metric response of prices results in an asymmetric pass-through of VAT changes
to profits and markups. Third, the asymmetry persists over the long run. Fourth,
several empirical features of this asymmetry are inconsistent with standard tax
incidence models.
    While the asymmetric pass-through of VATs appears to be of policy rele-
vance, precisely assessing the welfare implications of our result requires further
theoretical work. Introducing dynamics in optimal taxation models, in the spirit
of Golosov et al. (2011), appears to be crucial in light of our findings. In par-
ticular, such models are necessary to draw the precise welfare implications of
our results. Furthermore, there could be additional dimensions of heterogeneous
  39
     See Appendix D.3 for a more detailed discussion of Eyster et al. (2017) and Kahneman
et al. (1986a).
  40
     We find no evidence of mean reversion in VAT rates in our data, but because VAT changes
are a relatively rare event, it is possible that firms may have biased expectations.


                                            27
pass-through of VATs of equal or larger welfare implications, which are left for
future research to assess and investigate.


References
Ausubel, Lawrence M, Peter Cramton, Marek Pycia, Marzena Rostek & Marek
  Weretka. 2014. Demand Reduction and Inefficiency in Multi-Unit Auctions.
  The Review of Economic Studies 81(4). 1366–1400.
Ball, Laurence & Gregory Mankiw. 1994. Asymmetric Price Adjustment and
  Economic Fluctuations. The Economic Journal 104(423). 247–261.
Benabou, Roland & Robert Gertner. 1993. Search With Learning From Prices:
  Does Increased Inflationary Uncertainty Lead to Higher Markups? The Review
  of Economic Studies 60(1). 69–93.
Benedek, Dora, Ruud A De Mooij, Michael Keen & Philippe Wingender. 2015.
  Estimating VAT Pass Through. IMF Working Paper 15/214 .
Benzarti, Youssef & Dorian Carloni. 2016. Do Prices Respond Differently to In-
  creases and Decreases in Consumption Taxes? Previous working paper version
  of “What Goes Up May Not Come Down: Asymmetric Incidence of Value-
  Added Taxes” .
Benzarti, Youssef & Dorian Carloni. Forthcoming. Who Really Benefits from
  Consumption Tax Cuts? Evidence from a Large VAT Reform in France. Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy .
Blinder, Alan, Elie RD Canetti, David E Lebow & Jeremy B Rudd. 1998. Asking
  about prices: A new approach to understanding price stickiness. Russell Sage
  Foundation.
Borenstein, Severin, A Colin Cameron & Richard Gilbert. 1997. Do Gasoline
  Prices Respond Asymmetrically to Crude Oil Price Changes? The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 112(1). 305–339.
Bryson, Alex, Richard Dorsett & Susan Purdon. 2002. The Use of Propensity
  Score Matching in the Evaluation of Active Labour Market Policies. Working
  Paper .
Caliendo, Marco & Sabine Kopeinig. 2008. Some Practical Guidance for the
  Implementation of Propensity Score Matching. Journal of Economic Surveys
  22(1). 31–72.
Carbonnier, Clément. 2005. Is Tax Shifting Asymmetric? Evidence From French
  VAT Reforms, 1995-2000. Working Paper .
Carbonnier, Clément. 2008. Différence des Ajustements de Prix à des Hausses
  ou Baisses des Taux de la TVA: un Examen Empirique à Partir des Réformes
  Françaises de 1995 et 2000. Économie et Statistique 413(1). 3–20.



                                      28
Castanheira, Micael, Gaëtan Nicodème & Paola Profeta. 2012. On the Political
  Economics of Tax Reforms: Survey and Empirical Assessment. International
  Tax and Public Finance 19(4). 598–624.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney & Kory Kroft. 2009. Salience and Taxation: Theory
  and Evidence. The American Economic Review 99(4). 1145–1177.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko & Saten Kumar. 2018. How Do Firms
  Form Their Expectations? New Survey Evidence. American Economic Review
  108(9). 2671–2713.
DellaVigna, Stefano & Matthew Gentzkow. 2017. Uniform Pricing In U.S. Retail
  Chains. Working Paper .
Doyle, Joseph J & Krislert Samphantharak. 2008. $2.00 Gas! Studying the Effects
  of a Gas Tax Moratorium. Journal of Public Economics 92(3). 869–884.
European Commission. 1999. Council Directive 1999/85/EC. Official Journal of
  the European Union .
European Commission. 2006. Council Directive 2006/18/EC. Official Journal of
  the European Union .
Evans, William N, Jeanne S Ringel & Diana Stech. 1999. Tobacco Taxes and
  Public Policy to Discourage Smoking. Tax Policy and the Economy 13. 1–55.
Eyster, Erik, Kristof Madarasz & Pascal Michaillat. 2017. Pricing When Cus-
  tomers Care About Fairness But Misinfer Markups. Working Paper .
Fabinger, Michal & E Glen Weyl. 2018. Functional Forms for Tractable Economic
  Models and the Cost Structure of International Trade. Working Paper .
Feldman, Naomi & Bradley Ruffle. 2015. The Impact of Including, Adding, and
  Subtracting a Tax on Demand. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
  7(1). 95–118.
Feldstein, Martin & Paul Krugman. 1990. International Trade Effects of Value-
  Added Taxation. In Taxation in the global economy, 263–282. University of
  Chicago Press.
Foremny, Dirk & Nadine Riedel. 2014. Business Taxes and the Electoral Cycle.
  Journal of Public Economics 115. 48–61.
Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl & Sebastian Siegloch. 2018. Do Higher Corporate
  Taxes Reduce Wages? Micro Evidence From Germany. American Economic
  Review 108(2). 393–418.
Fullerton, Don & Gilbert E Metcalf. 2002. Tax Incidence. Handbook of Public
  Economics 4. 1787–1872.
Golosov, Mikhail, Maxim Troshkin & Aleh Tsyvinski. 2011. Optimal dynamic
  taxes. NBER Working Paper No.17642 .
Hallerberg, Mark & Carlos Scartascini. 2017. Explaining Changes in Tax Bur-
  dens in Latin America: Do Politics Trump Economics? European Journal of
  Political Economy 48. 162–179.



                                      29
Hamilton, Stephen F. 1999. Tax Incidence Under Oligopoly: a Comparison of
  Policy Approaches. Journal of Public Economics 71(2). 233–245.
Harju, Jarkko, Tuomas Kosonen & Oskar Nordström Skans. 2018. Firm Types,
  Price-Setting Strategies, and Consumption-Tax Incidence. Journal of Public
  Economics 165. 48–72.
Heckman, James J, Hidehiko Ichimura & Petra E Todd. 1997. Matching as an
  Econometric Evaluation Estimator: Evidence From Evaluating a Job Training
  Programme. The Review of Economic Studies 64(4). 605–654.
Heinrich, Carolyn, Alessandro Maffioli & Gonzalo Vazquez. 2010. A primer for
  applying propensity-score matching .
Hines, James & Mihir Desai. 2005. Value-Added Taxes and International Trades:
  the Evidence. Working Paper .
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L Knetsch & Richard Thaler. 1986a. Fairness As a
  Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements In the Market. The American
  Economic Review 76(4). 728–741.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L Knetsch & Richard H Thaler. 1986b. Fairness and
  the Assumptions of Economics. Journal of Business 59(4). S285–S300.
Karadi, Peter & Adam Reiff. 2016. Menu Costs, Aggregate Fluctuations, and
  Large Shocks. Working Paper .
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Claus Thustrup Kreiner & Emmanuel Saez. 2016. Why
  Can Modern Governments Tax So Much? An Agency Model of Firms As Fiscal
  Intermediaries. Economica 83(330). 219–246.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, Justin Marion, Erich Muehlegger & Joel Slemrod. 2016. Does
  Tax-Collection Invariance Hold? Evasion and the Pass-Through of State Diesel
  Taxes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(2). 251–86.
Kopczuk, Wojciech & Joel Slemrod. 2006. Putting Firms Into Optimal Tax
  Theory. The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96(2). 130–
  134.
Kosonen, Tuomas. 2015. More and Cheaper Haircuts After VAT Cut? On the
  Efficiency and Incidence of Service Sector Consumption Taxes. Journal of
  Public Economics 131. 87–100.
Kotlikoff, Laurence & Lawrence Summers. 1987. Tax Incidence. Handbook of
  Public Economics 2. 1043–1092.
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn & Erich Muehlegger. 2014. Gasoline Taxes and Con-
  sumer Behavior. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4). 302–342.
Marion, Justin & Erich Muehlegger. 2011. Fuel Tax Incidence and Supply Con-
  ditions. Journal of Public Economics 95(9). 1202–1212.
Meyer, Jochen & Stephan Cramon-Taubadel. 2004. Asymmetric Price Transmis-
  sion: a Survey. Journal of Agricultural Economics 55(3). 581–611.
Naritomi, Joana. 2018. Consumers as Tax Auditors. Working Paper .



                                     30
Okun, Arthur. 1981. Prices and quantities: A macroeconomic analysis. Brookings
  Institution Press.
Peltzman, Sam. 2000. Prices Rise Faster Than They Fall. Journal of Political
  Economy 108(3). 466–502.
Politi, Ricardo Batista & Enlinson Mattos. 2011. Ad-Valorem Tax Incidence and
  After-Tax Price Adjustments: Evidence From Brazilian Basic Basket Food.
  Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue Canadienne d’Économie 44(4). 1438–
  1470.
Pomeranz, Dina. 2015. No Taxation Without Information: Deterrence and Self-
  Enforcement In the Value Added Tax. The American Economic Review 105(8).
  2539–2569.
Romer, Christina D & David H Romer. 2010. The Macroeconomic Effects of
  Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks. American
  Economic Review 100. 763–801.
Slemrod, Joel & Christian Gillitzer. 2013. Tax systems. MIT Press.
Taubinsky, Dmitry & Alex Rees-Jones. 2018. Attention Variation and Welfare:
  Theory and Evidence from a Tax Salience Experiment. The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 85. 2462–2496.
Tirole, Jean. 1988. The theory of industrial organization. MIT press.
Weyl, E Glen & Michal Fabinger. 2013. Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Prin-
  ciples of Incidence Under Imperfect Competition. Journal of Political Economy
  121(3). 528–583.




                                      31
         Figure 1: Finnish Hairdressing Sector VAT Reforms




                135
                125
                  115                    ∆VAT= - 14 p.p.
         Price index
        105     95




                                                                             ∆VAT= + 14 p.p.
                85




                Jan. 2005       Jan. 2007                           Jan. 2012                  Oct. 2015
                                                         Months

                                    Hairdressers (treated)                Beauty Salons (control)


Notes: This figure shows the price of hairdressing services and beauty salons
before and after the 14 percentage point hairdressing services VAT cut in
January 2007 and the 14 percentage point VAT hairdressing services hike in
January 2012.


     Figure 2: Proportion of Prices Changed by Hairdresser

                                   VAT Decrease                             VAT Increase
                40
                30
      Percent
                20
                10
                0




                        0                 .5                 1   0                 .5               1
                        mean= 0.42 se=0.0211 N= 384              mean= 0.76 se=0.0183 N= 345
                                          Percent of Prices Changed By Firm


Notes: This figure plots the distribution of the within-hairdresser ratio of
services for which prices were changed over total services offered following
the VAT cut and hike.


                                                        32
                                                             Figure 3: Distributional Asymmetry
                        (a) VAT Decrease Pass-Through                                                (b) VAT Increase Pass-Through




         '!
                                                                                      '!




         &!
                                                                                      &!




         %!
                                                                                      %!




       $!
                                                                                    $!




      ()*+),-
                                                                                   ()*+),-




         #!
                                                                                      #!




33
         "!
                                                                                      "!




         !
                                                                                      !
                ï.#                ï."                 !                ."    .#             ï.#                ï."                !                 ."    .#
                                 /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>4?)+*)1@)                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)
                =004@)*32+)@;4A)1,B4ï!.!$4@)B!.!!!C4DB44#E##                                 =004?)*32+)?;4@)1,A44!.!B4?)A!.!!"%4CA44#"!'




     Notes: These figures compare the observed pass-through distributions for the VAT decrease (Figure 3a) to
     those of the VAT increase (Figure 3b) for Finnish hairdressing services. The red vertical line represents 100%
     pass-through.
                            Figure 4: Long Term Pass-Through of VAT Decrease
       (a) VAT Decrease Pass-Through After 6 Months            (b) VAT Decrease Pass-Through After 12 Months




       (c) VAT Decrease Pass-Through After 18 Months           (d) VAT Decrease Pass-Through After 24 Months




34
     Notes: These figures show the distribution of VAT decrease pass-through over four different horizons: 6, 12,
     18 and 24 months. Pass-through is calculated as log(pt ) − log(p0 ), where p0 is the price one month before the
     reform and pt is the price t = 6, 12, 18, 24 months after the reform.
                             Figure 5: Profits, Markups, Variable and Fixed Costs
                           (a) Profits                                                                     (b) Markups




35
                      (c) Variable Costs                                                                (d) Fixed Costs


                                                                              .25

                                                                                           ΔVAT = -14 p.p.
                                                                              .2
                                                                              .15




                                                                                                                       ΔVAT = +14 p.p.
                                                                              .1


                                                            Log fixed costs
                                                                              .05
                                                                              0




                                                                                    2002    2004         2006        2008     2010        2012          2014

                                                                                            Hairdressers (treated)            Beauty Salons (control)




     Notes: Figures 5a, 5b, 5c and 5d plot the coefficients from a regression of log profits, log markups, log variable
     costs and log fixed costs respectively, on year dummies for Finnish hairdressers and beauty salons.
        Figure 6: Changes in Markups by Quintile of Profit Margins for Finnish VAT Reforms
           (a) Hairdressers in 2007 and 2012 (Reforms)          (b) Placebo: Hairdressers in 2006 and 2011




36
                                  (c) Control: Finnish Beauty Salons in 2007 and
                                  2012




     Notes: To generate these graphs, we break down the sample of firms into 5 quintiles with respect to profit
     margins (turnover minus deductible costs divided by turnover) using data from 2004 to 2006, with 1 being
     firms with the smallest profit margins. For each quintile, we plot changes in their markup following changes in
     VAT. Figure 6a considers the 14 p.p. VAT increase and decrease for Finnish hairdressers. Figure 6b considers
     the Finnish hairdressers in 2006 and 2011. Figure 6c considers Finnish beauty salons (which we use a control
     group for hairdressers) in 2007 and 2012.
                                               Figure 7: Asymmetric Response of Prices to VAT Changes
                                                                                        (a) Unconditional Means

                                                                         102
                                                                                                              Pass−through = 55%


                                                                         101


                                                                         100




                                                           Price Index
                                                                          99
                                                                                                              Pass−through = 13%


                                                                          98


                                                                          97
                                                                               −3       −2             −1          0           1                               2           3
                                                                                                       Months Before/After Reform

                                                                                            Price if VAT Increase                               Price if VAT Decrease
                                                                                            VAT Rate if VAT Increase                            VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




37
                              (b) Fixed Effects Regression: Increase                                                                           (c) Fixed Effects Regression: Decrease

                                     Pass-Through to Price if VAT Increase                                                                             Pass-Through to Price if VAT Decrease
                     .5                                                                                                               .5

                     .4                                                                                                               .4

                     .3                                                                                                               .3

                     .2                                                                                                               .2

                     .1                                                                                                               .1




      Pass-Through
                                                                                                                       Pass-Through




                      0                                                                                                                0

                     -.1                                                                                                              -.1

                     -.2                                                                                                              -.2
                           -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                 5   6      7   8    9 10                                -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                 Month Relative to Reform                                                                                         Month Relative to Reform


     Notes: Figure 7a plots the response of the unconditional means of prices to VAT increases and decreases.
     Figure 7b and 7c plot the coefficients from the fixed effects regression (1) for VAT increases (7b) and VAT
     decreases (7c) on the full sample of reforms and includes ten-month leads and lags.
                                                                              Figure 8: Long-term Persistence
                                        (a) Finnish Restaurants                                                                                   (b) French Restaurants

                    120                                                                                                     105



                    110                                                                                                     100                         ∆VAT= + 1.5 p.p.
                                           ∆VAT = -9 p.p.
                                                                                                                                     ∆VAT= - 14 p.p.
                                                                                      ∆VAT = +1 p.p.
                    100                                                                                                      95




      Price Index
                                                                                                              Price Index
                     90                                                                                                      90

                                                                                                                                                                                             ∆VAT = + 3 p.p.

                                                                                                                             85
                     80
                          2006   2007   2008    2009    2010    2011 2012      2013   2014    2015     2016                       2007   2008   2009     2010    2011    2012 2013    2014    2015      2016     2017
                                                               Months                                                                                                   Months

                                    Finnish Sit-Down Restaurants                  Norwegian Sit-Down Rest.                                    French Sit-Down Restaurants                     Italian Sit-Down Rest.
                                    Symmetric Pass-Through Counterfactual                                                                     Symmetric Pass-Through Counterfactual




38
                                                                            (c) Hungary’s Standard VAT Rate Changes




     Notes: Figure 8a plots the response of Finnish sit-down restaurants to a 9 p.p. VAT decrease and a 1 p.p. VAT
     increase compared to a control group of Norwegian sit-down restaurants. Figure 8b plots the response of French
     sit-down restaurants to a 14 p.p. VAT decrease and 1.5 p.p. and 3 p.p. VAT increases relative to a control
     group of Italian restaurants. We also include a counterfactual that uses the VAT increase pass-through for
     VAT decreases. Figure 8c plots the response of all commodities subject to the standard VAT rate in Hungary
     (excluding diesel and gasoline) to a 5 p.p. VAT decrease and a 5 p.p. VAT increase relative to a control group
     consisting of neighboring countries.
Table 1: Pass-Through Estimates Using Fixed Effects Regression (Full Sample)

                                               ∆ log Price
                                          Increase Decrease
                       β0                    0.34     0.065
                                           (0.064) (0.030)

                       β+1                  0.020        0.025
                                           (0.019)      (0.017)

                       β−2                  0.030        0.026
                                           (0.019)      (0.015)

                       β+2                  0.020        -0.044
                                           (0.027)      (0.021)

                       β−3                  0.015       -0.0043
                                           (0.016)      (0.028)

                       β+3                  -0.043      -0.0046
                                           (0.018)      (0.022)

                       β−4                  0.049        -0.020
                                           (0.034)      (0.022)

                       β+4           -0.011             -0.0089
                                    (0.027)             (0.020)
                       Time FE        Yes                 Yes
                       R2            0.014               0.014
                       Observations 385,547             341,782
                       Notes: The coefficients reported in this ta-
                      ble indicate the pass-through of VAT increases
                      and decreases to prices, estimated using spec-
                      ification (1) on the full sample of reforms.
                      The first column shows the estimates for VAT
                      increases and the second those for VAT de-
                      creases. Standard errors are clustered by
                      month and are in parentheses. β0 measures
                      the pass-through of the VAT change at the
                      time of the reform, and βi measures price
                      changes i months away from the reform.
   Table 2: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample

                    Country Specification Timing Specification
                          ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                    Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
 β0                    0.32       -0.013    0.33       0.019
                     (0.073)     (0.025)  (0.066)     (0.038)

 β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                     (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

 β−2                  0.031          0.026           0.030          0.026
                     (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

 β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.020          -0.044
                     (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

 β−3                  0.015         -0.0050          0.015         -0.0050
                     (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

 β+3                  -0.042        -0.0047          -0.042        -0.0046
                     (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

 β−4                  0.050          -0.020          0.049          -0.020
                     (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

 β+4          -0.0098               -0.0089        -0.0096        -0.0089
              (0.027)               (0.020)        (0.027)        (0.020)
 Time FE        Yes                   Yes            Yes            Yes
 R 2           0.014                 0.014          0.014          0.014
 Observations 385,538               342,500        386,076        342,482
 Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
reforms, using nearest neighbor matching. The country specification (first and
second columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for be-
ing post-Great Recession, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The timing
specification (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year, commod-
ity, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The first and third columns show
the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT de-
creases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0
measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi
measures price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 49% of the
VAT changes in the country specification and 29% of the VAT changes in the
time specification are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                      40
    APPENDIX FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

A     Matching VAT Increases and Decreases
In this Section, we first provide details of the matching approach we use in Sec-
tion 4.3 and then discuss and provide the results of several alternative matching
algorithms and specifications.

Nearest Neighbor Matching We use a Nearest Neighbor Matching approach
in Section 4.3, because it appears to be the most straightforward and used match-
ing algorithm, as argued in the following two surveys of the matching literature:
Caliendo & Kopeinig (2008) and Heinrich et al. (2010). The nearest neighbor
matching algorithm proceeds in the following way: assume a set I of VAT in-
creases and a set D of VAT decreases. Our goal is to match VAT increases to
decreases on key characteristics (size of VAT change, economic conditions, coun-
try and commodity). Assume we are trying to match reform i ∈ I to a given
reform in D. Nearest neighbor matching proceeds in two steps. First, propensity
scores for all reforms in I and D are estimated based on the key characteristics
we are matching on. Second, for each i ∈ I, the algorithm will find the nearest
reform in D, which is defined as the one that minimizes the distance in propen-
sity scores. We implement this algorithm with replacement, which is the common
way of doing it in the literature, in part because it does not suffer from issues
raised by the order in which the reforms are matched (see Heinrich et al. (2010)
and Caliendo & Kopeinig (2008)). The matching algorithm then provides us with
a subset of matched reforms in I and D. We then use this subset to estimate
equation (1).

Key Matching Characteristics: Matching algorithms can be sensitive to the
choice of matching variables, as shown, for example, by Heckman et al. (1997).
Caliendo & Kopeinig (2008), in a review of the matching literature, recommend
using economic theory to choose what variables need to be included when imple-
menting a matching estimator. In our case, the goal of implementing a matching
estimator is to mitigate the concern that we are never able to observe similarly


                                       41
sized VAT increases and decreases for the same commodity, in the same country
and at the same time. This a possible concern, mainly because economic condi-
tions could be different at different times, which could in turn affect the degree
of pass-through differentially. This suggests two possible sets of key matching
characteristics: (1) match on country, commodity, size of change and economic
conditions (2) match on time, commodity, size of change and economic condi-
tions. There is no ambiguity over how to define country, commodity and size of
change as these are directly observable in the data. We use GDP per capita as a
proxy for economic conditions, but also consider GDP growth, the unemployment
rate and the interest rate. While we run a specification that includes all of these
economic variables, Bryson et al. (2002) warn against over-parametrization and,
therefore, we only include GDP per capita in the main specification in Section
4.3. Overall, we run the nearest neighbor matching estimator, described above,
using the following five specifications: (1) we match on country, commodity, size
of reform, a dummy for being post-Great Recession and GDP per capita, (2)
we match on country, commodity, size of reform, a dummy for being post-Great
Recession and unemployment rate, (3) we match on country, commodity, size
of reform, a dummy for being post-Great Recession and interest rate, (4) We
match on country, commodity, size of reform, a dummy for being post-Great Re-
cession GDP per capita, GDP growth, unemployment rate and interest rate (5)
we use logit (instead of probit) to match on country, commodity, size of reform,
a dummy for being post-Great Recession and GDP per capita. The results of
these specifications are reported in Tables D.13, D.14, D.15, D.16 and D.17. All
of these specifications generate very similar levels of asymmetric pass-through to
our main fixed effects specification without matching, with a pass-through rate
for VAT increases higher than 30% and a pass-through rate for VAT decreases
lower than 5%.

Alternative Matching Algorithms: In addition to the nearest neighbor match-
ing algorithm we implement above, we also use four alternative matching algo-
rithms: coarsened exact matching, kernel matching, radius matching and local
linear regression matching. Caliendo & Kopeinig (2008) and Heinrich et al. (2010)
provide details on how each algorithm operates. We use these additional match-


                                        42
ing algorithms because, in spite of nearest neighbor matching being the most
common and simple algorithm, there does not seem to be a clear consensus on
what algorithm is best as each has its own advantages in terms of bias reduction
versus efficiency. Caliendo & Kopeinig (2008), for example, give the following
advice regarding choice of matching algorithms: “Pragmatically, it seems sensi-
ble to try a number of approaches. Should they give similar results, the choice
may be unimportant. Should results differ, further investigation may be needed
in order to reveal more about the source of the disparity.”
    The results of the coarsened exact matching, kernel matching, radius matching
and local linear regression matching are reported in Tables D.18, D.19, D.20 and
D.21. All of these specifications yield very similar levels of asymmetric pass-
through to our main fixed effects specification with no matching with a VAT
increase pass-through rate higher than 30% and a VAT decrease pass-through
rate lower than 7%


B     Narrative Approach
We use a narrative approach in the spirit of Romer & Romer (2010) to describe
the underling reasons for VAT changes. We flag any reforms that were enacted
as part of stimulus packages or austerity measures. We gathered this information
from official documents from the EU Member States we are considering. We
describe this documentation here and can make it available upon request: we used
legislative documents, central bank annual reports and, when documentation was
not readily available, we reached out directly to Finance Ministries.
    First, we used legislative documents. These documents often give an official
reason for why governments implement VAT changes, and often also detail other
changes occurring in the same year. These documents are often easily available
online and date back to the early 1990s. Some examples include the following: for
Finland www.finlex.fi/en/, for France www2.assemblee-nationale.fr/documents-
parlementaires, and for the UK www.legislation.gov.uk.
    Second, we complemented and corroborated the legislative documents with
a second source of information emanating from Member States’ central banks.
Central banks describe the economic situation in detail, and discuss measures of


                                       43
fiscal policy and how they relate to potential monetary policies undertaken. For
our purposes this was useful for being able to categorize reforms into those that
were part of larger economic reform packages, or part of a response to an economic
downturn. For example, the documentation for Germany is from annual reports of
the Bundesbank, available online at https://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/
EN/Home/home_node.html, and for Portugal from the online documentation of
Banco de Portugal available in English at https://www.bportugal.pt/en.


C     Hungarian Reforms: List of Commodities and
      Control Group Countries
Commodities: The commodities included in Figure 8c are all commodities
subject to the standard rate except for diesel and gasoline. The full list is: Ac-
tual rentals for housing, Audio-visual, photographic and information processing
equipment, Books, Carpets and other floor coverings, Catering services, Cloth-
ing, Clothing materials, Electrical appliances for personal care; other appliances,
articles and products, Electricity, Furniture and furnishings, carpets and other
floor coverings, Glassware, tableware and household utensils, Hairdressing salons
and personal grooming establishments, Household textiles, Information process-
ing equipment, Jewelry, clocks and watches, Maintenance and repair of personal
transport equipment, Maintenance and repair of the dwelling, Major durables
for indoor and outdoor recreation including musical instruments, Materials for
the maintenance and repair of the home, Personal effects n.e.c., Pharmaceutical
products, Photographic and cinematographic equipment and optical instruments,
Purchase of vehicles, Refuse collection, Repair of furniture, furnishings and floor
coverings, Restaurants and hotels, Restaurants, cafs and the like, Services for the
maintenance and repair of the home, Sewerage collection, Tools and equipment
for the home and garden, Water supply.

Control Group Countries: The control group countries are an unweighted
average of Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Estonia, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg,
Norway and Romania.



                                        44
D       Appendix to Section 5 (Mechanisms)
D.1     Standard Perfect and Imperfect Competition Models
In this section, we test the extent to which standard perfect and imperfect com-
petition models can generate asymmetric pass-through. We use the framework
of Hamilton (1999). For imperfect competition to predict some degree of asym-
metry, one has to use demand functions that fall outside of the most commonly
used class of demand functions in economics. Even then, strong assumptions
regarding the first, second and third derivatives are needed in order to generate
any degree of asymmetry. In the case of perfect competition, demand elasticities
in excess of 100 are needed to rationalize our findings. Therefore, unless true
demand elasticities are much larger than previously thought and the functional
forms that are widely used are unrealistic, we cannot rationalize our finding of
asymmetric pass-through with standard perfect or imperfect competition models.

D.1.1    General Framework

We assume that there are n firms that produce a homogeneous good. Firm i
produces yi units of the good and the aggregate industry output is given by
Y = ni=1 yi . P (Y ) is the industry’s inverse demand function, its derivative is
     P

negative and defined throughout its support. The profit of firm i is given by

                              Πi = P (Y )yi − ci (yi )

    We restrict attention to symmetric equilibria, which implies that ∀i, ci (.) =
c(.), yi = y and Y = ny. Therefore, ∀i, Πi = Π = P (Y )y − c(y).
                         dY
    We denote by δ = dy    i
                             the response of aggregate output to changes in the
output of firm i. This key parameter is a sufficient statistic for the degree of
competition in the market. The degree of competition is negatively correlated
with δ ∈ [0, n], with δ = 0 corresponding to perfect competition and δ = n to
tacit collusion. Below, we allow δ to vary, in order to assess how the degree of
competition affects the extent of asymmetry.




                                        45
       The first and second order conditions are given by:

                                Πy = P + yδPy − cy = 0                                   (6)




                            Πyy = 2δPy + yδ 2 Pyy − cyy < 0                              (7)

D.1.2       Generalized Cournot Model

The Generalized Cournot Model corresponds to the case where δ ∈ (1, n).41 For
simplicity, we assume that marginal cost is constant and equal to c > 0.42 To
estimate the pass-through of taxes to prices, we introduce an ad-valorem tax t.
The first order condition (6) becomes:

                              Πy = P + yδPy − c − t = 0                                  (8)

       Summing up condition (8) over all firms, we get:

                               nP + Y δPY − nc − nt = 0                                  (9)

    Denote by ρ(t) = dPdt
                           the response of price to changes in the tax rate and
                      dY
notice that ρ(t) = PY dt . We differentiate (9) with respect to the t and get the
following condition:


                                                 n
                                   ρ(t) =                                               (10)
                                            n + δ(1 − ǫ)

    where ǫ = − PYPYY Y , is a measure of the curvature of the inverse demand func-
tion and is a function of t. ρt is a measure of the marginal pass-through of a
  41
     Weyl & Fabinger (2013) show that Generalized Cournot models cover most standard sym-
metric imperfect competition cases. In principle one can analyze more complex imperfect
competition models where firms respond to each others’ behavior in a heterogeneous manner.
However, in the commodity tax literature, these more complex models are seldom used.
  42
     Below, we show that asymmetric pass-through can be driven by the convexity of the market
demand function. When marginal cost is not constant, similar arguments can be used to
generate asymmetric pass-through.


                                             46
small change in taxes. We assume that the demand function is weakly convex,
i.e. ǫ ≥ 0, which is a standard assumption.43
     Marginal and average pass-through rates can be very close if the tax change
is small, but are not necessarily equal for large tax changes. We denote by
             RT
κ(T ) = T1 0 ρ(t)dt the average pass-through of a large change T in the ad-
valorem tax rate.
     It is worth emphasizing that, as long as the inverse demand function is twice
differentiable, marginal pass-through rates dρ
                                             dt
                                               t
                                                 are always symmetric for increases
and decreases in tax rates, which implies that average pass-through rates, for
sufficiently small tax changes, are always symmetric. Non-linearity in the de-
mand/supply function can only generate asymmetric pass-through for sufficiently
large tax changes. For a large enough T , pass-through is larger for increases than
decreases if κ(T ) > κ(−T ), i.e.,
                                Z       T
                                            [ρ(t) − ρ(−t)] dt > 0                       (11)
                                    0


       There are two possible cases under which this condition can be satisfied:

   1. ρ is non-monotonic but takes sufficiently large values for t > 0, such that
      inequality (11) is satisfied. If ρ is non-monotonic, then equation (10) implies
      that ǫ would be non-monotonic as well. This requires a demand function
      with the property that its degree of convexity does not vary monotonically
      and yet it would be convex throughout.

   2. ρ is monotonic, in which case, for inequality (11) to be satisfied, dρ
                                                                          dt
                                                                             needs to
      be positive. From equation (10), it follows that a necessary and sufficient
      condition for dρ
                    dt
                       > 0 is that dǫ
                                   dt
                                      > 0.

   Condition (1) rules out most demand functions in economics, as it is usual to
use functions with non-monotonic convexity. Condition (2) rules out most com-
monly used demand functions including linear demand functions, but also expo-
nential and constant elasticity demand functions which, according to Fabinger
& Weyl (2018), is the most commonly used demand function. Condition (2) in
  43
    Convexity is usually assumed because concavity leads, for example, to quantities demanded
being capped even if prices tend to zero.

                                                   47
fact rules out an entire class of demand function, which are all demand functions
where consumer valuations are drawn from Generalized Pareto Distributions, as
shown in Ausubel et al. (2014). These are the most commonly used demand
functions. For this reason, our results imply that, conditional on this standard
imperfect competition model being accurate, this entire class of demand functions
is inconsistent with our finding.
    Even demand functions where consumer valuations are not drawn from Gen-
eralized Pareto Distributions do not necessarily generate larger pass-through for
increases versus decreases. For this to happen, we need dǫdt
                                                             > 0, i.e.:


                   dǫ   dY −PY Y Y Y PY − PY Y PY + PY2 Y Y
                      =                                     >0                     (12)
                   dt   dt               PY2

    From this expression follows that the sign of dǫ
                                                  dt
                                                     depends on the sign of −PY Y Y Y PY −
             2
PY Y PY + PY Y Y . This expression can either be positive or negative: its sign de-
pends on the relative magnitudes of the first, second and third derivative of the
demand function, as well as the magnitude of Y. Notice also that the degree
of competition, δ, while it affects pass-through, it does not affect the degree of
asymmetry.
    Overall, our finding of asymmetric pass-through rules out any demand func-
tion where consumer valuations are drawn from Generalized Pareto Distributions,
which are the most commonly used demand functions in economics, and for the
remaining ones imposes a condition that depends on a relationship between first,
second and third derivatives of the demand function.

D.1.3    Perfect Competition
                                                                           ′
                                                                       S (·)
Marginal pass-through under perfect competition is equal to ρ = S ′ (·)−D    ′ (·) where

S and D are supply and demand functions, respectively. Similarly to the im-
perfect competition case above, for pass-through to be asymmetric, the following
                                RT
quantity needs to be positive: 0 [ρ(t) − ρ(−t)] dt > 0, which can also occur in
one of two cases: (1) ρ is non-monotonic, (2) ρ is monotonic and ∂ρ   ∂t
                                                                         > 0. Simi-
larly to the imperfect competition case, we focus on case (2), i.e., the monotonic
                                       RT
ρ case. Pass-through is asymmetric if 0 [ρ(t) − ρ(−t)] dt > 0. Given that ρ is


                                          48
                                               dρ
monotonic, a necessary condition is that       dt
                                                    > 0.


                            dρ   S ′′ (1 − ρ)D′ + D′′ ρS ′
                               =                           .                     (13)
                            dt           (S ′ − D′ )2

   We know that S ′ ≥ 0, D′ ≤ 0. Also, 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 which can be derived from
         S ′ (·)                                       dρ                     ′′
ρ = S ′ (·)−D    ′ (·) . This implies that the sign of dt depends on sign of S , which

corresponds to the third derivative of the cost function, and of D′′ . We consider
each possible combination of signs to determine the cases under which asymmetry
can be generated.

   • Cases that generate unambiguously positive asymmetric pass-through, i.e.,
     cases where the increase pass-through is larger than the decrease pass-
     through:

        1. S ′′ ≤ 0 and D′′ ≥ 0 implies that S ′′ (1 − ρ)D′ ≥ 0 and D′′ ρS ′ ≥ 0.
           Therefore, dρ
                      dt
                         ≥ 0.

      We calibrate this case below to assess how much asymmetry it generates.

   • Ambiguous cases where asymmetric pass-through can only be generated
     with functional forms that rely on specific relationship between the first
     and second derivative of the demand and supply functions:

        1. S ′′ < 0 and D′′ < 0 implies that S ′′ (1 − ρ)D′ ≥ 0 and D′′ ρS ′ ≤ 0.
           Therefore, the sign of dρ
                                   dt
                                      depends on the relative magnitudes of the
           first and second derivatives of S and D.
        2. S ′′ > 0 and D′′ > 0 implies that S ′′ (1 − ρ)D′ ≤ 0 and D′′ ρS ′ ≥ 0.
           Therefore, the sign of dρ
                                   dt
                                      depends on the relative magnitudes of the
           first and second derivatives of S and D.

   • Cases that generate unambiguously negative asymmetric pass-through, i.e.
     cases where the decrease pass-through is larger than the increase pass-
     through, which are inconsistent with our empirical evidence of positive
     asymmetric pass-through:



                                          49
         1. S ′′ ≥ 0 and D′′ ≤ 0 implies that S ′′ (1 − ρ)D′ ≤ 0 and D′′ ρS ′ ≤ 0.
            Therefore, dρ
                       dt
                          ≤ 0.

D.1.4     Calibration

In this section, we calibrate the cases that unambiguously generate asymmetric
pass-through in the case of perfect competition.44 We do not consider the am-
biguous cases for the following two reasons: (1) some ambiguous cases require
concave demand functions, which are not usually used in economics; (2) the un-
ambiguous cases are more likely to yield larger magnitudes of asymmetry and
therefore constitute the best possible candidates for falsification tests.

Convex Demand and Linear Supply. This corresponds to the first case
above, i.e. D′′ > 0 and S ′′ = 0. To calibrate this, we assume a constant elasticity
demand function, which corresponds to the following inverse demand function:
P (Y ) = aY −b .45 This functional form has the advantage of being commonly used
(see, for example, Fabinger & Weyl (2018)), is tractable and is convex through-
out its support. We discipline our calibration by choosing parameters a and b
to match the pass-through estimate for the VAT increase. Since there are two
parameters and only one identifying equation, we consider different combinations
of a and b. We assume constant marginal cost, since S ′′ = 0. We estimate the
marginal cost c, using the cost data from Finnish hairdressers. With a CES
market demand function, marginal pass-through is equal to:

                                                             c
                                       ρ(t) =                   1+b
                                                          1 p+t − b
                                                           !
                                                     c+   b    a

   and therefore, the following quantity determines the magnitude and sign of
the asymmetry:
                    Z       T              Z   0               Z       T
                                ρ(t)dt +            ρ(t)dt =               [ρ(t) + ρ(−t)] dt
                        0                      −T                  0

  44
     We do not calibrate the imperfect competition case because it excludes the class of demand
functions for which consumer valuations are drawn from Generalized Pareto Distributions,
which are the most commonly used demand functions.
                                                      ! − 1
  45
     The market demand function is equal to D(p) = ap b .


                                                        50
   which, when assuming a constant elasticity demand function, is equal to:
                                                                                 
                                Z       T
                                                        c                   c
          Γ(a, b, c, p, T ) =               
                                                           1+b +              1+b dt
                                                                                   
                                                     1 p+t − b           1 p−t − b
                                                      !                   !
                                    0           c+   b   a
                                                                    c+   b   a

    To estimate Γ, we proceed in the following way. First, we set p = 100
and choose c so as to match the estimated markup in the case of the Finnish
hairdressers. Second, we vary the demand elasticity, which is equal to 1b , and
choose the corresponding a to match our empirical estimate of VAT increase
pass-through. We use these parameters to calculate Γ. We implement this ap-
proach separately to match (1) the Finnish hairdressing experiment estimates,
i.e. with T = 14 and a pass-through rate of VAT increases of 80% (2) the pass-
through estimates from the European evidence, i.e. T = 3% and a pass-through
of VAT increases of 55%.
    Table D.22 shows the results of this calibration for common levels of demand
elasticities. The VAT increase pass-through is constant since we use it to estimate
a for given values of b. The VAT decrease pass-through is allowed to vary: because
of the convexity of the market demand function, it is always smaller than the VAT
increase pass-through, consistent with the derivations above. The curvature of
the demand function predicts very little asymmetry in the case of the European
evidence because the VAT changes are relatively small. For the Finnish evidence,
because the VAT rate changes by 14 percentage points, the asymmetry generated
by the curvature of the demand function is more substantial, although still far
from our empirical estimates. As the elasticity grows, the generated asymmetry
increases, and naturally, for very large values of this elasticity (in excess of 15),
we can generate similar levels of asymmetry as the ones we estimate. While, price
elasticities higher than 15 are in principle possible, they seem unlikely. DellaVigna
& Gentzkow (2017), for example, estimate elasticities that range between 2 and
3. In our case, Kosonen (2015) estimates a demand elasticity of 0.2 for Finnish
hairdressers.
    Overall, this suggests that the curvature of the demand function in the case
of perfect competition can only work for elasticities that are orders of magnitude
higher than commonly estimated ones.



                                                         51
Linear Demand and Concave Supply Functions. This corresponds to the
second case above, i.e. D′′ = 0 and S ′′ < 0. Because of perfect competition, the
supply function is equal to marginal cost, which corresponds to the first derivative
of the cost function. Therefore, for the supply function to be concave, the third
derivative of the cost function needs to be negative. This rules out any supply
function derived using Cobb-Douglas production functions and more generally
any Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) production functions. We prove
these statements below:

  1. Cobb-Douglas Production Functions:
     Assume a Cobb-Douglas production function with parameters α > 0 and
                                                                            1
     β > 0, the corresponding cost function is given by C(w1 , w2 , q) = q α+β θΦ(w1 , w2 ),
                                                                 α+β β         −α
                                                                              α+β
     where w1 and w2 are the cost of labor and capital, θ = αβ           + αβ       ,
                                               α     β

     which is positive, and Φ(w1 , w2 ) = w1α+β w2α+β which is also positive.
     The supply function is equal to the first derivative of the cost function, p =
             1
       1
     α+β
          Q α+β −1 θΦ(w1 , w2 ) and is only defined as long as the second derivative
     of the cost function is positive, i.e. as long as α + β < 1. This corresponds
                                                                           α+β
                                                                         1−(α+β)
                                                                 (α+β)p
     to a market supply function equal to S(p) = N θΦ(w1 ,w2 )                    , where
     N is the number of firms and firms are assumed to be symmetric. To get
     asymmetric pass-through, in this case, we need D′′ (·) = 0 and S ′′ (.) <
     0. The first derivative of the market supply function is given by S ′ (p) =
                                            α+β
                                        1−(α+β) −1
              (α+β)2           (α+β)p
     N (1−(α+β))θΦ(w1 ,w2 ) θΦ(w1 ,w2 )              . We calibrate this case using the
     following parameters:

        • We set w1 = w2 = 1. This virtually makes no difference in the degree
          of asymmetry (or pass-through) generated.
        • We set N = 100 to simulate perfect competition. Higher values of N
          generate pass-through levels that are closer to 1 for both increases and
          decreases but do not affect the degree of asymmetry.
        • We set α = β and vary α + β for values ranging from 0.1 to 0.9.
        • We set the change in tax rate to 14% to match the Finnish case and
          to 3% to match the European case.

                                          52
       Table D.23 summarizes our findings. Values of α+β < 0.5 yield larger pass-
       through rates for VAT decreases relative to VAT increases, albeit with a
       very small difference. This case is therefore inconsistent with our empirical
       evidence. Values of α + β ≥ 0.5 yield larger pass-through for VAT increases
       than decreases. However, the differences in pass-through are negligible.

   2. CES Production Functions:
       Assume a CES production function F (K, L) = (α1 Lρ + α2 K ρ )1/ρ , where
       α1 > 0, α2 > 0 and ρ < 1 are parameters. It can be shown that the
       corresponding cost function is equal to
                                                                         
                                                     1
                                                    ρ−1           1
                                                                  ρ−1
                                      w αw1        + r αr2           
                         C(q) = q                                                        (14)
                                                                     
                                                                    1 
                                                ρ              ρ  
                                                               ρ 
                                               ρ−1            ρ−1
                                      α1 αw1       + α2 αr2


       where w is the the price of labor and r the price of capital. From equa-
       tion 14 follows that marginal cost is constant, and therefore, S ′′ (p) = 0.
       This implies that asymmetric pass-through cannot be generated using CES
       production functions.


D.2      Adjustment Cost Models
D.2.1     Menu Cost Models

Simple adjustment cost models can predict some short-run asymmetry. We sketch
one such model in this section and show that it quantitatively matches the short-
run evidence but does not predict any long-run asymmetry.46 These models
require either large menu costs or very high inflation rates to match our findings
in the short run and do not predict any long-run asymmetry.
    The model we consider relies on the following assumption: firms face a pos-
itive cost C from increasing prices but no cost from decreasing them.47 As a
  46
    These models are, in spirit, similar to Ball & Mankiw (1994) who use trend inflation and
menu costs to generate downward price rigidity. Karadi & Reiff (2016) use a similar model to
Ball & Mankiw (1994) and estimate it using two VAT changes in Hungary.
 47
    The results carry through if we instead assume that the cost of increasing prices is greater


                                              53
consequence, firms fail to adjust prices upwards when faced with a cost shock
smaller than C.
    We denote by pi∗ the target price of a given firm i and by pi its posted price.
In every period, firms face a shock θt to their optimal price. At any given time t,
firm i’s price dynamics are determined by the following equations:
                       
                        pi + Θit−1 + θt       if Θit−1 + θt ≤ 0,
                        t−1
                       
                       
                  pit = pit−1                  if 0 ≤ Θit−1 + θt < C i ,          (15)
                       
                       
                        pi + Θ i + θ
                       
                                               if C i ≤ Θit + θt ,
                            t−1   t−1     t

where Θit−1 = pi∗      i
                t−1 − pt−1 is the stock of shocks θ that were not passed through to
price in previous periods, and C i is the cost of adjusting prices upwards for firm
i. The firm passes through Θit−1 + θt if this quantity is negative because it bears
no cost from adjusting prices downwards. If this quantity is positive but smaller
than its adjustment cost C i , it keeps prices fixed. It does so until this quantity
becomes greater than C i , at which point the difference between the posted and
optimal price is too large, and it becomes optimal to pass through Θit−1 + θt .
    Assume that firm i enters period t with Θit > 0 and that the VAT rate increases
by τ . Denote by ρ the incidence of the tax had there been no adjustment cost C
and as determined by the supply (ǫS ) and demand elasticities (ǫD ): ρ = ǫS ǫ−ǫ   S
                                                                                    D
                                                                                      .
                                i                                   i
The firm will pass through Θt + ρτ when it is greater than C . If, instead, the
VAT decreases by τ , the firm will pass through Θit − ρτ if it is lower than zero. As
a consequence, the pass-through of VAT increases and decreases is asymmetric
by Θit .
    To simulate the price dynamics, we use equation (15) and assume that each
firm has an adjustment cost C i , which is a random variable drawn from a given
distribution F . In every period t, firms are hit by a shock θt , which is also a
random variable drawn from a distribution G. Figure D.28 shows the results of
our simulation. Figure D.30a shows simulated price time series for a treatment
group that experiences a 14 p.p. VAT cut followed by a 14 p.p. VAT increase five
years later and compares it to a control group that does not experience any VAT
changes. We choose these values so as to match the Finnish hairdressing VAT
than that of decreasing them.



                                          54
reforms. The simulations show that the pass-through is asymmetric, but prices
converge to symmetry over time. The simulated distributions of pass-through
following the VAT increase and decrease are simply given by pt − pt−1 , where t
is the time of the reforms. These distributions are plotted in Figures D.30b and
D.30d and roughly match the patterns observed in Figures 3a and 3b.

D.2.2    Capacity Constraints.

In this section, we consider whether binding capacity constraints can generate
the price response patterns we observe. We benchmark this explanation against
the price dynamics we observe in the Finnish hairdressing case in Figure 1. Ca-
pacity constraints can lead to price rigidity: if firms cannot cater to additional
demand, they may be less likely to change prices. However, we show below that
this explanation does not match the dynamics we observe in the Finnish case.
Specifically, assume firms experience a capacity constraint K above which they
cannot supply additional quantities. This implies a kinked supply function such
that ǫS ≥ 0 below K and ǫS = 0 above K.
    Case 1: Suppose that capacity constraints are binding prior to the 2007 VAT
cut. Firms are therefore operating on the portion of the supply function where
ǫS = 0. As the VAT is cut, firms will still be operating on this same portion
of the supply function and therefore we should not expect a response of prices
to the VAT cut. This is illustrated in Appendix Figure D.25. This finding is
inconsistent with the fact that we observe that prices respond to the VAT cut.
    Case 2: Assume instead, as in Appendix Figure D.26, that capacity constraints
are close to binding prior to the 2007 VAT cut, but not binding. In this case, we
should observe that prices respond to the VAT cut, as firms are operating on the
portion of the supply function where ǫS > 0. However, the VAT cut will bring
the equilibrium to the portion of the supply function where ǫS = 0, i.e., as the
VAT is cut, capacity constraints become binding. Next there are two possibilities:
capacity constraints can either (1) remain fixed over time, or (2) get relaxed as
firms increase their investments or number of employees. If capacity constraints
remain fixed over time, then as the VAT rate increases in 2012, firms will still be
operating on the portion of the supply function where ǫS = 0. In this case, there
should be no lagged response of prices to the VAT cut and prices should revert

                                        55
back to their original level after the VAT increase in 2012. In this case, we should
observe a symmetric response of prices to the VAT changes. This is inconsistent
with the fact that we find that prices respond more to the VAT increase.
    Case 3: Assume instead, as in Appendix Figure D.27, that capacity constraints
are relaxed over time. In this case, prices should incrementally decrease following
the VAT cut: we should observe a lagged response of prices to the 2007 VAT cut.
This is inconsistent with our evidence as we observe that treatment and control
prices follow parallel trends in Figure 1 with no evidence of lagged responses.
Finally, if capacity constraints are relaxed over time, we should observe that
prices return to their pre-VAT cut equilibrium once the VAT rate is raised back
to its original level. Instead, we observe that post-2012, prices are higher than
their pre-2007 equilibrium levels.
    Overall, binding capacity constraints are unlikely to explain the price dynam-
ics we observe in the Finnish hairdressing VAT experiments. Further, for this
explanation to rationalize the European evidence, we would need to assume that
most industries across Europe are operating close to capacity. This seems un-
likely as emphasized, for example, by Tirole (1988): “Except in special cases, a
firm usually has some leeway to increase its production beyond its efficient level.”


D.3     Fairness and Consumer Loyalty
Kahneman et al. (1986a) shows that customers will accept price increases when
costs increase but not when demand increases. Conversely, consumers do not
feel antagonistic when firms fail to adjust prices downwards when costs decrease.
Based on this evidence, Kahneman et al. (1986b) conclude that “there is a notable
asymmetry between the rules of fairness that apply when circumstances increase
or decrease the profits of a firm. The rules of fairness evidently permit firms to
pass on the entire amount of a cost increase, but [...] firms are allowed to retain
most of the benefits of a cost reduction.”
    Okun (1981) reports some evidence that firms might respond to fairness con-
siderations when setting prices because of the risk of losing some of their loyal
customers which threatens future profits.
    Eyster et al. (2017), in an effort to rationalize our finding, show that introduc-
ing the insights from Kahneman et al. (1986a) in a simple monopolistic pricing

                                         56
model yields asymmetric pass-through of taxes. Eyster et al. (2017) make two
main assumptions. First, customers care about markups: high markups are per-
ceived to be unfair and reduce the utility derived from consuming the good.
Second, customers misinfer markups from prices: they underappreciate the ex-
tent to which higher prices reflect higher markups. Firms can educate customers
if it is to their advantage – i.e. when markups are perceived to be high when in
reality they are low. Eyster et al. (2017) show that when costs (or taxes) increase
it is more profitable for firms to reveal markups rather than conceal them because
perceived markups are likely to increase relative to true markups. When taxes
decrease, the opposite holds true: perceived markups are likely to be lower than
true markups and firms have no incentive to educate consumers. Eyster et al.
(2017) show that this asymmetric behavior leads to asymmetric pass-through of
taxes. Further, their model is consistent with Figure 6a, which shows that firms
with low markups are more likely to pass through tax increases than firms with
high markups, while pass-through in the case of tax decreases is homogeneous
across firms.
     To corroborate these findings, we surveyed 187 restaurant customers in France.
The customers were approached by our surveyor when exiting a mid-range sit-
down restaurant in Paris. They were asked to rank the following situations as
(1) very fair, (2) fair, (3) neutral, (4) unfair and (5) very unfair. We report the
average ranking and the standard deviations:

  1. A restaurant increases prices after a VAT increase. Average: 1.3; standard
     deviation: 0.65.

  2. A restaurant does not increase prices after a VAT increase. Average: 2.5;
     standard deviation: 1.36.

  3. A restaurant decreases prices after a VAT decrease. Average: 2.7; standard
     deviation: 1.36.

  4. A restaurant does not decrease prices after a VAT decrease. Average: 3.1;
     standard deviation: 1.15.

  5. Assume taxes and costs do not change. A restaurant increases prices to
     increase profits. Average: 4.2; standard deviation: 1.27.

                                        57
  6. Assume taxes and costs do not change. A restaurant decreases prices to
     increase profits. Average: 1.8; standard deviation: 0.99.

These results suggest that increasing prices to compensate for an increase in the
VAT rate is perceived to be very fair, while keeping prices fixed following a VAT
decrease is perceived to be neutral. This suggests that passing through VATs
asymmetrically is not perceived to break any pricing norms. However, increasing
prices to increase profits is heavily frowned upon as it is perceived to be the least
fair scenario. If managers are taking fairness into account when setting prices, as
suggested by Blinder et al. (1998) they could use these pricing norms to increase
their markups without antagonizing their customer base.




                                         58
   Figure D.9: Summary Statistics: Country and Commodity


    .2
    .15
    .1
    .05
    0
                          Distribution of VAT Changes by Commodity
            1

                      2

                                3

                                         4

                                                     5

                                                               6

                                                                         7

                                                                                   8

                                                                                             9

                                                                                                     10

                                                                                                              11

                                                                                                                       12
          P

                  P

                            P

                                         P

                                                  P

                                                           P

                                                                     P

                                                                               P

                                                                                         P




                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                  P




                                                                                                                    P
        O

                  O

                            O

                                     O

                                                 O

                                                           O

                                                                     O

                                                                               O

                                                                                         O




                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                 O




                                                                                                                   O
      IC

                IC

                          IC

                                    IC

                                             IC

                                                         IC

                                                                   IC

                                                                             IC

                                                                                       IC




                                                                                                      IC
                                                                                             IC




                                                                                                               IC
   O

              O

                      O

                                O

                                             O

                                                      O

                                                               O

                                                                         O

                                                                                   O




                                                                                                      O
                                                                                          O




                                                                                                               O
  C

            C

                      C

                                C

                                         C

                                                     C

                                                               C

                                                                         C

                                                                                   C




                                                                                                     C
                                                                                         C




                                                                                                              C
                                             VAT Increases                              VAT Decreases



                           Distribution of VAT Changes by Country
    .2
    .15
    .1
    .05
    0
          AT
          BE
          BG
            Y
            Z
            E
            K
          EE
          EL
          ES
                                                       FI
                                                      FR
                                                        U
                                                       IE
                                                       IT
                                                       LT
                                                      LU
                                                      LV
                                                        T
                                                        L
                                                      PL
                                                      PT
                                                        O
                                                      SE
                                                       SI
                                                      SK
                                                        K
                                                      N
          C




                                                      M
          C

          D
          D




                                                      U
                                                      H




                                                      R




                                             VAT Increases                              VAT Decreases




Notes: The first panel shows the distribution of all VAT increases and de-
creases by two-digit COICOP category. The second panel shows the distri-
bution of all VAT increases and decreases by country. The description of the
2-digit COICOP categories is provided in Appendix Tables D.4 and D.5.




                                                               59
      Figure D.10: Summary Statistics: Economic Conditions

                        Distribution of VAT Changes by Unemployment Rate
              .2
              .15
    Density
      .1      .05
              0




                    0                    10              20              30

                                     VAT Increases       VAT Decreases



                           Distribution of VAT Changes by GDP Growth
              15
              10
    Density
              5
              0




                    -.2            -.1               0         .1          .2

                                     VAT Increases       VAT Decreases




Notes: The first panel shows the distribution of all VAT increases and de-
creases by unemployment rate. The second panel shows the distribution of
all VAT increases and decreases by GDP growth rates.




                                               60
             Figure D.11: Summary Statistics: Size and Timing

                     Distribution of VAT Changes by Size of VAT Change
         80
         60
    Density
      40 20
         0




                 0              .05                 .1                 .15             .2

                                       VAT Increases                   VAT Decreases



                       Distribution of VAT Changes by Month and Year
         .025
         .02
          .015
      Density
    .01  .005
         0
            96


                        98


                               00


                                        02


                                               04


                                                           06


                                                                  08


                                                                           10


                                                                                  12


                                                                                         14
          19


                      19


                             20


                                      20


                                             20


                                                         20


                                                                20


                                                                         20


                                                                                20


                                                                                       20
     n.


                   n.


                           n.


                                  n.


                                           n.


                                                   n.


                                                              n.


                                                                     n.


                                                                               n.


                                                                                      n.
   Ja


                 Ja


                         Ja


                                Ja


                                         Ja


                                                 Ja


                                                            Ja


                                                                   Ja


                                                                             Ja


                                                                                    Ja




                                       VAT Increases                   VAT Decreases




Notes: The first panel shows the distribution of all VAT increases and de-
creases by the size of the VAT change in absolute value. The second panel
shows the distribution of all VAT increases and decreases by month and
year.




                                                    61
Figure D.12: Finnish Hairdressing VAT Reforms Pass-Through Distributions
With Controls For Inflation

            60
            50
            40
         Percent
          3020
            10
            0




                   ï.2              ï.1                0                 .1    .2
                                         Passïthrough for VAT increase
                   All services: mean= 0.08 se=0.0014 N= 1909
            60
            50
            40
         Percent
          3020
            10
            0




                   ï.2              ï.1                 0              .1      .2
                                         Passïthrough for VAT decrease
                   All services: mean= ï0.03 se=0.0016 N= 922



       Notes: These Figures plot the pass-through distribution of the Finnish hair-
       dressing sector VAT increase and decrease experiments (as in Figure 3),
       while controlling for inflation.



                                                  62
                                Figure D.13: Pass-Through Distribution By Service: VAT Increase




          '!
                                                                                        '!




          &!
                                                                                        &!




          %!
                                                                                        %!




        $!
                                                                                      $!




       ()*+),-
                                                                                     ()*+),-




          #!
                                                                                        #!




          "!
                                                                                        "!




          !
                                                                                        !
                 ï.#                 ï."                !                 ."    .#             ï.#                 ï."                !                 ."    .#
                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)                                    /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)
                 @12*+A-4?5B*-4512*;4C)1,D44!.!E4?)D!.!!$%4FD444$"&                            @12*+A-40B,64512*;4C)1,D44!.!E4?)D!.!!%$4FD444"EG




63
          '!
                                                                                        '!




          &!
                                                                                        &!




          %!
                                                                                        %!




        $!
                                                                                      $!




       ()*+),-
                                                                                     ()*+),-




          #!
                                                                                        #!




          "!
                                                                                        "!




          !
                                                                                        !




                 ï.#                ï."                 !                 ."    .#             ï.#                ï."                 !                 ."    .#
                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)                                    /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)
                 @A0A*4?5A*-4512*;4B)1,C44!.!D4?)C!.!!$&4EC444#DF                              @A0A*40A,64512*;4B)1,C44!.!D4?)C!.!!%%4EC444"DD




     Notes: These figures are a disaggregated version of Figure 3. Each figure plots the distribution of pass-through
     following a VAT increase for each service offered by hairdressers.
                                Figure D.14: Pass-Through Distribution By Service: VAT Increase




          '!
                                                                                        '!




          &!
                                                                                        &!




          %!
                                                                                        %!




        $!
                                                                                      $!




       ()*+),-
                                                                                     ()*+),-




          #!
                                                                                        #!




          "!
                                                                                        "!




          !
                                                                                        !
                 ï.#                ï."                 !                 ."    .#             ï.#               ï."                 !                 ."    .#
                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)
                 ()*@.4?5A*-4512*;4@)1,B44!.!C4?)B!.!!$&4DB444#E&                              ()*@.40A,64512*;4@)1,B44!.!C4?)B!.!!&!4DB444"&!




64
          '!
                                                                                        '!




          &!
                                                                                        &!




          %!
                                                                                        %!




        $!
                                                                                      $!




       ()*+),-
                                                                                     ()*+),-




          #!
                                                                                        #!




          "!
                                                                                        "!




          !
                                                                                        !




                 ï.#                ï."                 !                 ."    .#             ï.#              ï."                !                 ."      .#
                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)                                 /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>42,+*)1?)
                 @520A*),4512*+B-;4C)1,D44!.!E4?)D!.!!%$4FD444#$%                              @)A1,B2,64512*+C-?;4A)1,D44!.!E4?)D!.!!%F4GD444#$!




     Notes: These figures are a disaggregated version of Figure 3. Each figure plots the distribution of pass-through
     following a VAT increase for each service offered by hairdressers.
                               Figure D.15: Pass-Through Distribution By Service: VAT Decrease




          '!
                                                                                          '!




          &!
                                                                                          &!




          %!
                                                                                          %!




        $!
                                                                                      $!




       ()*+),-
                                                                                     ()*+),-




          #!
                                                                                          #!




          "!
                                                                                          "!




          !
                                                                                          !
                 ï.#                 ï."                 !                ."    .#                ï.#                 ï."                 !                ."    .#
                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>4?)+*)1@)                                       /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>4?)+*)1@)
                 A12*+B-4@5C*-4512*;4D)1,E4ï!.!$4@)E!.!!#'4FE444$%%                               A12*+B-40C,64512*;4D)1,E4ï!.!$4@)E!.!!#'4FE444$$"




65
          '!
                                                                                          '!




          &!
                                                                                          &!




          %!
                                                                                             %!




        $!
                                                                                      $!




       ()*+),-
                                                                                     ()*+),-




          #!
                                                                                          #!




          "!
                                                                                          "!




          !
                                                                                          !




                 ï.#                ï."                  !                ."    .#                ï.#                ï."                 !                ."     .#
                                   /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>4?)+*)1@)                                      /)01-23)4+51,6)42,47*2+)489:;4<=>4?)+*)1@)
                 AB0B*4@5B*-4512*;4C)1,D4ï!.!#4@)D!.!!#%4ED444$&&                                 AB0B*40B,64512*;4C)1,D4ï!.!#4@)D!.!!#&4ED444$#!




     Notes: These figures are a disaggregated version of Figure 3. Each figure plots the distribution of pass-through
     following a VAT decrease for each service offered by hairdressers.
                                  Figure D.16: Pass-Through Distribution By Service: VAT Decrease




                                                                                           60




           60
                                                                                           50




           50
                                                                                           40




              40
                                                                                        30




       30
      Percent
                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                           20




           20
                                                                                           10




           10
           0
                                                                                           0
                   −.2                −.1                 0                .1     .2              −.2               −.1                  0                .1    .2
                                    Relative change in price (%): VAT decrease                                     Relative change in price (%): VAT decrease
                   Perm. short hair: mean= −0.03 se=0.0027 N= 308                                 Perm. long hair: mean= −0.03 se=0.0027 N= 264




66
           60
                                                                                           60




           50
                                                                                           50




              40
                                                                                             40




      30
      Percent
                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                       30




           20
                                                                                           20




           10
                                                                                           10




           0
                                                                                           0




                   −.2                −.1                  0                .1    .2              −.2              −.1                 0                .1      .2
                                     Relative change in price (%): VAT decrease                                  Relative change in price (%): VAT decrease
                   Children haircut: mean= −0.03 se=0.0026 N= 327                                 Demanding haircuts: mean= −0.03 se=0.0032 N= 248




     Notes: These Figures are a disaggregated version of Figure 3. Each Figure plots the distribution of pass-through
     following a VAT decrease for each service offered by hairdressers.
        Figure D.17: Markup Changes and Price Changes




Notes: This figure presents a bin-scatter plot of changes in log markup
versus changes in log average price using the linked price corporate tax data
for Finnish hairdressers.




                                     67
       Figure D.18: Finnish Hairdressing Reforms: Investments
.6




             ΔVAT = -14 p.p.
.4
.2




                                            ΔVAT = +14 p.p.
0
-.2




      2002     2004        2006         2008       2010        2012          2014

              Hairdressers (treated)               Beauty Salons (control)


Notes: This Figure plots the response of investments to the Finnish VAT
hairdressing reforms.




                                       68
 Figure D.19: Number of Firms in Finnish Hairdressing Sector




Notes: This figure uses the administrative dataset containing information on
the full population of Finnish hairdressers, beauty salons, massage parlors
and physical therapists to plot the number of firms in each sector over time.
Others include massage parlors and physical therapy industries in Finland.




                                     69
  Figure D.20: Entry and Exit in Finnish Hairdressing Sector




Notes: These figures use the administrative dataset containing information
on the full population of Finnish hairdressers, beauty salons, massage parlors
and physical therapists to plot the number of firms entering and exiting each
sector over time. Others include entry and exit in the massage parlor and
physical therapy industries in Finland.


                                     70
     Figure D.21: Changes in Markups by Quintile of Operating Margins for Finnish VAT Reforms
         (a) Hairdressers in 2007 and 2012 (Reforms)             (b) Placebo 1: Hairdressers in 2006 and 2011




71
                                (c) Placebo 2: Finnish Beauty Salons in 2007 and 2012




     Notes: To generate these graphs, we break down the sample of firms into 5 quintiles with respect to operating
     margins (turnover minus deductible costs divided by turnover) using data from 2004 to 2006 for 2007 and 2009
     to 2011 for 2012 , with 1 being firms with the smallest operating margins. For each quintile, we plot changes
     in their markup following changes in VAT. Figure D.21a considers the 14 p.p. VAT increase and decrease for
     Finnish hairdressers. Figure D.21b considers the Finnish hairdressers in 2006 and 2011. Figure D.21c considers
     Finnish beauty salons (which we use a control group for hairdressers) in 2007 and 2012.
     Figure D.22: Asymmetric Response of Prices to VAT Changes by 2-Digit COICOP Code in the Full Sample


                                                     Food and Non−Alcoholic Beverages                                                                    Alcoholic Beverages, Tobacco and Narcotics
                           102                                                                                                     104




                                                                                                                                                                 Pass−through = 107 percent

                                                                       Pass−through = 65 percent
                           100                                                                                                     102




             Price Index
                                                                                                                     Price Index
                                                          Pass−through = 23 percent
                           98                                                                                                      100



                                                                                                                                                                  Pass−through = −1 percent



                           96                                                                                                      98

                                 −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3                       −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3
                                                      Months Before/After Reform                                                                              Months Before/After Reform

                                           Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease                                        Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease
                                           VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease                                     VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




72
                                               Housing, Water, Electricity, Gas and Other Fuels                                                                            Misc. Goods
                           103                                                                                                     102
                                                          Pass−through = 92 percent
                                                                                                                                                                  Pass−through = 47 percent


                           102                                                                                                     101




                           101
                                                                                                                                   100



                           100
                                                                                                                                   99                             Pass−through = 3 percent




             Price Index
                                                                                                                     Price Index



                           99
                                                          Pass−through = 12 percent
                                                                                                                                   98



                           98
                                                                                                                                   97

                                 −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3                       −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3
                                                      Months Before/After Reform                                                                              Months Before/After Reform

                                           Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease                                        Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease
                                           VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease                                     VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




           Notes: Each of these graphs is a disaggregated version of Figure 7a: they plot the response of prices to variation
           in the VAT rate by groups of commodities.
     Figure D.23: Asymmetric Response of Prices to VAT Changes by 2-Digit COICOP Code in the Full Sample


                                                                   Health                                                                                                  Transport
                           104                                                                                                     104




                           102                                                                                                     102


                                                          Pass−through = 71 percent


                           100                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                                                  Pass−through = 60 percent




             Price Index
                                                                                                                     Price Index
                           98                                                                                                      98
                                                                                                                                                                  Pass−through = 29 percent
                                                          Pass−through = 28 percent




                           96                                                                                                      96

                                 −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3                       −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3
                                                      Months Before/After Reform                                                                              Months Before/After Reform

                                           Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease                                        Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease
                                           VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease                                     VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




73
                                                            Recreation and Culture

                           102
                                                          Pass−through = 37 percent

                           101




                           100




                           99




             Price Index
                                                          Pass−through = 7 percent


                           98




                           97

                                 −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3
                                                      Months Before/After Reform

                                           Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease
                                           VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




           Notes: Each of these graphs is a disaggregated version of Figure 7a: they plot the response of prices to variation
           in the VAT by groups of commodities.
                                                                Figure D.24: Commodities With No Asymmetry

                                                         Clothing and Footwear                                                                                      Communication
                     102                                                                                                        102




                     100
                                                                                                                                                               Pass−through = 66 percent
                                                                                                                                100

                                                     Pass−through = −178 percent

                     98




       Price Index
                                                                                                                  Price Index
                                                                                                                                98
                                                                                                                                                              Pass−through = 318 percent
                     96



                                                      Pass−through = 157 percent
                                                                                                                                96
                     94

                           −3      −2              −1          0            1                     2           3                       −3   −2              −1          0            1                     2           3
                                                   Months Before/After Reform                                                                              Months Before/After Reform

                                        Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease                                        Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease
                                        VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease                                     VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




74
                                Furnishings, Household Equipment and Routine Household Maintenance
                     102


                                                       Pass−through = 12 percent



                     100




                                                       Pass−through = 16 percent




       Price Index
                     98




                     96

                           −3      −2              −1          0            1                     2           3
                                                   Months Before/After Reform

                                        Price if VAT Increase                      Price if VAT Decrease
                                        VAT Rate if VAT Increase                   VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




     Notes: Each of these graphs is a disaggregated version of Figure 7a: they plot the response of prices to variation
     in the VAT by groups of commodities. This panel shows the commodities for which there is no asymmetry.
     Clothing and Footwear shows a price decrease for both VAT increases and decreases consistent with sales
     occurring at the same time as VAT reforms (mostly in January), it is excluded from our main specification.
     Communication and Furnishings, Household equipment etc. are included in our main specification.
                                  Figure D.25: Capacity Constraints (case 1)




                     %"
                                                  9"
                                                                      '(")$'$*)"+*,"
                                                                      -("./0"12342')2"
                                                                      """"!"5,"36'572"85"%4832"



                                                  -"




75
                     %"
                                             '"




                                                                         !"           !#$"


                                              :"                                               &"




     Notes: In this figure, we assume that capacity constraints are binding prior to the VAT cut (a). As the VAT
     rate is cut, prices inclusive of VAT do not change (b), since firms are operating on the portion of the supply
     function where ǫS = 0.
                                   Figure D.26: Capacity Constraints (case 2)




                      %"
                                                                         #"'(")$'$*)"+*,"
                                                  ;"                     #-("./0"12342')2"
                                                                         """!"%4532"12342')2)"
                                                                         #3("./0"56342')2"
                                                                         """!"%4532"42724$)"-'38"$,"
                                                                               ",45956':":272:"
                                                                         "




76
                                                        -"

                                              '=3"
                      %"
                      %$"

                                                                                 !#$"
                                                                   !"
                                                       <"                                         &"




     Notes: In this figure, we assume that firms are operating just below capacity constraints (a), prior to the VAT
     cut. As the VAT rate is decreased, firms decrease prices (b). If capacity constraints are not relaxed, then prices
     respond symmetrically to the VAT increase as they did to the VAT decrease (c).
                                   Figure D.27: Capacity Constraints (case 3)




                     %"
                                                                        '(")$'$*)"+*,"
                                                 ="         =A"         -("./0"12342')2"
                                                                        """"!"%4532"12342')2"
                                                                        3("3'%6"3,7)$4'57$)"428'921"
                                                                        """"!"%4532"12342')2"
                                                                        1("./0"57342')2"
                                                                        """"!"%4532"42:24$)"-'3;"$,"




77
                                                                             ",45<57'8"82:28"
                                                                        "
                                                       -"                    ""
                                                            3"
                                              '?1"
                      %"
                      %$"
                     %@$"$
                                                                                !#$"
                                                                  !"
                                                      >"                                         &"




     Notes: In this figure, we assume that firms are operating just below capacity constraints (a), prior to the VAT
     cut. As the VAT rate is decreased, firms decrease prices (b). Capacity constraints are then gradually relaxed,
     leading to incremental price decreases (c). When the VAT rate is increased, prices revert back to their original
     levels (d).
                                                 Figure D.28: Adjustment Cost Model Simulations
                                (a) Time Series Simulation                                                         (b) VAT Decrease Distribution Simulation




                                                                                                           60




                 130
                                                                                                           50




                      120
                                                                                                           40




             110
                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                        Percent




        Simulated Price
      100
                                                                                                           20




                 90
                                                                                                           10
                 Jan. 2005   Jan. 2007                             Jan. 2012             Oct. 2015




                                                                                                           0
                                                   Months                                                         -20    -15   -10       -5       0        5       10   15   20
                                                                                                                                Percent Change in Price: VAT Decrease
                                   Simulated Treatment                   Simulated Control                        Mean=-3.74




78
                                                                     (c) VAT Increase Distribution Simulation




                                                          3060
                                                            50
                                                            40
                                                         Percent
                                                            20
                                                            10
                                                            0
                                                                   -20         -15   -10      -5       0         5       10     15       20
                                                                                      Percent Change in Price: VAT Increase
                                                                    Mean=9.82



     Notes: Figures D.30a, D.30b and D.30d plot results of the simulation of the model from section D.2.1 respec-
     tively for the time series and pass-through distributions for VAT decreases and increases.
Figure D.29: Asymmetric Response of Prices to VAT Changes (Real Prices)

                     102
                                                       Pass-through = 45%


                     101
       Price Index




                     100


                      99
                                                       Pass-through = 17%

                      98


                      97
                           -3   -2              -1          0           1                  2           3
                                                Months Before/After Reform

                                     Price if VAT Increase                  Price if VAT Decrease
                                     VAT Rate if VAT Increase               VAT Rate if VAT Decrease




     Notes: This figure plots the response of prices to VAT increases and de-
     creases, while controlling for inflation. The underlying dataset consists of
     three-month window price and VAT time series around each VAT reform
     from 1996 to 2015. We average out and normalize each series to 100 one
     month before the reform.




                                                             79
                                    Figure D.30: Path of VAT Changes After VAT Change
     (a) Probability of VAT Increase After a VAT Increase (b) Probability of VAT Increase After a VAT Decrease




                    .1
                                                                         .06
                                                                         .04




                    .05
                                                                       .02




      probability
                                                                    probability




                    0
                                                                         0




                    -.05
                                                                         -.02
                           0   20    40            60    80   100                 0   20    40            60    80   100
                                    month_after_reform                                     month_after_reform




80
     (c) Probability of VAT Decrease After a VAT Increase (d) Probability of VAT Decrease After a VAT Decrease




                    .3
                                                                         .03
                                                                         .02




                    .2
                                                                         .01




          .1
      probability
                                                                    probability
                                                                         0




                    0
                                                                         -.01




                    -.1
                           0   20    40            60    80   100                 0   20    40            60    80   100
                                    month_after_reform                                     month_after_reform



     Notes: These Figures plot the probability that a VAT change occurs 1 to 100 months after a given VAT
     change. Panel a. plots the probability of a VAT increase after a VAT increase, panel b. the probability of a
     VAT increase after a VAT decrease, panel c. the probability of a VAT decrease after a VAT increase and panel
     d. the probability of a VAT decrease after a VAT decrease.
          Table D.3: Summary Statistics For Finnish Hairdressers and Beauty Salons

                                   Hairdressers                                      Beauty Salons
                           Mean Median S.D.      N.                            Mean Median S.D.     N.
      Turnover             40190 25924 231039 157082                           35643 18504 143747 45368
      Profits              13787 11330 15193 155837                            9610  5048    19365 44332
      Costs                26699 13285 213093 162634                           26865 11415 126093 47347
      Total Assets         12841 2834    79027 112682                          13065 2115    84635 36984




81
      Nb. Employees         0.40   0      4.22 162634                           0.37   0      3.53 47347
      Cost of Employees     1129   0     20138 145729                           766    0     10709 43649
      Sole Proprietors      0.91   1      0.29 162634                           0.89   1      0.31 47347
      Partnerships          0.05   0      0.21 162634                           0.03   0      0.18 47347
      Corporations          0.05   0      0.21 162634                           0.07   0      0.26 47347
      Nb. of firms in 2006           12,301                                              3,073
     Notes: This table reports annual summary statistics on the full population of Finnish hairdressers and beauty salons
     using corporate tax data.
                       Table D.4: COICOP Codes
COICOP Codes     Description
     01          Food and Non-Alcoholic Beverages
    01.1         Food
    01.2         Non-Alcoholic Beverages
     02          Alcoholic Beverages, Tobacco and Narcotics
    02.1         Alcoholic Beverages
    02.2         Tobacco
    02.3         Narcotics
     03          Clothing and Footwear
    03.1         Clothing
    03.2         Footwear
     04          Housing, Water, Electricity, Gas and Other Fuels
    04.1         Actual Rentals For Housing
    04.2         Imputed Rentals For Housing
    04.3         Maintenance and Repair of the Dwelling
    04.4         Water Supply and Misc Services Relating to the Dwelling
    04.5         Electricity, Gas and Other Fuels
     05          Furnishings, Household Equipment and Routine Household Maintenance
    05.1         Furniture and Furnishings, Carpets and Other Floor Coverings
    05.2         Household Textiles
    05.3         Household Appliances
    05.4         Glassware, Tableware and Household Utensils
    05.5         Tools and Equipment for House and Garden
    05.6         Goods and Services for Routine Household Maintenance
     06          Health
    06.1         Medical Products, Appliances and Equipment
    06.2         Outpatient Services
    06.3         Hospital Services
     07          Transport
    07.1         Purchase of Vehicles
    07.2         Operation of Personal Transport Equipment
    07.3         Transport Services


   Notes: This table reports the COICOP codes used by Eurostat to describe price categories.




                                              82
        Table D.5: COICOP Codes (continued)
   COICOP Code       Description
         08          Communication
        08.1         Postal Services
        08.2         Telephone and Telefax Equipment
        08.3         Telephone and Telefax Services
         09          Recreation and Culture
        09.1         Audio-Visual, Photographic and Information Processing Equipment
        09.2         Other Major Durables For Recreation and Culture
        09.3         Other Recreational Items and Equipment, Gardens and Pets
        09.4         Recreational and Cultural Services
        09.5         Newspapers, Books and Stationery
        09.6         Package Holidays
         10          Education
        10.1         Pre-Primary and Primary Education
        10.2         Secondary Education
        10.3         Post-Secondary Non-Tertiary Education
        10.4         Tertiary Education
        10.5         Education Not Definable By Level
         11          Restaurants and Hotels
        11.1         Catering Services
        11.2         Accommodation Services
         12          Misc. Goods and Services
        12.1         Personal Care
        12.2         Prostitution
        12.3         Personal Effects
        12.4         Social Protection
        12.5         Insurance
        12.6         Financial Services
        12.7         Other Services


Notes: This table reports the COICOP codes used by Eurostat to describe price categories.




                                           83
     Table D.6: Finnish VAT Pass-Through with Cost Controls by Hairdressing Service

                                           VAT Increase VAT Decrease
                                           Pass-Through Pass-Through
                      Men’s haircut            0.751        0.354
                                             (0.0512)     (0.0926)
                      Observations              266          268
                      Women’s haircut          0.723        0.235
                                             (0.0546)     (0.0337)
                      Observations              163          299
                      Coloring                 0.844        0.248
                                             (0.0498)     (0.0344)
                      Observations              260          287
                      Coloring - demanding     0.723        0.166
                                             (0.0416)      (0.200)
                      Observations              159          283




84
                      Perm                     0.768        0.377
                                             (0.0365)      (0.119)
                      Observations              234          113
                      Perm - demanding         0.742        0.420
                                             (0.0495)     (0.0744)
                      Observations              120          285
                      Kid’s haircut            0.927        0.363
                                             (0.0747)     (0.0452)
                      Observations              212          280
                      Special haircut          0.684        0.280
                                             (0.0638)      (0.109)
                      Observations              202          237
                      Notes: This table shows VAT increase (column (1)) and decrease
                     (column (2)) pass-through estimates for every hairdressing service
                     we observe with controls for variable costs. Pass-through is esti-
                     mated by regressing differences in log prices over time normalized
                     by the size of the VAT change on an indicator variable equal to 1
                     for post-reform and zero otherwise as well as control variables for
                     variable costs. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and
                     are reported in parenthesis.
                                                   Table D.7: Heterogeneity by Zipcode Density

                                        Markup     Markup Log variable costs Log variable costs Log turnover Log turnover
                                       (decrease) (increase) (decrease)          (increase)      (decrease)   (increase)
      2nd most dense*reform              0.002          -0.004               0.006                     -0.002                  0.019               -0.01
                                        (-0.021)        (-0.02)             (-0.022)                  (-0.019)               (-0.014)            (-0.013)
      3rd most dense*reform              0.019           0.014              -0.0188                    -0.022                 0.003               -0.016
                                        (-0.018)        (-0.021)            (-0.019)                  (-0.018)               (-0.012)            (-0.013)
      4th most dense*reform               -0.01          0.003                0.02                     -0.021                  0.020              -0.023
                                        (-0.021)        (-0.02)             (-0.021)                   (-0.02)               (-0.012)            (-0.013)
      5th most dense*reform              0.041           -0.001              -0.050                    -0.005                 -0.013              -0.009
                                        (-0.019)        (-0.019)            (-0.018)                  (-0.015)               (-0.012)            (-0.013)
      2nd most dense                     -0.001           0.001               0.024                     0.03                   0.018              0.037
                                        (-0.026)        (-0.026)             (-0.03)                  (-0.028)               (-0.019)             -0.018




85
      3rd most dense                     -0.014           0.005               0.069                     0.05                  0.061               0.064
                                        (-0.028)        (-0.033)            (-0.029)                  (-0.031)               (-0.018)            (-0.019)
      4th most dense                     -0.023         -0.033               0.122                      0.141                  0.117              0.136
                                        (-0.025)        (-0.03)             (-0.026)                  (-0.027)               (-0.021)            (-0.02)
      5th most dense                     -0.021           0.02                0.198                    0.148                   0.205               0.193
                                         (-0.03)        (-0.03)             (-0.056)                  (-0.053)               (-0.045)            (-0.044)
      VAT Increase                                       -0.052                                         0.057                                     0.030
                                                        (-0.015)                                      (-0.014)                                   (-0.01)
      VAT Decrease                       0.113                               0.136                                             0.202
                                        (-0.014)                            (-0.014)                                         (-0.009)
      Constant                            0.947           1.060               8.833                     8.969                 10.18               10.38
                                        (-0.018)        (-0.018)            (-0.022)                   (-0.02)               (-0.018)             -0.015
      Observations                       91,544          79,003              92,347                    79,195                 91,789              79,195
      R-squared                           0.006          0.001                0.009                     0.004                  0.036              0.011

      Notes: This table shows the changes in the level of markups, variable costs and turnover by quintiles of zipcode density; 2nd most dense, 3rd most
     dense, etc. are dummies for hairdressers being located in a zipcode that belongs to the 2nd most dense quintile, 3rd most dense quintile, etc. of zipcodes.
     The variable 2nd most dense*reform is the interaction of the quintile density dummy with a dummy for reform year. VAT increase and VAT decrease
     are dummies for the years when the VAT increase and decrease occur. We use 10 years of data when we study the VAT decrease (2002-2011), 5 years
     before and after the reform, and 8 years of data when we examine the VAT increase (2007-2014), 4 years before and after the reforms. Standard errors
     are clustered by municipalities and are in parentheses. The dummy for the least dense zipcodes and the interaction of this dummy with a dummy for
     the reform year are both omitted.
Table D.8: Pass-Through Estimates For Temporary VAT Changes

                                       ∆ log Price
                                  Increase Decrease
               β0                    0.34     0.079
                                   (0.084) (0.043)

               β+1                  0.032        0.038
                                   (0.023)      (0.025)

               β−2                  0.036        0.024
                                   (0.022)      (0.016)

               β+2                  -0.010       -0.038
                                   (0.024)      (0.028)

               β−3                 0.0049       0.00058
                                   (0.018)      (0.036)

               β+3                  -0.051       -0.020
                                   (0.022)      (0.027)

               β−4                  0.042       -0.0070
                                   (0.039)      (0.024)

               β+4                  -0.033      -0.0063
                                   (0.027)      (0.028)
               Time FE               Yes          Yes
               R2                   0.014        0.014
               Observations        367631       331157
               Notes: The coefficients reported in this ta-
              ble indicate the pass-through of VAT increases
              and decreases to prices, estimated using spec-
              ification (1) on temporary VAT changes. The
              first column shows the estimates for VAT in-
              creases and the second those for VAT de-
              creases. Standard errors are clustered by
              month and are in parentheses. β0 measures
              the pass-through of the VAT change at the
              time of the reform, and βi measures price
              changes i months away from the reform.
Table D.9: Pass-Through Estimates For Permanent VAT Changes

                                       ∆ log Price
                                  Increase Decrease
               β0                    0.26     0.028
                                   (0.073) (0.023)

               β+1                  -0.023       0.012
                                   (0.014)      (0.019)

               β−2                  0.019        0.010
                                   (0.022)      (0.013)

               β+2                  0.045        -0.031
                                   (0.023)      (0.022)

               β−3                  0.013       -0.0011
                                   (0.015)      (0.026)

               β+3                 -0.0090      0.0030
                                   (0.019)      (0.019)

               β−4                  0.037        -0.024
                                   (0.034)      (0.023)

               β+4                 -0.0063       0.011
                                   (0.031)      (0.020)
               Time FE               Yes          Yes
               R2                   0.014        0.014
               Observations        364272       332067
               Notes: The coefficients reported in this ta-
              ble indicate the pass-through of VAT increases
              and decreases to prices, estimated using spec-
              ification (1) on permanent VAT changes. The
              first column shows the estimates for VAT in-
              creases and the second those for VAT de-
              creases. Standard errors are clustered by
              month and are in parentheses. β0 measures
              the pass-through of the VAT change at the
              time of the reform, and βi measures price
              changes i months away from the reform.
Table D.10: Pass-Through Estimates Using Fixed Effects Regression (Inflation
Controls)

                                                ∆ log Price
                                           Increase Decrease
                       β0                     0.33     0.066
                                            (0.060) (0.031)

                       β+1                   0.013         0.027
                                            (0.018)       (0.018)

                       β−2                   0.023         0.029
                                            (0.017)       (0.015)

                       β+2                   0.013         -0.042
                                            (0.029)       (0.020)

                       β−3                  0.0078        -0.0017
                                            (0.016)       (0.030)

                       β+3                   -0.050       -0.0027
                                            (0.021)       (0.022)

                       β−4                   0.042         -0.017
                                            (0.032)       (0.021)

                       β+4                   -0.018       -0.0069
                                            (0.029)       (0.021)
                       Time FE                Yes           Yes
                       R2                    0.018         0.018
                       Observations         386557        342792
                       Notes: The coefficients reported in this ta-
                      ble indicate the pass-through of VAT increases
                      and decreases to prices, estimated using spec-
                      ification (1) on the full sample of reforms,
                      while also controlling for linear trends in coun-
                      try*commodity specific inflation rates. The
                      first column shows the estimates for VAT in-
                      creases and the second those for VAT de-
                      creases. Standard errors are clustered by
                      month and are in parentheses. β0 measures
                      the pass-through of the VAT change at the
                      time of the reform, and βi measures price
                      changes i months away from the reform.
Table D.11: Correlation of VAT Changes with GDP and Unemployment Rate

                             VAT Change VAT Increase VAT Decrease

          β−1                    -0.0012             -0.0011            -0.000100
                                (0.0011)            (0.0010)            (0.00034)

          β−2                  -0.000057             -0.00024            0.00018
                                (0.0012)            (0.00097)           (0.00056)

          β−3                    -0.0017             -0.0013             -0.00044
                                (0.0012)            (0.0011)            (0.00027)

          β−4                    -0.0015             -0.0012             -0.00027
                                (0.0017)            (0.0017)            (0.00030)

          β−5                    -0.0014             -0.0010             -0.00036
                                (0.0011)            (0.0010)            (0.00035)

          γ−1                   0.00097              0.0016              -0.00063
                                (0.0044)            (0.0037)             (0.0016)

          γ−2                    -0.0054             -0.0036              -0.0018
                                (0.0048)            (0.0040)             (0.0026)

          γ−3                    0.0019             0.00091              0.00094
                                (0.0042)            (0.0040)            (0.00098)

          γ−4                    -0.0014             -0.0020             0.00059
                                (0.0075)            (0.0074)             (0.0012)

          γ−5                    0.0025              0.0018              0.00072
                                (0.0041)            (0.0037)             (0.0012)

          R2                      0.070              0.072                0.022
          Observations           462,706            462,706              462,706
          Notes: This Table shows the results of estimating specification (2), which cor-
         relates the timing of VAT changes with the underlying economic conditions
         leading up to the VAT change. The first column uses as an outcome variable
         an indicator variable for VAT changes, the second one uses an indicator variable
         for VAT increases and the third one an indicator variable for VAT decreases.
         We regress these outcome variables on the log of GDP and unemployment rate
         in the twelve months leading up to the reform.




                                               89
Table D.12: Correlation of VAT Changes with Industry Turnover and Unemploy-
ment Rate

                               VAT Change VAT Increase VAT Decrease

            β−1                    -0.0016             -0.0010             -0.00059
                                  (0.0012)            (0.00093)           (0.00057)

            β−2                    0.0012             0.00069              0.00053
                                  (0.0014)            (0.0011)            (0.00052)

            β−3                    -0.0015             -0.0010             -0.00051
                                  (0.0011)            (0.0010)            (0.00028)

            β−4                    -0.0019             -0.0017             -0.00018
                                  (0.0014)            (0.0014)            (0.00014)

            β−5                    -0.00075            -0.00040            -0.00035
                                  (0.00088)           (0.00082)           (0.00030)

            γ−1                   -0.00076            -0.00081            0.000052
                                  (0.0016)            (0.0015)            (0.00051)

            γ−2                    -0.0078             -0.0058              -0.0020
                                  (0.0037)            (0.0030)             (0.0015)

            γ−3                    -0.0020             -0.0022             0.00018
                                  (0.0018)            (0.0018)            (0.00028)

            γ−4                    -0.0037             -0.0036             -0.00011
                                  (0.0032)            (0.0032)            (0.00027)

            γ−5                    -0.0015             -0.0015            -0.000029
                                  (0.0015)            (0.0014)            (0.00039)

            R2                      0.070              0.072                0.022
            Observations           462,706            462,706              462,706
            Notes: This Table shows the results of estimating specification (2), which cor-
           relates the timing of VAT changes with the underlying economic conditions
           leading up to the VAT change, with industry turnover instead of GDP as one
           of the main regressor (the remaining variables are the same). The first column
           uses as an outcome variable an indicator variable for VAT changes, the second
           one uses an indicator variable for VAT increases and the third one an indicator
           variable for VAT decreases. We regress these outcome variables on the log of
           industry turnover and unemployment rate in the twelve months leading up to
           the reform.




                                                 90
Table D.13: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (GDP Per Capita)

                            Country Specification Timing Specification
                                  ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                            Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
         β0                    0.32      0.0021     0.33       0.025
                             (0.075)     (0.037)  (0.067)     (0.044)

         β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                             (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

         β−2                  0.031          0.026           0.030          0.026
                             (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

         β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.020          -0.044
                             (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

         β−3                  0.015         -0.0050          0.015         -0.0050
                             (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

         β+3                  -0.042        -0.0046          -0.042        -0.0046
                             (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

         β−4                  0.050          -0.020          0.049          -0.020
                             (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

         β+4                  -0.010        -0.0089         -0.0096        -0.0089
                             (0.027)        (0.020)         (0.027)        (0.020)
         Time FE                Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
         R2                    0.014         0.014           0.014          0.014
         Observations        385892         342502          386096         342502
         Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
        increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
        reforms, using nearest neighbor matching. The country specification (first and
        second columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for be-
        ing post-Great Recession, size of VAT change and GDP per capita. The timing
        specification (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year, commod-
        ity, size of VAT change and GDP per capita. The first and third columns show
        the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT de-
        creases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0
        measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi
        measures price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 38% of the
        VAT changes in the country specification and 28% of the VAT changes in the
        time specification are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                              91
Table D.14: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (Unemployment Rate)

                             Country Specification Timing Specification
                                   ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                             Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
          β0                    0.30       0.021     0.33       0.032
                              (0.075)     (0.038)  (0.066)     (0.050)

          β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                              (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

          β−2                  0.031          0.026           0.031          0.026
                              (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

          β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.020          -0.044
                              (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

          β−3                  0.015         -0.0050          0.015         -0.0050
                              (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

          β+3                  -0.042        -0.0046          -0.042        -0.0046
                              (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

          β−4                  0.050          -0.020          0.050          -0.020
                              (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

          β+4                 -0.0098        -0.0089         -0.0095        -0.0089
                              (0.027)        (0.020)         (0.027)        (0.020)
          Time FE               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
          R2                   0.014          0.014           0.014          0.014
          Observations        385477         342501          385675         342503
          Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
         increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
         reforms, using nearest neighbor matching. The country specification (first and
         second columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for be-
         ing post-Great Recession, size of VAT change and the unemployment rate. The
         timing specification (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year,
         commodity, size of VAT change and the unemployment rate. The first and third
         columns show the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that
         for VAT decreases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in paren-
         theses. β0 measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the
         reform and βi measures price changes i months away from the reform. Over-
         all, 51% of the VAT changes in the country specification and 40% of the VAT
         changes in the time specification are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                               92
Table D.15: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (Interest Rate)

                          Country Specification Timing Specification
                                ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                          Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
       β0                    0.35       0.018     0.33       0.020
                           (0.074)     (0.031)  (0.062)     (0.042)

       β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                           (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

       β−2                  0.030          0.026           0.031          0.026
                           (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

       β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.020          -0.044
                           (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

       β−3                  0.015         -0.0049          0.015         -0.0050
                           (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

       β+3                  -0.042        -0.0046          -0.042        -0.0046
                           (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

       β−4                  0.049          -0.020          0.049          -0.020
                           (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

       β+4                  -0.011        -0.0089         -0.0096        -0.0089
                           (0.027)        (0.020)         (0.027)        (0.020)
       Time FE                Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
       R2                    0.014         0.014           0.014          0.014
       Observations        385879         342502          385951         342502
       Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
      increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
      reforms, using nearest neighbor matching. The country specification (first and
      second columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for be-
      ing post-Great Recession, size of VAT change and the interest rate. The timing
      specification (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year, commod-
      ity, size of VAT change and the interest rate. The first and third columns show
      the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT de-
      creases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0
      measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi
      measures price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 38% of the
      VAT changes in the country specification and 33% of the VAT changes in the
      time specification are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                            93
Table D.16: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (All Variables)

                          Country Specification Timing Specification
                                ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                          Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
       β0                    0.32      0.0082     0.33       0.017
                           (0.076)     (0.031)  (0.066)     (0.037)

       β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                           (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

       β−2                  0.031          0.026           0.030          0.026
                           (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

       β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.020          -0.044
                           (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

       β−3                  0.015         -0.0050          0.015         -0.0050
                           (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

       β+3                  -0.042        -0.0046          -0.042        -0.0046
                           (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

       β−4                  0.050          -0.020          0.049          -0.020
                           (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

       β+4                 -0.0099        -0.0089         -0.0096        -0.0089
                           (0.027)        (0.020)         (0.027)        (0.020)
       Time FE               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
       R2                   0.014          0.014           0.014          0.014
       Observations        385586         342500          386076         342478
       Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
      increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
      reforms, using nearest neighbor matching. The country specification (first and
      second columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for being
      post-Great Recession, GDP per capita, GDP growth, unemployment rate, inter-
      est rate and size of change. The timing specification (third and fourth columns)
      matches on month and year, commodity, GDP per capita, GDP growth, un-
      employment rate, interest rate and size of change. The first and third columns
      show the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT
      decreases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0
      measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi
      measures price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 48% of the
      VAT changes for the country specification and 32% for the time specification
      are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                            94
Table D.17: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (Logit)

                       Country Specification Timing Specification
                             ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                       Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
    β0                    0.32     0.000022    0.33       0.033
                        (0.074)     (0.029)  (0.066)     (0.041)

    β+1                  0.020           0.025          0.020          0.025
                        (0.019)         (0.017)        (0.019)        (0.017)

    β−2                  0.031           0.026          0.030          0.026
                        (0.019)         (0.015)        (0.019)        (0.015)

    β+2                  0.020           -0.044         0.020          -0.044
                        (0.027)         (0.021)        (0.027)        (0.021)

    β−3                  0.015          -0.0049         0.015         -0.0050
                        (0.016)         (0.028)        (0.016)        (0.028)

    β+3                  -0.042         -0.0046         -0.042        -0.0046
                        (0.018)         (0.022)        (0.018)        (0.022)

    β−4                  0.050           -0.020         0.049          -0.020
                        (0.034)         (0.022)        (0.034)        (0.022)

    β+4                 -0.0098         -0.0089        -0.0096        -0.0089
                        (0.027)         (0.020)        (0.027)        (0.020)
    Time FE               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
    R2                   0.014           0.014          0.014          0.014
    Observations        385617          342499         386080         342482
    Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
   increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
   reforms, using nearest neighbor matching and logit instead of probit to estimate
   the propensity scores. The country specification (first and second columns)
   matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for being post-Great Re-
   cession, GDP growth and size of change. The timing specification (third and
   fourth columns) matches on month and year, commodity, GDP growth and
   size of change. This specification uses logit instead of probit (which is used in
   all other specifications) to estimate the propensity scores. The first and third
   columns show the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that
   for VAT decreases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in paren-
   theses. β0 measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the
   reform and βi measures price changes i months away from the reform. Over-
   all, 47% of the VAT changes for the country specification and 29% for the time
   specification are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                         95
Table D.18: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (Coarsened Exact Match-
ing)

                              Country Specification Timing Specification
                                    ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                              Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
           β0                    0.34       0.064     0.38       0.061
                               (0.063)     (0.030)  (0.060)     (0.031)

           β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                               (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

           β−2                  0.030          0.026           0.031          0.026
                               (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

           β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.021          -0.044
                               (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

           β−3                  0.015         -0.0050          0.015         -0.0050
                               (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

           β+3                  -0.043        -0.0046          -0.042        -0.0045
                               (0.017)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

           β−4                  0.049          -0.020          0.050          -0.020
                               (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

           β+4                  -0.011        -0.0089         -0.0094        -0.0089
                               (0.027)        (0.020)         (0.027)        (0.020)
           Time FE                Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
           R2                    0.014         0.014           0.014          0.014
           Observations        386557         342792          385515         342730
           Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
          increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
          reforms, using coarsened exact matching. The country specification (first and
          second columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for be-
          ing post-Great Recession, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The timing
          specification (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year, commod-
          ity, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The first and third columns show
          the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT de-
          creases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0
          measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi
          measures price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 2.1% of the
          VAT changes for the country specification and 40.4% for the time specification
          are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                                96
Table D.19: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (Kernel Matching)

                            Country Specification Timing Specification
                                  ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                            Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
         β0                    0.32       0.053     0.33       0.071
                             (0.073)     (0.025)  (0.066)     (0.034)

         β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                             (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

         β−2                  0.031          0.026           0.030          0.026
                             (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

         β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.020          -0.044
                             (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

         β−3                  0.015         -0.0050          0.015         -0.0050
                             (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

         β+3                  -0.042        -0.0046          -0.042        -0.0046
                             (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

         β−4                  0.050          -0.020          0.049          -0.020
                             (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

         β+4                 -0.0098        -0.0089         -0.0096        -0.0089
                             (0.027)        (0.020)         (0.027)        (0.020)
         Time FE               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
         R2                   0.014          0.014           0.014          0.014
         Observations        385538         342787          386076         342769
         Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
        increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
        reforms, using kernel matching. The country specification (first and second
        columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for being post-
        Great Recession, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The timing specifica-
        tion (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year, commodity, size
        of VAT change and GDP growth. The first and third columns show the es-
        timates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT decreases.
        Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0 measures
        the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi measures
        price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 40% of the VAT changes
        for the country specification and 20% for the time specification are dropped by
        the matching algorithm.




                                              97
Table D.20: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (Radius Matching)

                            Country Specification Timing Specification
                                  ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                            Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
         β0                    0.32       0.053     0.33       0.064
                             (0.073)     (0.025)  (0.066)     (0.030)

         β+1                  0.020          0.025           0.020          0.025
                             (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)

         β−2                  0.031          0.026           0.030          0.026
                             (0.019)        (0.015)         (0.019)        (0.015)

         β+2                  0.020          -0.044          0.020          -0.044
                             (0.027)        (0.021)         (0.027)        (0.021)

         β−3                  0.015         -0.0050          0.015         -0.0050
                             (0.016)        (0.028)         (0.016)        (0.028)

         β+3                  -0.042        -0.0046          -0.042        -0.0046
                             (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.018)        (0.022)

         β−4                  0.050          -0.020          0.049          -0.020
                             (0.034)        (0.022)         (0.034)        (0.022)

         β+4                 -0.0098        -0.0089         -0.0096        -0.0089
                             (0.027)        (0.020)         (0.027)        (0.020)
         Time FE               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
         R2                   0.014          0.014           0.014          0.014
         Observations        385538         342787          386076         342790
         Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
        increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
        reforms, using radius matching. The country specification (first and second
        columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for being post-
        Great Recession, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The timing specifica-
        tion (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year, commodity, size
        of VAT change and GDP growth. The first and third columns show the es-
        timates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT decreases.
        Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0 measures
        the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi measures
        price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 40% of the VAT changes
        for the country specification and 19% for the time specification are dropped by
        the matching algorithm.




                                              98
Table D.21: Pass-Through Estimates: Matched Sample (Local Linear Regression
Matching)

                               Country Specification Timing Specification
                                     ∆ log Price          ∆ log Price
                               Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
            β0                    0.32       -0.013    0.33       0.019
                                (0.073)     (0.025)  (0.066)     (0.038)

            β+1                  0.020           0.025          0.020          0.025
                                (0.019)         (0.017)        (0.019)        (0.017)

            β−2                  0.031           0.026          0.030          0.026
                                (0.019)         (0.015)        (0.019)        (0.015)

            β+2                  0.020           -0.044         0.020          -0.044
                                (0.027)         (0.021)        (0.027)        (0.021)

            β−3                  0.015          -0.0050         0.015         -0.0050
                                (0.016)         (0.028)        (0.016)        (0.028)

            β+3                  -0.042         -0.0047         -0.042        -0.0046
                                (0.018)         (0.022)        (0.018)        (0.022)

            β−4                  0.050           -0.020         0.049          -0.020
                                (0.034)         (0.022)        (0.034)        (0.022)

            β+4                 -0.0098         -0.0089        -0.0096        -0.0089
                                (0.027)         (0.020)        (0.027)        (0.020)
            Time FE               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
            R2                   0.014           0.014          0.014          0.014
            Observations        385538          342500         386076         342482
            Notes: The coefficients reported in this table indicate the pass-through of VAT
           increases and decreases to prices estimated using specification (1) on matched
           reforms, using local linear regression matching. The country specification (first
           and second columns) matches on country, commodity, an indicator variable for
           being post-Great Recession, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The timing
           specification (third and fourth columns) matches on month and year, commod-
           ity, size of VAT change and GDP growth. The first and third columns show
           the estimates for VAT increases and the second and fourth that for VAT de-
           creases. Standard errors are clustered by month and are in parentheses. β0
           measures the pass-through of the VAT change at the time of the reform and βi
           measures price changes i months away from the reform. Overall, 50% of the
           VAT changes for the country specification and 29% for the time specification
           are dropped by the matching algorithm.




                                                 99
      Table D.22: Pass-Through Calibration With Convex Demand Function and Perfect Competition

                                   Finnish Estimates                      European Estimates
       Price Elasticity   Increase       Decrease    Difference   Increase      Decrease     Difference
         of Demand      Pass-Through Pass-Through               Pass-Through Pass-Through
             0.10            0.80          0.77         0.03         0.33          0.32         0.01
             0.50            0.80          0.76         0.04         0.33          0.32         0.01
             1.00            0.80          0.75         0.05         0.33          0.32         0.01
             1.50            0.80          0.74         0.06         0.33          0.31         0.02




100
             2.00            0.80          0.72         0.08         0.33          0.31         0.02
             2.50            0.80          0.71         0.09         0.33          0.31         0.02
             3.00            0.80          0.70         0.10         0.33          0.30         0.03
             3.50            0.80          0.68         0.12         0.33          0.30         0.03
             4.00            0.80          0.67         0.13         0.33          0.30         0.03
       Notes: This Table shows the result of a calibration of the pass-through of VAT increases and decreases implied by a perfect competi-
                                                                          b , where − 1 is equal to the price elasticity of demand. Column (1)
                                                                    ! − 1
      tion model with a market demand function equal to D(p) = ap                     b
      shows the different elasticity parameters we consider, columns (2) to (4) show the results of the calibration using the Finnish estimates,
      while columns (5) to (7) show the results of the calibration using the European estimates.
      Table D.23: Pass-Through Calibration With Concave Supply Function and Perfect Competition

                           Finnish Estimates                      European Estimates
           α+β    Increase       Decrease    Difference   Increase      Decrease     Difference
                Pass-Through Pass-Through               Pass-Through Pass-Through
            0.1      0.06          0.07        -0.01         0.06          0.06         0.00
            0.2      0.17          0.19        -0.02         0.18          0.18         0.00
            0.3      0.40          0.42        -0.02         0.40          0.41         0.00
            0.4      0.71          0.72        -0.01         0.71          0.71         0.00




101
            0.5      0.93          0.93         0.00         0.93          0.93         0.00
            0.6      0.99          0.99         0.00         0.99          0.99         0.00
            0.7      1.00          1.00         0.00         1.00          1.00         0.00
            0.8      1.00          1.00         0.00         1.00          1.00         0.00
            0.9      1.00          1.00         0.00         1.00          1.00         0.00
          Notes: This Table shows the result of a calibration of the pass-through of VAT increases and decreases implied by a
          perfect competition model with a Cobb-Douglas production function with parameters α and β. Column (1) shows the
          different α + β parameters we consider, columns (2) to (4) show the results of the calibration using the Finnish estimates,
          while columns (5) to (7) show the results of the calibration using the European estimates.
