                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  AGRICULTURAL TRADE REFORM, REALLOCATION AND TECHNICAL CHANGE:
               EVIDENCE FROM THE CANADIAN PRAIRIES

                                        Mark Brown
                                      Shon M. Ferguson
                                         Crina Viju

                                      Working Paper 23857
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23857


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




We thank Paul Rhode, Martin Beaulieu, Danny Leung and seminar participants at the NBER
Understanding Productivity Growth in Agriculture Workshop, Statistics Canada and Agriculture
and Agri-Food Canada for comments and suggestions. We thank the Canadian Centre for Data
Development and Economic Research (CDER) at Statistics Canada for providing access to the
data and, in particular, Afshan Dar-Brodeur for her assistance throughout the process. We thank
Jason Skotheim and Gary Warkentine for assistance with the freight rate data. Financial
assistance from the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation and the Marianne and the
Marcus Wallenberg Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Mark Brown, Shon M. Ferguson, and Crina Viju. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Agricultural Trade Reform, Reallocation and Technical Change: Evidence from the Canadian
Prairies
Mark Brown, Shon M. Ferguson, and Crina Viju
NBER Working Paper No. 23857
September 2017
JEL No. F14,O13,Q16,Q17,Q18

                                         ABSTRACT

We decompose the impact of trade reform on technology adoption and land use to study how
aggregate changes were driven by reallocation versus within-farm adaptation. Using detailed
census data covering over 30,000 farms in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba, Canada we find
a range of new results. We find that the reform-induced shift from producing low-value to high-
value crops for export, the adoption of new seeding technologies and reduction in summerfallow
observed at the aggregate level between 1991 and 2001 were driven mainly by the within-farm
effect. In the longer run, however, reallocation of land from shrinking and exiting farms to
growing and new farms explains more than half of the aggregate changes in technology adoption
and land use between 1991 and 2011.

Mark Brown                                               Crina Viju
Statistics Canada                                        Institute of European, Russian and
Ottawa, Canada                                            Eurasian Studies
mark.brown@statcan.gc.ca                                 Carleton University
                                                         Ottawa, Canada
Shon M. Ferguson                                         crina.viju@carleton.ca
Research Institute of Industrial Economics (IFN)
Stockholm, Sweden
shon.ferguson@ifn.se
Introduction

The impact of trade liberalization on the reallocation of resources and aggregate technical
progress continues to be an important area of study. At the same time, many countries maintain
tariff and non-tariff barriers aimed at preserving small farms that are identified by many
commentators as impediments in trade agreement negotiations. It is thus crucial to understand
the distributional impacts of trade reform across the farm population and their combined
implications for aggregate outcomes such as technology adoption and land use adaption.
    In this paper, we exploit the removal of a railway transportation subsidy on the Canadian
Prairies in 1995 to study the relative contribution of reallocation versus within-farm changes due
to the reform on aggregate technology adoption and land use. The subsidy, worth CAD700
million per year (Klein et al. 1994) applied to the main export crops. As locations farthest from
seaport experienced the greatest increase in transportation costs when the subsidy was removed,
the impact of the reform was location-dependent. Furthermore, the export-dependent nature of
grain production on the prairies, combined with the unique institutional features of the grain
marketing and transportation system at the time, imply that the increase in freight rates translated
directly into a decrease in the price of grains at the farm gate.1 Ferguson and Olfert (2016)
exploited this large regional variation in this historic reform in order to identify the causal effects
of the subsidy loss on the aggregate adoption of new technologies for sowing grain crops and
several other aspects of land use. Their study used data aggregated at the Census Consolidated
Subdivision (CCS) level, which allowed for a comparison in average technology adoption across
regions, but due to data limitations they could not investigate the distributional impact of the
reform within each spatial unit over time.
    Using a detailed farm-level panel, we decompose the aggregate technology adoption and land
use in each region into several components, which capture adaption through within-farm change

1
  Two main institutional features allow us to infer farm gate prices for wheat (the main export crop at the time)
directly from the freight rate data. First, the Canadian Wheat Board (CWB) marketed wheat and barley on behalf of
prairie farmers and “pooled” prices for a given quality of grain delivered during each “crop year” (August 1 st – July
31st). Price pooling meant that the wheat price per tonne at the farm gate equalled the pooled price minus the cost
per tonne of railway transportation to seaport. Pooling prices regardless of whether wheat was exported to the east or
west also meant that any divergences in world wheat prices between east and west coast seaports did not affect the
spatial variation in prices across the prairies. Second, freight rates were regulated, publicly available and constant
during each crop year, which meant that freight rate changes translated directly into changes in the price of wheat at
the farm gate. The combination of CWB price pooling and a constant export basis within each crop year implies that
all farmers delivering their grain at a given location received the same price, net of railway freight costs, regardless
of which day during the crop year they delivered.


                                                           2
and the reallocation of cropland between incumbent and entering and exiting farms. We find that
the shift from producing low-value to high-value crops for export, the adoption of new seeding
technologies and reduction in summerfallow observed at the aggregate level between 1991 and
2001 were driven mainly by the within-farm effect. While the reallocation of cropland played a
minor role in the shorter time horizon, it plays a larger role over the 1991-2011 period,
accounting for over half of aggregate technology adoption and land use changes. Although
technology adoption and land use changes occurred across the prairies, the pace of change was
much faster in those areas where transportation costs rose through the within-farm and
reallocation effects—both are economically, and statistically, significant channels by which the
farm population adapt to economic shocks.
    This study contributes to a growing literature on the impact of trade liberalization and
reallocation on aggregate technical change. Melitz (2003) showed theoretically that trade
liberalization raises aggregate productivity by reallocating production from low-productivity
firms to high-productivity firms, with strong empirical support by many studies that exploited
historical trade reforms, including Chile (Pavcnik 2002) and Canada (Trefler 2004). Our results
also contribute to a related empirical literature positing that trade liberalization or competitive
pressure induces technology adoption and efficiency improvements within farms (Paul et al.
2000) or firms in other industries (Galdon-Sanchez and Schmitz 2002, Schmitz 2005, Lileeva
and Trefler 2010, Bustos 2011, Bloom et al. 2012).
    The idea that reallocation of land from contracting farms to growing farms leads to aggregate
technical change is motivated by several studies. A survey of the literature by Sumner (2014)
suggests a positive relationship between farm size and productivity in developed countries such
as the United States. Adamopolous and Restuccia (2014) find that differences in farm size across
countries can explain a great deal of the cross-country differences in agricultural productivity.
Empirical studies using Canadian farm data suggest that larger farms are more likely to adopt
conservation (or what is also termed minimum) tillage (Davey and Furtan 2008) and, in
particular, zero tillage (Awada 2012).
    Our work contributes to a broader literature that focuses on the impact of technology
diffusion on farm size, including Olmstead and Rhode (2001).2 Our work is also complementary


2
 See Sunding and Zilberman (2001) for a comprehensive literature review of technology adoption in agriculture and
see Olmstead and Rhodes (2008) for a historical background of innovation in the U.S. context.


                                                       3
to recent research by Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2015) that emphasizes the role of
technology adoption in driving the reallocation process and within-firm efficiency improvements
that together raised aggregate productivity in the U.S. steel industry.
    Our methodology builds on Foster et al. (2001, 2008), who decompose aggregate total factor
productivity (TFP) growth into separate components, but we depart from the literature by
performing the decomposition within each finely detailed spatial unit and then using these
components as separate outcome variables in regressions where the variable of interest is the
change in railway freight rates. Our regression approach allows us to determine the impact of the
reform on each component of aggregate technology adoption and land use change, which, to the
best of our knowledge, is a unique contribution to the literature.


Background
We begin with a brief overview of the grain transportation subsidy and its reform, as well as a
description of the grain market in Western Canada. Finally, we discuss the advent of zero tillage
technology in the region.
The Western Grain Transportation Act and Structural Change
In 1995, the Canadian Government eliminated a transportation subsidy on railway shipments of
grain from the Canadian Prairies to seaport, known as the Western Grain Transportation Act
(WGTA).3 The decision ended one of the longest-running agricultural subsidies in the world,
first known as the Crow's Nest Pass Agreement of 1897.4 These subsidized freight rates were
commonly referred to as the “Crow Rate.” The removal of the transportation subsidy increased
the cost of exporting grain from the Canadian Prairies by $17-$34/tonne, equivalent to 8%-17%
of its value.5 These increased transportation costs translated directly into lower grain prices at the
farm gate since grain was exported almost exclusively by rail.6



3
  After the October 1993 federal election the new government moved quickly to eliminate the WGTA. The reform
was passed in Parliament in February of 1995 and the elimination of the WGTA was effective August 1st, 1995
(Doan, Paddock and Dyer 2003).
4
  See Vercammen (1996) for a detailed overview of reforms to the Western Canadian grain transportation system.
5
  This assumes an average grain price of $200/tonne.
6
  In the case of export or CWB grains at the time, farmers deliver their grain to the grain companies’ “elevator,” a
short-term storage facility usually located along a rail line. The grain is then loaded onto rail cars for transport to
ports in on Canada’s west coast (Vancouver or Prince Rupert), the Lakehead (Thunder Bay) or Hudson’s Bay
(Churchill), and then loaded on ships for export; grain destined for the eastern U.S. market to enters via rail to
Minneapolis.


                                                            4
    The subsidization of railway freight rates to move Western Canadian grains to export position
was a vital part of the National Policy of the late 19th century to settle the prairie provinces and
develop the so-called “wheat economy.” While the subsidized grain producers benefitted from
the subsidy, livestock producers and processors were disadvantaged by the resulting higher local
prices of grains, and the Crow Rate was seen as contributing to dependence on a very narrow
range of crops whose export was subsidized (Klein and Kerr 1996). Removal of the
transportation subsidy was expected to have large impacts on the grains and livestock industries
in the region (Kulthreshra and Devine 1978).
    While the repeal of the WGTA affected farmers in all locations across the prairies to some
extent, there was substantial geographical heterogeneity in the size of this impact. Prior to the
reform, railway freight rates for shipping wheat from the prairies to export position (Vancouver,
BC or Thunder Bay, ON) ranged from $8 to $14/tonne, depending on location. After the reform,
the freight rates more than tripled to $25 to 46/tonne, with the highest freight rates in locations
that were farthest from the seaports. It is this spatial heterogeneity that Ferguson and Olfert
(2016) used to untangle the impact of the WGTA repeal from other concurrent changes in the
production and marketing of wheat that affected all locations equally or did not share the same
geographical pattern as the shock to railway freight rates.7
    The timing of the WGTA removal is attributable to two external factors that were beyond the
control of the grain industry in Western Canada. First, a recession in the early 1990’s forced the
Canadian federal government to cut spending. Second, the GATT deemed the WGTA to be a
trade-distorting export subsidy and the Canadian government faced international pressure to
reduce export subsidies during the Uruguay Round.8
    Farmers were partially compensated for the higher freight rates resulting from the repeal of
the WGTA, with a one-time payment of $1.6 billion, with an additional $300 million allocated to
assist producers that were most severely affected and to invest in rural roads. Payments were
based on a formula that considered each farm’s acreage of eligible land, productivity, and
distance to seaport. This compensation was equivalent to approximately two years of the annual

7
  For example, grain handling and transportation innovations such as high-throughput elevators and unit-trains were
gradually being adopted across the prairies, possibly resulting in adaptations by farmers, but these were generally
the same in all locations and not differentiated by distance to the nearest seaport.
8
  In particular, the Uruguay Round’s Agriculture Agreement stipulated that export subsidies were to be reduced by
36 percent of what was spent in 1991/92 by the year 2000. Moreover, this reduction was to apply to at least 21
percent of the volume shipped in 1991/92 (Kraft and Doiron 2000).


                                                         5
subsidy amount, and may have helped farmers to finance the purchase of new zero tillage
equipment.9 Nevertheless, despite its large size, Schmitz, Highmoor and Schmitz (2002)
calculated that the payment was not large enough to fully compensate farmers for the loss of the
subsidy.
    Two other domestic reforms occurred around the same time as the WGTA repeal. First, the
federal government began to speed up the process permitting railways to abandon prairie branch
rail lines that were too inefficient to maintain. Second, the federal government also amended the
Canada Wheat Board (CWB) Act in order to change the point of price equivalence to St.
Lawrence/Vancouver, rather than Thunder Bay/Vancouver. The new pricing regime accounted
for the cost to ship grain on lake freighters from Thunder Bay to the mouth of the St. Lawrence
Seaway.10 In addition, Canada and the U.S. gradually eliminated import tariffs for wheat, canola,
and other grains over a 9-year period that ended January 1, 1998 as part of the 1988 Canada-
United States Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) and the 1994 North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) (USDA 2002).
    It is important to note that the WGTA subsidized exports of grain to non-U.S. locations and
thus the repeal of the WGTA made it relatively more attractive to export to the U.S. In the case
of grains exported by the CWB (wheat and barley for human consumption), the CWB’s
catchment area for exports to the U.S. was located in southern Manitoba. The WGTA repeal
would have increased the U.S. catchment area, resulting in more wheat exports to the U.S. via
Manitoba. The increase in exports to the U.S. moderated the freight increase after 1995 observed
in southern Manitoba locations, and is captured by our freight rate data.
    Overall, it was expected that some farmers would adapt to the new environment by shifting
away from low-value (wheat) exports and towards high-value export crops such as canola (Doan,
Paddock and Dyer 2003, 2006). It was also expected that farmers would produce more feed grain
for the local livestock industry. Finally, the lower farmgate prices were expected to encourage
farmers to pursue economies of size in grain production.

9
  Vercammen (2007) shows, for example, that the risk of farm bankruptcy may induce farmers to invest the proceeds
of direct payments into productivity-enhancing investments.
10
   The re-location of the eastern export basis point for CWB grains discouraged the export of wheat and barley to
ports in eastern Canada. However, west coast capacity constraints led to an additional measure, the “freight rate
adjustment factor” (FAF), which had the effect of re-establishing freight rates consistent with a Thunder Bay export
basis point, for eastward movement of wheat and barley. Financed by all producers across the prairies, the FAF
largely averted the additional impact of moving the eastern basis point to the St. Lawrence (Fulton et al. 1998).
Freight rates for wheat, adjusted for west coast capacity constraints, can thus be interpreted as an “export basis.”


                                                         6
     It is important to note, however, that the 1990's were a dynamic time for grain production on
the Canadian Prairies for several reasons, not just because of the repeal of the WGTA.
Improvements in farm equipment encouraged larger and more efficient farms, and the
development of herbicide-resistant canola varieties led to their increasing popularity (Beckie et
al. 2011). World prices for agricultural commodities also varied widely during this period, which
likely affected farmers' production and technology adoption decisions. It is thus a challenging
empirical question to determine how much of the aggregate changes in land use and technology
adoption stemming from within-farm changes and reallocation that were caused by the trade
reform. To the best of our knowledge such an empirical investigation has not been undertaken to
date.
The advent of zero tillage in Western Canada
The 1990’s marked the beginning of large-scale adoption of a new seeding technology called
zero tillage in Western Canada. The technology was a seeding method that could prepare the
seedbed and deposit the seed all in one operation while disturbing the soil as little as possible.
The conventional seeding method involved tilling the soil several times, which dried the soil and
removed the previous year’s crop residue from the surface, hence leading to erosion problems
under windy conditions. The benefits of zero tillage were to reduce fuel use, conserve soil
moisture, decrease soil erosion and reduce labor requirements. Zero tillage technology was an
extension of existing “minimum tillage” technology, which involved less tillage than
conventional methods (often seeding in one operation) but disturbed the soil more than zero
tillage technology.
     The moisture conservation benefits of zero tillage allowed many farms to sow a crop every
year in their fields instead of leaving them to lie idle every 2nd or 3rd year, a practice commonly
referred to as “summerfallowing”. This practice allowed for moisture to accumulate for the next
year and allowed for the control of weeds using tillage. Planting a crop every year, however, also
meant that more fertilizer needed to be applied, since leaving the soil idle increased plant-
available nitrogen levels through the natural soil process of mineralization. Furthermore, zero
tillage depends on the use of herbicides to control weeds that conventional tillage helps to
control.11


11
  Awada (2012) posits four factors hastened the adoption of zero tillage in Western Canada during the 1990’s in
general. First, the zero tillage seeding equipment improved substantially during this time. Second, the price of


                                                         7
   Zero tillage became the dominant seeding technology on the prairies, increasing from 8% to
59% of cultivated acres between 1991 and 2011. At the same time, the use of “minimum tillage”
technology was relatively stable between 1991 and 2011 at 25% of cultivated acres. Zero tillage
has been adopted in many countries (Derpsch et al. 2010).


Data
We combine freight rate data with a unique new farm-level dataset derived from the Census of
Agriculture. This section explains the data sources and how they were combined.
Census of Agriculture microdata
The analysis is based on the longitudinal Census of Agriculture File (L-CEAG), which is
constructed from the quinquennial Census of Agriculture (CEAG). Stretching from 1986 to
2011, the L-CEAG traces the evolution of the farm population over five-year intervals,
permitting the longitudinal analysis of continuing farms and their operators as well as the
identification of entering and exiting farms.
   The census data also indicates the location of each farm at the Census Consolidated
Subdivision (CCS) level. A CCS is equivalent to a Rural Municipality in the case of
Saskatchewan and Manitoba and a County in the case of Alberta. We use data for several years
before and after the 1995 reform in order to identify the effect of the WGTA repeal on farm
outcomes. We therefore use data from 1991 and 2001 census years in the baseline estimations.
   The data includes a rich set of information such as farm size and the number of acres devoted
to different crops and summerfallow. We also use census data on the use of different tillage
technologies. Constant 2011 CCS boundaries were used to control for changes in boundaries
between years and amalgamations of CCS’s over time. The CCS boundaries are illustrated in
Figure 1.
   The definition of agricultural operation used by the Census of Agriculture includes many
operations where farming is not the main occupation of the operator and gross farm revenues are
very small. Small acreages, for example, are included in the definition of a “census farm”. Since
we want to focus on the behavior of grain farms of sufficient size to avoid including hobby or
lifestyle farms, we restrict our sample to farms with a gross farm income of CAD30,000

“Roundup” herbicide decreased to a point where it became economical to use it as a primary weed control method.
Third, interest rates decreased, making it easier for farmers to finance the cost of the new technology. Finally, the
price of fuel increased during this time.


                                                          8
(constant 2002 dollars) in 1991, which is the average income for Canadian low-income grain and
oilseed farms during the study period (Statistics Canada 2016). We also restrict the sample to
only “grain and oilseed farms” (Longitudinal NAICS 17 to 22) that are defined by Statistics
Canada using the derived market value of commodities reported.
Freight rate data
We combine data on farm outcomes from the Census of Agriculture with railway freight rate
data supplied by Freight Rate Manager, a service provided by a consortium of government,
academic and farmer organizations.12 The freight rate data encompass the freight rate (price per
tonne) for wheat from almost 1,000 delivery locations spread across Alberta, Saskatchewan and
Manitoba.13 Since we do not know where each farm in the census delivers its grain, we measure
average railway freight rates for each CCS in the data using the nearest delivery point available
each census year. We measure freight rates from several grid points within each CCS, using a 0.1
degree grid of the earth’s surface, then take the average freight rate for all grid points within a
given CCS as our measure of each CCS’s average freight rate.14
     We measure average local trucking costs from the farm to the delivery location using the
average distance measure from each grid point to the nearest delivery location. The change in
distances over time reflects the effect of the branch line abandonment and the consolidation of
delivery points that occurred at the same time as the subsidy repeal.
     The pattern of freight rate changes between 1991 and 2001 by CCS is illustrated in Figure 1.
Note that while freight rates increased for all locations between 1991 and 2001, there was large
variation in the size of this increase, even within individual provinces. The largest freight
increases were in Northeastern Saskatchewan, which is the most remote location in terms of
distance to both the west coast and Thunder Bay.
     Figure 2 illustrates the abrupt increase in freight rates in the 1995-1996 crop year, using data
for Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, a location in the middle of the Canadian Prairies. On a constant
dollar basis, rates were effectively invariant across the other years. Hence, we are confident that

12
   This service provides farmers with information on the cost of shipping various crops by rail, depending on their
location. See http://freightratemanager.usask.ca/index.html for more details on the source of the freight rate data.
13
   Using shipment volume data from the Canadian Grain Commission (2014) for each station, we exclude stations
that report total train deliveries per year of 1000mt or less.
14
   We restrict the grid points to only those where crops are actually grown, using satellite data from Ramankutty et
al. (2008). Grid points are excluded if less than 10% of the surrounding land is devoted to crops or pasture. The
average number of grid points in a CCS is 17, and the median number of grid points in a CCS is 12. See Ferguson
and Olfert (2016) for an example of how grid points are matched to delivery locations.


                                                          9
the changes in observed freight rates are due to the policy change, rather than any endogenous
relationship between farm production and freight rates.15 The figure also illustrates that primary
elevator tariffs for wheat, which is the fee charged by grain companies to store and load grain
onto railway cars, were generally constant over the 1986-2009 period,16 and that wheat prices
fluctuated greatly during this period.
Soil and weather data
The weather data includes lagged August precipitation and average July temperature in each
CCS. We posit that the previous year’s weather will influence planting decisions in the
subsequent year. The weather data are taken from the University of East Anglia’s high-resolution
(10’) data set of surface climate over global land areas (New et al. 2002). We match the weather
data from the centroid of each grid area to its nearest CCS using GIS techniques.
     The soil data describes the percentage of each CCS that is brown, dark brown, black, dark
gray or gray soil. The color of the soil is determined by the level of organic matter it contains,
which is itself related to the vegetation and hence by long-run weather. Brown soil is found in
the most arid parts of the prairies that were previously a grassland ecosystem. Black soil is found
in moister areas of the prairies that were previously covered by long grass and deciduous trees.
Gray soil is found in areas with coniferous forest. The soil data originates from the Soil
Landscapes of Canada database (AAFC 2010).


Defining entering, exiting and continuing farms
As with any longitudinal firm population, a full understanding of their dynamics depends on the
rules that are imposed to identify continuing, entering and exiting farms. The L-CEAG identified
agriculture operations17 (hereafter farms) using a longitudinally consistent code that is
maintained across census years18 and is largely based on the headquarters location of the farm.


15
   Freight rates and production are inherently endogenous, because freight rates influence the equilibrium level of
production, while production through transportation density and fronthaul and backhaul effects can influence freight
rates (see Behrens and Brown, 2017)
16
   Handling charges and freight rates for canola and other grains evolved similarly to those for wheat, (SAFRR
2003, Tables 2-43 and 2-44).
17
   An agriculture operation is a “…farm, ranch or other agriculture operation producing agriculture
products”(http://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/ca2011/gloss and see http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/95-629-
x/2007000/4123857-eng.htm for a more detailed discussion).
18
   One of the concerns with working with a longitudinal file is the quality of the longitudinal identifier. In
construction of the cross-sectional Census of Agriculture file considerable effort is put into identifying farms that
may be false births, with the most effort put into identifying large farm false births and deaths. This means these


                                                         10
Of course, decisions have to be made when farms change hands or are merged into larger
operations as to whether they are continuers, exiters or entrants. 19 These are based on a set of
basic rules that allow the farm population to be classified into these three groups.
Continuing farms
Mechanically, farms are considered to be continuers if their response to the subsequent census is
under the same identifier. The identifier is maintained if the farm is an on-going operation20 and
has the same headquarters location. This is the case even if the farm is sold as long as it
continues to be associated with the original headquarter’s location and the new operator’s
information is available (i.e., name and age). The rule holds regardless of whether the sale is an
inter-generational transfer or the farm is sold to someone outside of the family.
Exiting farms
If the respondent indicates the farm is no longer operating (i.e., selling agriculture products for
sale or the intent for sale) the farm has exited and its identifier is terminated. Furthermore, if the
farm is purchased by an on-going operation farm, under most circumstances it will be treated as
an exit, and all of its land and assets will be combined with the purchasing farms operations. The
purchasing farms identifier is maintained and the purchased farm identifier is terminated.
Entering farms
If a new farm is identified on the Farm Register and qualifies as an operating farm based on the
census response, then it is a new farm and given a unique farm identifier. The farm is also
considered to be an entrant if the farm is sold to a new operation, and the headquarters location
cannot be associated with the farm under the previous owner.21 The farm is given a new
identifier and the old identifier is terminated.
   It is, in the end, likely impossible to codify every possible scenario to discern whether a farm
is continuing or is an exit or an entrant. Nevertheless, farms are generally treated as continuers if
they are taken over and maintained as on-going and independent operations, but are exits if they


errors may be more likely for smaller farms, inflating their entry and exit rates. False births and deaths was one of
the concerns when constructing the longitudinal file, but tests of the data (e.g., identifying entering farms in the
same geographic unit matching exiting farms with the same size and operator age five years on) suggested this was
at most a minor problem.
19
   See also Nagelschmitz et al. (2016) for a similar, but more in depth discussion of the identification of continuing,
exiting and entering farms.
20
   An on-going operation is one that produces agricultural products for sale or with the intent to sale.
21
   In the case of a dissolved partnership, where the farm is split and begins operations as separate entities, the old
farm identifier is terminated and new operations are treated as entrants.


                                                          11
cease operation or are taken over by another farm that continues to operate. They are entrants if
they are new to the Farm Register or it is not clear that the farm that has been sold is identifiable
as a continuing farm.


Farm dynamics and technological change
We decompose the change in the composition of farmland, either in its land use (focusing on
wheat, canola and summerfallow22) or in the application of the type of tillage (conventional,
minimum and zero till), resulting from the contributions of the continuing, entering and exiting
farms. In so doing, the decomposition provides a means to measure how the competitive process
influences these outcomes. There are several ways that these outcomes can be decomposed into
the contributions of entering, exiting and continuing farms.23 We adopt the Foster et al. (2001)
approach, but do so with an eye to its limitations.
     Defining      as the percentage share of land accounted for by outcome o (i.e., land use or

tillage type) in region g (  prairies, CCS) at time t, we can decompose the percentage point

change in share of farmland (            ) between year                and t into the contributions of continuing

(C), entering (E) and exiting (X) farms (f):



                                  f C             f C
                                                                        
                         Lgt   s ft  L ft   L ft   Lgt  s ft   L ft s ft
                                                                                  f C


                                                                           
                                                                                                                  (1)
                           s ft L ft  Lgt    s ft  L ft   Lgt  L ft ,
                           f E                    f X




where to simplify the notation the outcome index o is dropped. The first three terms in the
decomposition capture the effect of the continuing farm population (C). The first term is the
within farm effect and measures the contribution of change in the share of acres in a land use to
which a tillage technology is applied while holding the share of land accounted for by the farm to
its level at the start of the period. The second term captures the between farm effect, where the

22
   We focus on wheat and canola because both crops are primarily sold to export markets and have different value to
weight ratios. The effect of changing freight rates might also be applied to barley, for instance, but it is both
exported and used for domestic consumption, reducing the expected effect of rising freight rates, as farmers are less
dependent on foreign markets. Wheat and canola are also used because they are two of the most important crops
that, along with summerfallow, account for about two-thirds of land use by 2011.
23
   For a review of various decomposition methods as applied to productivity see Baldwin and Gu (2006).


                                                              12
farm makes a positive contribution if it is growing and its land use/till technology share is above
average at the start of the period. The third term is the cross effect and is positive if growing
farms are also more intensively using a land use/till technology.
     While the first three terms tell us the extent to which change is driven by incumbent farms, it
is only the within term that measures the extent to which incumbent farms drive change
independent of shifts in farm land. The between and cross terms capture the effect of shifts in
acreage between growing and declining farms on outcomes and, therefore, measure an aspect of
how the reallocation of resources across farms drive overall change. Their contributions are
positive if farms that have higher than average intensity in year                             increase their share
(between) or because there was concomitant growth in both intensity and shares (cross) over t
years.
     The fourth and fifth terms capture the effects of entry (E) and exit (X). Entry has a positive
effect if entrants use the technology more intensively than the farm population at the start of the
period, while exit has a positive effect if they use technology less intensively at the start of the
period compared to the overall farm population.
     The Foster et al. (2001) decomposition is not without limitations, but it likely provides a
reasonable representation of the effect of changes in the farm population on outcomes. One
concern is the potential bias in the continuing farm components resulting from regression to the
mean (Baldwin and Gu, 2006). That is, farms with initially large sizes (e.g., because of an
expansion of rented land to produce more of a particular crop) are more likely to see subsequent
decline in both size and the share of acreage in a particular land use/technology in the subsequent
period. Hence, the use of initial farm shares and outcome variable shares in the three incumbent
farm components may be correlated because of these transitory effects rather than some
underlying economic process. However, in this instance we are less concerned about this effect,
because we have chosen to focus the analysis on longer-term trends that are less sensitive to
transitory shocks associated with regression to the mean (Baldwin and Gu, 2006).
     A second concern24 surrounds the implicit assumption of who is replacing whom in the farm
population. The Foster et al. (2001) decomposition assumes entering farms are replacing the
average farm at the start of the period, while the average farm at the start of the period is

24
  A third concern is that the Foster et al. (2001) decomposition is sensitive to bias stemming from measurement
error (see Foster et al, 2001). We don’t believe this particular form of error, which is more likely to occur when
measuring output and employment in productivity decompositions, is a major concern here.


                                                          13
replacing exiting farms. In other sectors of the economy that are imperfectly competitive, this
assumption may not hold. For instance, in many manufacturing industries entry and exits tend to
replace each other as the churn involves small firms that are often less productive than larger
firms and compete for the same small market segments (Baldwin 1995 and Baldwin and Gu,
2006). Here it isn’t apparent a priori that entering farms are taking land from exits or declining
incumbents. We believe it is reasonable, at least as a starting point, to assume entering farms are
replacing the average farm and the average farm is replacing exiting farms.


Decomposing the Sources of Aggregate Changes in Technology Adoption
We begin the analysis by decomposing aggregate changes in technology adoption and land use
patterns into the contributions by exiting, entering and continuing farms between 1991 and 2001
(Table 1) based on the Foster et al. (2001) decomposition expressed in (1). For the change in the
adoption rate (outcome) and its decomposition, the prairie farm population is divided into two
groups: farms experiencing changes in railway freight rates above and below that of the median
farm. Splitting the sample this way allows us to test initially on an informal basis, and
subsequently on a formal basis, the relationship between transport costs and shifts in the farm
population. However, before reviewing the decomposition results, we first set the scene by
describing the basic pattern in the farm-level data.
Aggregate Changes in Land Use and Technology Adoption
In terms of land use, there is an overall shift in the share of land devoted to wheat and
summerfallow and towards canola between 1991 and 2001 (see “Total change” column of Table
1). This is the case irrespective of whether the farm incurs below or above median changes in
railway freight rates. For instance, the share of land devoted to the production of wheat fell by 13
percentage points (49 to 36%) for farms with above-median freight rate increases and 6
percentage points (43 to 37%) for farms with below-median freight rate increases. The share of
land devoted to the production of canola increased by 4 percentage points and 1 percentage
points for farms subject to above-median and below-median freight rate increases respectively.
This shift towards production from low-value to high-value export crops due to the reform is
akin to the Alchian and Allan (1964) conjecture from the producer’s perspective, since the
increase in per-unit trade costs increased the relative price of canola compared to wheat.




                                                 14
     The share of land in summerfallow declined by 13 percentage points and 6 percentage points
for farms subject to above-median and below-median freight rate increases respectively. In
contrast, the share of land where zero till was used rose by 29 percentage points (9 to 38%) for
farms with above-median freight rate increases and 24 percentage points (8 to 31%) for farms
with below-median freight rate increases. Conventional till saw a similar and opposite shift,
while minimum till saw little change. Again, there appears to be a stronger effect across all three
technologies for farms with above median changes to freight rates. Ferguson and Olfert (2016)
suggest that the declining importance of summerfallow is related to the shift away from
conventional till towards minimum till and especially zero till technology, since the moisture
conservation benefits of new tillage technologies reduced the need for summerfallow.
     The 1991 to 2001 period allows only six years of the farm population to adapt to the 1995
change in transportation costs, whose effect is partially cushioned by a one-time payout to farms
in partial compensation for the change. Moreover, while individual farms may have the capacity
to shift their crops and technology relatively quickly, it may take longer for this changes to play
out in terms of farm dynamics as those farms that are better able to adapt enter/expand and those
less able exit/contract. Therefore, it is also necessary to look over a longer time frame.
     As a result, we extend the analysis by a further ten years, from 1991 to 2011 (Table 2). Over
this longer period the total change in land use and related technological change is even more
apparent. In particular, the shift towards the production of canola and away from wheat is more
pronounced and so too is the adoption of zero till technology instead of conventional till.25
Minimum till is the one exception as it becomes less popular by the end of the period, as it is
apparently eclipsed by zero-till technology that was only in its infancy in 1991. Still, the
essential pattern of greater change for those farms with above median and below median freight
rate shocks remains, essentially confirming Ferguson and Olfert’s (2016) descriptive findings,
but with micro data instead of aggregate data. Left open to question, of course, is whether these
outcomes are the result of the incumbent farm adapting to the price shock and/or the reallocation
of land from declining incumbent and exiting farms to growing incumbent and entering farms.
And, following from this, whether the apparent association between transportation costs and
these changes stands up to more rigorous statistical testing. We address these questions in turn.


25
 The 1991 adoption rates reported in Tables 1 and 2 are not identical, which is due to small differences in the
median freight rate for the two time horizons.


                                                         15
Decomposition of Farm Outcomes
Across Tables 1 and 2, we find that the within-farm effect, which isolates the incumbent farm
adoption of technology holding farm size constant, is the largest contributor to aggregate changes
in technology and land use for the time period 1991-2001. As per Table 1, the within-farm effect
for zero till adoption explains about 16 percentage points of the total 29 percentage points of
aggregate change for farms with above-median transport costs and 14 percentage points out of
the total 24 percentage point change for farms with below-median transport costs. A strong
within-farm effect can be observed in the decline of conventional till technology, accounting for
20 percentage points out of the total change of 33 percentage points for farms with above-median
transport costs and 18 percentage points of the total of 29 percentage point change for farms with
below-median transport costs. The within-farm effect is also strong when looking at land use,
explaining around 11 percentage points of the total of 13 percentage point decline in land used
for wheat production for farms with above median transport costs and 6 percentage points out of
a total of 6 percentage points for farms with below median transport costs.
   The decomposition was performed again for the period 1991 to 2011 to examine whether the
same components are important over a long period of time (Table 2). Over this longer period, the
within-farm effect is losing importance and the cross and entry terms combined become the most
important component. For example, Table 2 shows that from the total 58 percentage point
change in zero till adoption, the within-farm effect explains 22 percentage points, while the cross
and entry effects together explain 35 percentage points for farms with above median transport
costs. In contrast, for the farms with below median transport costs, of the total of 54 percentage
point change, the within term explains 22 percentage points and cross and entry terms sum to 32
percentage points. The same trend can be observed for the other technology and land use
variables. Thus, the reallocation of land through the expansion of incumbent farms and the entry
of new farms gain importance in the long-run. Competitive reallocation matters for
understanding aggregate technology adoption.
   Casual inspection of Tables 1 and 2 suggests that the effect of transportation costs varies
substantially across the components. By focusing, for example, on zero till technology, its
adoption is stronger for farms with above-median transport costs. For the period 1991 to 2001,
the entry term does not play an important role, thus the adoption of zero till technology in higher
transport cost areas is associated with farms that have adopted the technology and are expanding



                                                16
and not from new entrants. The situation changes for the period 1991 to 2011 when the entry
gains importance and thus, in the long run, the adoption of zero till technology in higher cost
areas is explained by farms that have adopted the technology and expand and new entrants.
Hence, entry would have occurred only after incentives had changed. These dynamics hold true
for all variables considered.


Regression Analysis
Overall, the preliminary results in Tables 1 and 2 suggest that the increase in transportation costs
has a within-farm effect in the short run, while reallocation becomes more important in the long
run. In order to test this hypothesis more formally we now perform the decomposition analysis
separately for each CCS and apply a regression analysis. The following first-differenced model is
used to estimate the effect of transport costs on the five decomposition effects: Within, Between,
Cross, Entry and Exit. The regressions are run separately for the 1991-2001 and 1991-2011 time
periods, at the CCS level.
       The model for the periods 1991-2001/2011 is specified as follows:


                       Lcgt    freight gt  dist gt   controls g   gt                (2)


where Lgt is the change in the outcome variable of interest for the components c (c  Total
        c



change, Within, Between, Cross, Entry and Exit) for CCS g between the pre-reform year 1991

and post-reform years 2001 and 2011. The independent variables freight gt and dist gt

represent the change in average freight cost per ton of grain shipped from CCS g to port between
1991 and two different years, 2001 and 2011, and the change in average distance from each CCS
to its nearest delivery point over the same two periods of time, respectively. The various control
variables include January and July temperatures, annual precipitation, dummy variables for the
provinces of Alberta and Manitoba and shares of soil types (black, gray, dark gray, brown and

dark brown). We run the model with just freight gt and dist gt (Model 1) and with the

controls added (Model 2). First-differencing subsumes CCS fixed effects, yet allows us to
control for long-run weather as an explanatory variable for changes in the decomposition
components. The constant term captures any effects that are constant across all CCS’s, such as


                                                  17
world grain prices, the advent of new technologies or the effect of tariffs negotiated at the WTO
or regionally via the CUSFTA or NAFTA. The constant in the first-differenced specification is
analogous to the post-treatment period dummy in a difference-in-differences specification.
     The model is run on a balanced panel of 464 CCSs. A CCS is included in the estimation if we
are able to measure the total change in all of the outcome variables and the independent variables
over both the 1991 to 2001 and 1991 to 2011 periods. This means there will be different set of
farms represented in the sample compared to the one used to produce tables 1 and 2.
Nevertheless, as Table 3 demonstrates, there is no qualitative difference between the change in
the outcome variables for the 1991 and 2001 periods and 1991 and 2011 periods and those
reported in Tables 1 and 2 (after taking the mean of the above and below median transport costs).
Land Use Regressions
The main results are summarized in Figures 3 and 4, where we report the point estimates and the
90 percent confidence intervals for the railway freight rate coefficient (β) for the 1991-2001 and
1991-2011 periods.26 The effect of increased freight rate on crop production is presented in
Figure 3. We find evidence that an increase in the freight rate resulted in positive changes for
most components (within, cross and entry) explaining changes in canola production, and a
decrease of these same components related to wheat production and summerfallow. The within-
farm effect reacted the most to the change in transportation costs, meaning that the policy change
created a strong incentive for incumbent farms in areas with high transport costs to reallocate
land from wheat production and summerfallow to canola production or to other high-value crops
tested in this paper. The point estimates for the within-farm term over the 1991-2001 period with
controls suggest that every one dollar per tonne increase in transportation costs increased the
absolute value of the within-farm component by 0.52 percentage points for canola, 0.69 for
wheat, and 0.56 for summerfallow.
     The impacts of changes in railway freight rates on reallocation are sustained and even larger
in some cases over the longer period of time, as the results for the period 1991-2011 show. The
effect of changes in railway freight rates on the cross component is (in relative terms) becoming
larger during the period 1991-2011, showing that reallocation of land from slow-adapting farms
to fast-adapting farms becomes more important in the long run. The change in the entry and exit

26
   We report the regression tables for models 1 and 2, where the dependent variable is the total change in adoption,
in the appendix. These tables include extra columns where we add the precipitation and province indicators
separately.


                                                         18
components are not statistically significant except for wheat, and this does not hold when
controls are added. Hence, in the longer run the effect of transportation costs on land use runs
through the incumbent farm population, rather than being associated with the exit of farms that
may not have adapted their land use or the entry of farms that on average use less land for wheat
and summerfallow and more land for canola. The inclusion of controls does not qualitatively
change the results, although the point estimates do change, which suggests that excluding the
controls leads to a problem of omitted variable bias.
Tillage Technology Regressions
The increase of freight rate on tillage technology adoption is presented in Figure 4. We find
evidence that an increase in railway freight rates resulted in a positive change in the within, cross
and exit components explaining zero tillage adoption, and a negative change in the within, cross
and exit components related to conventional tillage. The results on minimum tillage are mixed
and the point estimates for the within and cross terms only become statistically significant once
controls are added. The zero tillage results show that the within-farm effect is responsive to the
increase in railway freight rates, thus incumbent farms from high transport cost areas are the ones
that implement this technology. However, the change in the cross component is as large as the
change in the within term and the cross term is the largest in the 2011 horizon. Thus, in places
hardest hit by the loss of the transportation subsidy, farms that adopted the zero tillage
technology tended to simultaneously increase their size, while farms slower to adopt zero tillage
tended to downsize over the 20 year horizon. The same picture can be drawn based on the
conventional tillage results, with farms that are moving away from this technology being the
ones that expand in size. The results for minimum tillage in the 20 year horizon again only
become robust once controls are added.27




27
   The results for minimum tillage are volatile across the specifications of Tables A2 and A4 in the appendix. In the
10 year horizon (Table A2), the point estimate for Δfreightgt becomes statistically significant only once the province
indicators are added. In the 20 year horizon (Table A4), the point estimate for Δfreightgt is negative and statistically
significant, then becomes positive and statistically significant when adding the precipitation control, then loses
statistical significance when adding the province indicators, and finally becomes positive and statistically significant
once all controls are added. We conclude that these results are not consistent enough to make any assertion about the
impact of higher railway freight rates on minimum tillage. Our lack of conclusive evidence for an effect on
minimum tillage corroborates with Ferguson and Olfert (2016), who find no effect on minimum tillage in the
aggregated CCS-level data.


                                                          19
Conclusion
The sudden and spatially differentiated increases in freight rates experienced in Western Canada
after 1995 serves as a useful natural experiment that allows us to evaluate the relative
contribution of reallocation versus within-farm change to understand aggregate changes in
technology adoption and land use. The results suggest that the reform induced a within-farm
effect in the short-run, while reallocation occurred in the longer-term. Hence, the competitive
process plays an important role in aggregate technological change and in land use change, albeit
one that focuses on the reallocation of land amongst growing and declining incumbent farms
rather than through the entry and exit process. These results, therefore, are consistent with the
literature that finds competitive pressure induces technology adoptions within the farms sector
(Paul et al. 2000) and a broader set of industries (see Collard-Wexler and De Loecker, 2015). To
the extent that this competitive reallocation leads to productivity growth either through the
adoption of technology or through the shift to larger farm sizes, these results are also in line with
Melitz’s (2003) theoretical findings.
   Methodologically, these findings suggest moving from the aggregate to the micro-level
through the development of farm-level panel datasets, has the potential to provide insight. This
paper has focused on developing a better understanding of a transportation cost shock on both
within-farm changes and competitive reallocation, with both being important. Further
exploration of the farm-level data may help to uncover the underlying economic mechanisms
that induced farmers to change their land use and tillage technology in response to the reform. A
natural next step is to focus on the incumbent farm population at the micro-level to examine how
farms have adapted to change and whether this is conditioned on farm size, as these result points
to the effects of shifts in farm land towards growing and likely large farms.




                                                 20
References:
Alchian, Armen A., and William R. Allen. 1964. University Economics. Wadsworth: Belmont.

Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC). 2010. “Soil Landscapes of Canada version 3.2.”
Soil Landscapes of Canada Working Group, 2010.

Baldwin, John R. 1995. The Dynamics of Industrial Competition. Cambridge University Press:
New York.

Baldwin, J. R. and W. Gu. 2006. “Plant Turnover and Productivity Growth in Canadian
Manufacturing.” Industrial and Corporate Change. 15(3): 417-465.

Awada, L. 2012. The Adoption of Conservation Tillage Innovation on the Canadian Prairies.
PhD Thesis, University of Saskatchewan.

Beckie, H. J., K.N. Harker, A. Légère, M.J. Morrison, G. Séguin-Swartz, and K.C. Falk. 2011.
“GM Canola: The Canadian Experience.” Farm Policy Journal 8(1):43-49.

Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen. 2015. “Trade Induced Technical Change: The Impact
of Chinese Imports on Innovation, Diffusion and Productivity.” Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming.

Behrens, K. and W.M. Brown. 2017. “Transport Costs, Trade, and Geographic Concentration:
Evidence from Canada.” In B. Blonigen and W. Wilson (eds.) Handbook of International Trade
and Transportation. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd.

Canadian Grain Commission, 2014. “Grain Deliveries at Prairie Points,” 1985-86, 1990-91,
1995-96, 2000-01 and 2005-06 Crop Years. http://www.grainscanada.gc.ca/statistics-
statistiques/gdpp-lgpcp/gdppm-mlgpcp-eng.htm. Accessed August 8, 2014.

Davey, K. and W.H. Furtan. 2008. “Factors That Affect the Adoption Decision of Conservation
Tillage in the Prairie Region of Canada.” Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics
56(3):257-275.

Derpsch, R., T. Friedrich, A. Kassam and H. Li. 2010. ”Current Status of Adoption of No-till
Farming in the World and Some of its Main Benefits.” International Journal of Agricultural and
Biological Engineering 3(1):1-26.

Doan, D., B. Paddock and J. Dyer. 2003. “Grain Transportation Policy and Transformation in
Western Canadian Agriculture.” Proceedings of International Agricultural Policy Reform and
Adjustment Project (IAPRAP) Workshop, Paper #15748, October 23-25, 2003, Imperial College
London: Wye Campus

Doan, D., B. Paddock and J. Dyer. 2006. “The Reform of Grain Transportation Policy and
Transformation in Western Canadian Agriculture,” in Blanford, D. and B. Hill (eds.) Policy



                                             21
Reform and Adjustment in the Agricultural Sectors of Developed Countries, pp. 163-174.
Oxfordshire, UK: CABI Pub.

Ferguson, S. M., and M. R. Olfert. 2016. "Competitive Pressure and Technology Adoption:
Evidence from a Policy Reform in Western Canada." American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 98(2):422-446.

Foster, L., J.C. Haltiwanger and C.J. Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate Productivity Growth. Lessons
from microeconomic evidence.” In New Developments in Productivity Analysis, pp. 303-372.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger and C. Syverson. 2008. "Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency:
Selection on Productivity or Profitability?" American Economic Review 98(1):394-425.

Fulton, M., K. Baylis, H. Brooks and R. Gray. 1998. “The Impact of Deregulation on the Export
Basis in the Canadian Grain Handling and Transportation System.” Working paper, Department
of Agricultural Economics, University of Saskatchewan.

Galdon-Sanchez, J. E., and J.A. Schmitz Jr. 2002. “Competitive Pressure and Labor Productivity:
World Iron-Ore Markets in the 1980's.” American Economic Review 92(4):1222-1235.

Klein, K.K., S.N. Kulshreshtha, G. Stennes, G. Fox, W.A. Kerr and J. Corman. 1994.
“Transportation Issues in Canadian Agriculture II: Analysis of the Western Grain Transportation
and Feed Freight Assistance Acts.” Canadian Journal of Regional Science 17(1):45-70.

Klein, K.K. and W.A. Kerr. 1996. “The Crow Rate Issue: A Retrospective on the Contribution of
the Agricultural Economics Profession in Canada.” Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics
44(1):1-18.

Kraft, D.F. and J. Doiron. 2000. “Post Crow Influence on Prairie Feed Grain Prices.” Paper
presented September 29, 2000 at Western Nutrition Conference, Winnipeg.

Kulthreshra, S.N. and D.G. Devine. 1978. “Historical Perspective and Propositions on the
Crowsnest Pass Freight Rate Agreement.” Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics
26(2):72-83.

Melitz, M. J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra‐Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity.” Econometrica 71(6):1695-1725.

Nagelschmitz, K., J-F Frenette, M. Brown and S. Prasil. 2016. “The Canadian Longitudinal
Census of Agriculture File—A Tool to Better Understand Structural Change of Canadian
Farms.” Presented to the Seventh International Conference on Agricultural Statistics in Rome,
Italy October 26 to 28.

New, M., D. Lister, M. Hulme and I. Makin. 2002. “A high-resolution data set of surface climate
over global land areas.” Climate Research, 21(1):1-25.


                                              22
Olmstead, A. L. and P. W. Rhode. 2001. “Reshaping the landscape: the impact and diffusion of
the tractor in American agriculture, 1910–1960.” Journal of Economic History 61(3):663-698.

Olmstead, A. L. and P. W. Rhode. 2008. Creating Abundance. Cambridge University Press, New
York, NY.

Paul, C.J. Morrison, W.E. Johnston, and G.A.G. Frengley. 2000. “Efficiency in New Zealand
Sheep and Beef Farming: The Impacts of Regulatory Reform.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 82(2):325-337.

Ramankutty, N., A.T. Evan, C. Monfreda, and J.A. Foley. 2008. “Farming the Planet: 1.
Geographic Distribution of Global Agricultural Lands in the Year 2000.” Global Biogeochemical
Cycles 22(1). DOI: 10.1029/2007GB002952.

Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization (SAFRR). 2003. Agricultural Statistics
2002. Regina, SK: SAFRR, Policy Branch.

Schmitz Jr., J.A. 2005. “What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic Recovery of
the U.S. and Canadian Iron Ore Industries Following Their Early 1980s Crisis.” Journal of
Political Economy 113(3):582-625.

Schmitz, T.G., T. Highmoor, and A. Schmitz. 2002. “Termination of the WGTA: An
Examination of Factor Market Distortions, Input Subsidies and Compensation.” Canadian
Journal of Agricultural Economics 50(3):333-347.

Statistics Canada, 2016. Distribution of farm families and average total income by typology
group and farm type, unincorporated sector, annual. CANSIM Table 002-0030.

Sumner, D.A. 2014. “American Farms Keep Growing: Size, Productivity, and Policy.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 28(1):147-166.

Sunding, D., and D. Zilberman. 2001. “The Agricultural Innovation Process: Research and
Technology Adoption in a Changing Agricultural Sector.” In L. Gardner and G.C. Rausser, ed.
Handbook of Agricultural Economics, edition 1, vol. 1, chapter 4:207-261, Elsevier.

United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2002. “Effects of North American Free Trade
Agreement on Agriculture and the Rural Economy.” Electronic Outlook Report from the
Economic Research Service WRS-02-1.

Vercammen, J. 1996. “An Overview of Changes in Western Grain Transportation Policy.”
Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics 44(4):397-402.

Vercammen, J. 2007. “Farm Bankruptcy Risk as a Link Between Direct Payments and
Agricultural Investment.” European Review of Agricultural Economics 34(4):479–500.




                                               23
Figure 1. Freight rate changes between 1991 and 2001 and 2011 Census Consolidated Subdivision boundaries for
Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba

Notes: Areas with no fill indicate CCS’s without Census data or CCS’s where data was amalgamated with
neighboring CCS’s for confidentiality reasons.

Source: Statistics Canada and Freight Rate Manager.




                                                      24
                           300

                           250
   Constant 2002 $/tonne




                           200

                           150

                           100

                           50

                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006-07


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008-09
                                 1985-86
                                           1986-87
                                                     1987-88
                                                                1988-89
                                                                          1989-90
                                                                                    1990-91
                                                                                              1991-92
                                                                                                        1992-93
                                                                                                                  1993-94
                                                                                                                            1994-95
                                                                                                                                      1995-96
                                                                                                                                                1996-97
                                                                                                                                                          1997-98
                                                                                                                                                                    1998-99
                                                                                                                                                                              1999-00
                                                                                                                                                                                        2000-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2002-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2003-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2005-06


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2007-08
                                                               Primary Elevator Tariff                                         Freight Rate                               Price In Store Saskatoon

Figure 2. Primary elevator tariff, freight rate and price in store, Saskatoon SK, #1 Canada Western Red Spring
Wheat, 12.5% protein
Source: Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food.




                                                                                                                                        25
Figure 3. Freight rate coefficient ( ˆ ) by land use type and period, without controls (Model 1) and with controls (Model 2).
Notes: All models are estimated using a balanced panel of 464 CCSs. The dependent variables are the change in acres in percentage points and its components (within,
between, cross, exit and entry) derived from the Foster et al. (2001) decomposition. Presented are the coefficients on freight and their 90 percent confidence interval based
on robust standard errors. The coefficients represent the total change (or its components) of the share of land in percentage points with respect to a 1$ change in
transportation costs incurred per tonne shipped.
Source: Statistics Canada, authors’ calculations



                                                                                     26
Figure 4. Freight rate coefficient ( ˆ ) by tillage type and period, without controls (Model 1) and with controls (Model 2).
Notes: All models are estimated using a balanced panel of 464 CCSs. The dependent variables are the change in acres in percentage points and its components (within,
between, cross, exit and entry) derived from the Foster et al. (2001) decomposition. Presented are the coefficients on freight and their 90 percent confidence interval
based on robust standard errors. The coefficients represent the total change (or its components) in the share of land in percentage points with respect to a 1$ change in
transportation costs incurred per tonne shipped.
Source: Statistics Canada, authors’ calculations




                                                                                       27
Table 1. Decomposition of the change in land use/tillage type adoption rates between 1991 and 2001 for farms with above and below median changes
in railway freight rates
                                                         Adoption rate              Total                          Total change decomposition
         Type                 Transport cost           1991        2001            change         Within        Between       Cross        Exit               Entry
                             Above median              0.10           0.14          0.04           0.02           0.00           0.01           0.00          0.01
        Canola
                             Below median              0.12           0.13          0.01           0.00           0.00           0.01           0.00          0.00

                             Above median              0.49           0.36          -0.13          -0.11          0.01          -0.01           0.00          -0.02
     Total wheat
                             Below median              0.43           0.37          -0.06          -0.06          0.01           0.00           0.00          -0.01

                             Above median              0.26           0.13          -0.13          -0.09          -0.01         -0.01           0.00          -0.02
    Summerfallow
                             Below median              0.21           0.15          -0.06          -0.05          -0.01          0.00           0.00          -0.01

                             Above median              0.09           0.38          0.29           0.16           0.01           0.08           0.00          0.04
       Zero till
                             Below median              0.08           0.31          0.24           0.14           0.00           0.06           0.00          0.04

                             Above median              0.26           0.30          0.04           0.03           0.00           0.00           0.00          0.00
    Minimum till
                             Below median              0.28           0.34          0.06           0.04           0.00           0.01           0.00          0.00

                             Above median              0.66           0.32          -0.33          -0.20          -0.01         -0.08           0.00          -0.05
   Conventional till
                             Below median              0.64           0.35          -0.29          -0.18          -0.01         -0.06           0.00          -0.04

Notes: Acres of crops, summerfallow and by tillage type are measured as a proportion of total farmland in 1991 and 2001 (the adoption rate) for farms classified to
Longitudinal NAICS 17 to 22. Totals may not add due to rouding. Entrants and exits and incumbent farms are identified using the longitudinal farm identifier derived
from each farm's longitudinal identifier. The restricted sample excludes farms with revenues of $30,000 or less. The decomposition is adapted from Foster,
Halitwanger and Krizan (2001). The within component measures the contribution of incumbent farms to the aggregated change based on their initial share in acres.
The between component captures the effect of growth in the measured adoption rate of crops/tillage relative to the average weighted by the change in the farm's share
of crop land. The cross-product(cross) term measures whether farms with changes in their share of land in crops also experience change in their adoption rate. The
last two terms measure the effect of entrants and exits on the adoption rate. The effect of exits will be positive if they have lower than average adoption rates, while
the effect of entrants will be positive if they have above average adoption rates.

Source: Statistics Canada, authors’ calculations.




                                                                                   28
Table 2. Decomposition of the change in land use/tillage type adoption rates between 1991 and 2011 for farms with above and below median changes
in railway freight rates
                                                         Adoption rate              Total                          Total change decomposition
         Type                 Transport cost           1991        2011            change         Within        Between       Cross        Exit               Entry
                             Above median              0.07           0.27          0.20           0.07           0.00           0.06           0.00           0.06
        Canola
                             Below median              0.15           0.31          0.16           0.06           0.01           0.04           0.00           0.05

                             Above median              0.49           0.32          -0.17          -0.09          0.01          -0.04           0.00          -0.05
     Total wheat
                             Below median              0.42           0.34          -0.08          -0.05          0.00           0.00           0.00          -0.03

                             Above median              0.30           0.09          -0.21          -0.09          -0.01         -0.05           0.00          -0.06
    Summerfallow
                             Below median              0.17           0.05          -0.12          -0.05          -0.01         -0.02           0.00          -0.04

                             Above median              0.11           0.69          0.58           0.22           0.00           0.20           0.00           0.15
       Zero till
                             Below median              0.06           0.60          0.54           0.22           0.00           0.15           0.00           0.17

                             Above median              0.26           0.22          -0.05          -0.01          0.00          -0.03           0.00          -0.01
    Minimum till
                             Below median              0.28           0.25          -0.03           0.00          0.00          -0.02           0.00          -0.02

                             Above median              0.63           0.10          -0.53          -0.21           0.00         -0.18           0.00          -0.14
   Conventional till
                             Below median              0.67           0.15          -0.51          -0.22          -0.01         -0.14           0.00          -0.15

Notes: Acres of crops, summerfallow and by tillage type are measured as a proportion of total farmland in 1991 and 2011 (the adoption rate) for farms classified to
Longitudinal NAICS 17 to 22. Totals may not add due to rounding. Entrants and exits and incumbent farms are identified using the longitudinal farm identifier
derived from each farm's longitudinal identifier. The restricted sample excludes farms with revenues of $30,000 or less. The decomposition is adapted from Foster,
Halitwanger and Krizan (2011). The within component measures the contribution of incumbent farms to the aggregated change based on their initial share in acres.
The between component captures the effect of growth in the measured adoption rate of crops/tillage relative to the average weighted by the change in the farm's share
of crop land. The cross-product(cross) term measures whether farms with changes in their share of land in crops also experience change in their adoption rate. The
last two terms measure the effect of entrants and exits on the adoption rate. The effect of exits will be positive if they have lower than average adoption rates, while
the effect of entrants will be positive if they have above average adoption rates.

Source: Statistics Canada, authors’ calculations.




                                                                                  29
Table 3. Average change in share of acreage in crops and till
technology across Consolidated Census Subdivisions, 1991 to
2001 and and 1991 to 2011 (percentage points)
                                                                 Standard
Period            Land use/Technology           Average          deviation
                  Canola                            2.6              7.2
                  Wheat                           -20.3             14.5
                  Summerfallow                     -8.9              8.4
1991-2001
                  Zero till                        23.1             17.5
                  Minimum till                      4.5             13.9
                  Conventional till               -27.6             16.9

                  Canola                           17.7             10.3
                  Wheat                           -27.8             16.9
                  Summerfallow                    -15.5             11.3
1991-2011
                  Zero till                        50.4             25.0
                  Minimum till                     -1.6             17.8
                  Conventional till               -48.8             19.0

Notes: Reported is the average total change, and its standard deviation, in the
share of acreage in the crop or where the till technology is applied across 464
Consolidated Census Subdivisions (CCSs). These form a balanced panel for
both the 1991 to 2001 and 1991 to 2011 periods, and match the sample used
in the regression estimates.
Source: Statistics Canada, authors calculations




                                                           30
                            Appendix: Additional Regression Results

Presented below are the regression results for the total change term for the land use and
technology decompositions across periods (tables A1-A4). Model 1 only includes the change in
the freight rate and the distance shipped to the nearest delivery point between 1991 and 2001 and
1991 and 2011, while model 2 augments model 1 with full set of controls as laid out in equation
2. The coefficients on the change in freight rates correspond to those reported in figures 3 and 4.
Also included is a set of intermediate models that include precipitation (model 1a) and provincial
binary variables (model 1b). While the inclusion of controls, especially in the intermediate
models, at times weaken the effect of freight rates, in the fully specified model (model 2) the
estimated effect remains statistically significant.




                                                  31
Table A1: Effect of higher freight rates on on crop production and summerfallow, 1991 to 2001
                                      Canola                                       Wheat                                       Summerfallow
                   Model 1 Model 1a Model 1b Model 2               Model 1 Model 1a Model 1b          Model 2     Model 1    Model 1a Model 1b       Model 2
Δfreightg,2001-1991   0.390a    0.439a      0.408a     0.768a      -1.039a     -1.073a     -0.554a     -0.809a    -0.971a     -0.617a     -0.295b    -0.925a
                      (0.095)   (0.094)     (0.131)    (0.135)     (0.136)     (0.134)     (0.182)     (0.194)    (0.099)     (0.091)     (0.149)    (0.155)
Δdistg,2001-1991      -0.195a   -0.192a     -0.174a    -0.0880c    0.137b      0.136b      0.0751      -0.00248   -0.0472     -0.0274     -0.0139    -0.011
                      (0.052)   (0.052)     (0.054)    (0.049)     (0.054)     (0.055)     (0.053)     (0.057)    (0.044)     (0.042)     (0.042)    (0.041)
jan_tempg                                              0.234                                           -0.360                                        -0.534b
                                                       (0.205)                                         (0.277)                                       (0.213)
july_tempg                                             -0.0624                                         -2.034a                                       0.286
                                                       (0.678)                                         (0.622)                                       (0.374)
precipg                         0.0115b                0.0418a                 -0.00804                -0.0491a               0.0837a                0.00524
                                (0.005)                (0.014)                 (0.006)                 (0.016)                (0.006)                (0.010)
Alberta                                     -0.363     2.175                               6.818a      3.170c                             6.356a     0.988
                                            (1.148)    (1.478)                             (1.532)     (1.743)                            (1.282)    (1.462)
Manitoba                                    2.450a     2.061c                              -1.177      2.836c                             11.27a     4.088a
                                            (0.746)    (1.156)                             (0.857)     (1.661)                            (0.728)    (1.098)
black soil                                             8.905a                                          -5.660b                                       -1.505
                                                       (2.350)                                         (2.500)                                       (1.434)
dark gray soil                                         -0.438                                          0.819                                         -0.495
                                                       (2.659)                                         (3.034)                                       (2.074)
dark brown soil                                        12.41a                                          -6.250c                                       -11.63a
                                                       (3.069)                                         (3.192)                                       (1.892)
brown soil                                             8.757b                                          -4.808                                        -5.603b
                                                       (3.651)                                         (3.823)                                       (2.411)
constant              -5.487b   -11.16a     -6.567c    -34.99a     14.33a      18.30a      2.085       62.70a     15.19a      -26.13a     -5.189     0.663
                      -2.375    -3.106      -3.389     -10.28      -3.365      -4.125      -4.633      -11.22     -2.482      -3.738      -3.909     -9.573
Observations            464       464         464        464         464         464         464         464        464         464         464        464
R-squared              0.109     0.119       0.138      0.414       0.179       0.182       0.230       0.387      0.132       0.442       0.396      0.624
Notes: Freight rates and average distance to the nearest delivery location are measured in terms of change between 1991 and 2001, while soil and weather data
are fixed over time. Soil types are measured as shares, with gray soil excluded. Alberta and Manitoba are province binary variables with the excluded category
being Saskatchewan. Robust standard errors in parentheses, with a , b and c denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Authors' calculations, Statistics Canada.




                                                                              32
Table A2: Effect of higher freight rates on technology adoption, 1991 to 2001
                                      Zero Till                                    Minimum Till                                Conventional Till
                    Model 1 Model 1a Model 1b Model 2              Model 1      Model 1a Model 1b      Model 2     Model 1    Model 1a Model 1b      Model 2
freightg,2001-1991 0.677b      0.211        0.187      0.744c      -0.0099     0.238     1.661a       0.845 a
                                                                                                                   -0.667a
                                                                                                                               -0.448c
                                                                                                                                          -1.848a
                                                                                                                                                     -1.589a
                    (0.279)     (0.267)      (0.332)    (0.393)     (0.244)     (0.236)   (0.293)      (0.319)     (0.248)     (0.246)    (0.330)    (0.423)
distg,2001-1991    -0.0041     -0.0302      -0.143     -0.0729     0.083       0.0969    -0.0219      0.0176      -0.0789     -0.0667    0.165      0.0552
                    (0.101)     (0.0941) (0.0879) (0.106)           (0.0983)    (0.0890) (0.0948)      (0.114)     (0.107)     (0.111)    (0.101)    (0.115)
jan_tempg                                               1.679a                                         -0.215                                        -1.465a
                                                        (0.618)                                        (0.492)                                       (0.560)
july_tempg                                              -0.670                                         -0.730                                        1.399
                                                        (1.873)                                        (1.802)                                       (1.204)
precipg                         -0.110a                 -0.0458                 0.0584a                -0.0637c                0.0516a               0.109a
                                (0.0158)                (0.0418)                (0.0129)               (0.0362)                (0.0156)              (0.0295)
Alberta                                     -1.592      -2.751                             20.58a      12.74a                             -18.99a    -9.985a
                                            (2.975)     (4.080)                            (2.381)     (3.525)                            (3.146)    (3.763)
Manitoba                                    -20.53a     -14.30a                            7.716a      5.910b                             12.81a     8.389b
                                            (1.792)     (3.638)                            (1.760)     (2.958)                            (2.068)    (3.485)
black soil                                              1.719                                          -3.487                                        1.768
                                                        (4.399)                                        (5.646)                                       (6.411)
dark gray soil                                          -1.072                                         4.535                                         -3.463
                                                        (4.842)                                        (7.238)                                       (7.688)
dark brown soil                                         -0.624                                         -10.91                                        11.54
                                                        (6.672)                                        (6.988)                                       (7.205)
brown soil                                              -9.772                                         -16.93b                                       26.70a
                                                        (8.236)                                        (8.173)                                       (8.335)
constant             6.516      60.85a      24.46a      67.87b      4.262       -24.58a    -40.87a     20.72       -10.78      -36.27a    16.41c     -88.59a
                     (7.164)    (8.743)     (8.662)     (33.56)     (6.259)     (7.242)    (7.740)     (26.14)     (6.557)     (9.256)    (8.732)    (24.32)
Observations         464        464         464         464         464         464        464         464         464         464        464        464
R-squared            0.015      0.139       0.249       0.278       0.002       0.058      0.114       0.277       0.016       0.045      0.263      0.346
Notes: Freight rates and average distance to the nearest delivery location are measured in terms of change between 1991 and 2001, while soil and weather data
are fixed over time. Soil types are measured as shares, with gray soil excluded. Alberta and Manitoba are province binary variables with the excluded category
being Saskatchewan. Robust standard errors in parentheses, with a , b and c denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Authors' calculations, Statistics Canada.




                                                                                33
Table A3: Effect of higher freight rates on on crop production and summerfallow, 1991 to 2011
                                        Canola                                      Wheat                                       Summerfallow
                     Model 1 Model 1a Model 1b Model 2 Model 1 Model 1a Model 1b                       Model 2     Model 1    Model 1a Model 1b      Model 2
                            b           a           b          a           a           a          a           a           a          a           a
Δfreightg,2001-1991    0.214       0.465      0.335       0.687      -0.614      -1.069     -0.529      -0.429      -1.308     -0.514      -0.708     -0.394a
                       (0.101)    (0.110)     (0.151)    (0.140)     (0.124)     (0.126)    (0.139)     (0.147)    (0.0890)   (0.0858)     (0.125)    (0.105)
Δdistg,2001-1991       -0.212a     -0.194a    -0.203a     -0.101a    0.216a      0.183a     0.163a      0.0777a     -0.0308    0.0265     0.00145     0.0245
                      (0.0388)    (0.0365)   (0.0376)    (0.0308)   (0.0253)    (0.0270)   (0.0236)    (0.0272)    (0.0282)   (0.0216)    (0.0220)   (0.0233)
jan_tempg                                                 -0.955a                                        0.672c                                          -0.462c
                                                          (0.308)                                       (0.358)                                          (0.264)
july_tempg                                                 0.432                                        -3.786a                                           0.167
                                                          (0.655)                                       (1.124)                                          (0.396)
precipg                           0.0385a                 0.0107                -0.0699a               -0.0904a                 0.122a                0.0400a
                                 (0.00976)               (0.0152)              (0.00883)               (0.0237)               (0.00876)              (0.0128)
Alberta                                        0.65       7.356a                             7.972a      2.943                             4.721a        4.104b
                                              (1.669)    (2.321)                            (1.723)     (2.502)                           (1.499)        (1.690)
Manitoba                                      2.849b      0.637                             -6.958a      5.189a                            12.46a         4.031a
                                              (1.398)    (1.740)                            (1.242)     (1.876)                           (1.011)        (1.295)
black soil                                                10.22a                                        -6.946b                                           1.369
                                                         (3.391)                                        (3.175)                                          (1.935)
dark gray soil                                           -2.783                                         -0.883                                            1.021
                                                         (3.651)                                        (3.717)                                          (2.078)
dark brown soil                                          9.259b                                         -7.868c                                          -10.86a
                                                         (4.118)                                        (4.232)                                          (2.648)
brown soil                                               -4.357                                         -4.783                                           -5.833c
                                                         (4.889)                                        (5.099)                                          (3.153)
constant                13.41a    -11.31       7.943     -40.45a      5.278       50.17a     3.47        119.1a     34.46a     -44.00a     7.569         -26.27b
                       (3.936)    (6.895)     (6.207)    (12.79)     (4.971)     (6.682)    (5.658)     (18.13)    (3.382)     (5.987)    (5.057)        (12.15)
Observations             464        464         464        464         464         464        464         464        464         464        464            464
R-squared               0.130      0.165       0.141      0.459       0.159       0.247      0.307       0.438      0.292       0.565      0.440          0.679
Notes: Freight rates and average distance to the nearest delivery location are measured in terms of change between 1991 and 2001, while soil and weather data
are fixed over time. Soil types are measured as shares, with gray soil excluded. Alberta and Manitoba are province binary variables with the excluded
category being Saskatchewan. Robust standard errors in parentheses, with a , b and c denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Authors' calculations, Statistics Canada.




                                                                                34
Table A4: Effect of higher freight rates on technology adoption, 1991 to 2011
                                         Zero Till                                   Minimum Till                               Conventional Till
                       Model 1 Model 1a Model 1b Model 2 Model 1                 Model 1a Model 1b       Model 2    Model 1    Model 1a Model 1b      Model 2
Δfreightg,2001-1991      1.597a     -0.0532     0.587b     0.972a      -0.663a     0.529a    0.312             a
                                                                                                           0.905     -0.933a
                                                                                                                                 -0.476b
                                                                                                                                            -0.900a
                                                                                                                                                       -1.876a
                        (0.254)     (0.235)    (0.246)    (0.284)      (0.171)    (0.182)   (0.230)       (0.224)    (0.223)     (0.211)    (0.251)    (0.243)
Δdistg,2001-1991         0.117     -0.00177    -0.0401    0.00656     -0.0155     0.0706    0.0251        0.0145     -0.102b     -0.0688     0.015     -0.0211
                       (0.0757) (0.0592) (0.0515) (0.0527) (0.0660)              (0.0484) (0.0537)       (0.0457)   (0.0474)    (0.0500)   (0.0517)   (0.0409)
jan_tempg                                                   2.863a                                       -1.559a                                      -1.304b
                                                           (0.702)                                       (0.559)                                      (0.536)
july_tempg                                                 -0.286                                        -2.912b                                      3.198b
                                                           (1.451)                                       (1.191)                                      (1.557)
precipg                             -0.254a                -0.230a                 0.184a                 0.0742b                0.0704a               0.155a
                                   (0.0208)               (0.0379)                (0.0155)               (0.0314)               (0.0177)              (0.0347)
Alberta                                         5.209c      6.780c                             9.173a    6.607b                             -14.38a   -13.39a
                                               (3.046)     (3.943)                            (2.821)    (2.981)                            (3.154)   (3.722)
Manitoba                                       -36.64a     -18.44a                             18.45a     11.45a                             18.19a   6.993b
                                               (2.685)     (4.599)                            (2.262)    (3.733)                            (2.530)   (3.278)
black soil zone                                             4.797                                        -4.324                                       -0.473
                                                           (5.141)                                       (4.835)                                      (4.200)
dark gray soil zone                                         9.535                                        -4.073                                       -5.462
                                                           (5.826)                                       (5.639)                                      (5.205)
dark brown soil zone                                       -9.610                                        -7.905                                        17.51a
                                                           (6.904)                                       (6.146)                                      (5.767)
brown soil zone                                            -25.96a                                       -8.286                                        34.25a
                                                           (9.129)                                       (7.717)                                      (7.324)
constant                -11.95       151.1a     36.86a      161.7a      23.76a   94.07a       -19.53b    -36.32      -11.81      -57.03a    -17.33c   -125.4a
                        (10.37)     (14.76)    (9.961)     (33.44)     (6.826)     (11.37)    (9.285)    (24.53)     (9.116)     (12.04)    (10.34)   (27.86)
Observations              464         464        464         464         464         464        464        464         464         464        464       464
R-squared                0.094       0.335      0.466       0.539       0.030       0.279      0.156      0.385       0.059       0.091      0.334     0.497
Notes: Freight rates and average distance to the nearest delivery location are measured in terms of change between 1991 and 2001, while soil and weather data
are fixed over time. Soil types are measured as shares, with gray soil excluded. Alberta and Manitoba are province binary variables with the excluded category
being Saskatchewan. Robust standard errors in parentheses, with a , b and c denoting significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Authors' calculations, Statistics Canada.




                                                                                 35
