CRUDE BY RAIL, OPTION VALUE, AND PIPELINE
INVESTMENT
Thomas R. Covert
Ryan Kellogg
WORKING PAPER 23855

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CRUDE BY RAIL, OPTION VALUE, AND PIPELINE INVESTMENT
Thomas R. Covert
Ryan Kellogg
Working Paper 23855
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23855

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation for generous financial support, and we thank seminar
and conference participants at the 2017 NBER Hydrocarbon Infrastructure and Transportation
Conference, 2018 AEA Meeting, 2018 NBER IO Summer Institute, 2018 Winter MarketingEconomics Summit, Iowa State University, Montana State University, Oberlin College, PittCMU, Wharton, UBC, and UC Berkeley for valuable comments. We are grateful to Chris
Bruegge for generously sharing code to process the STB waybill dataset and to Nathan Lash for
valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Thomas R. Covert and Ryan Kellogg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Crude by Rail, Option Value, and Pipeline Investment
Thomas R. Covert and Ryan Kellogg
NBER Working Paper No. 23855
September 2017
JEL No. L13,L71,L95,Q35
ABSTRACT
The U.S. shale boom has profoundly increased crude oil movements by both pipelines–the
traditional mode of transportation–and railroads. This paper develops a model of how pipeline
investment and railroad use are determined in equilibrium, emphasizing how railroads' flexibility
allows them to compete with pipelines. We show that policies that address crude-by-rail's
environmental externalities by increasing its costs should lead to large increases in pipeline
investment and substitution of oil flows from rail to pipe. Similarly, we find that policies
enjoining pipeline construction would cause 80-90% of the displaced oil to flow by rail instead.

Thomas R. Covert
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
thomas.covert@chicagobooth.edu
Ryan Kellogg
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kelloggr@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

Since the mid 2000s, U.S. shale oil production has increased from essentially nothing to more
than 6 million barrels per day (bpd) in 2018.1 At present, shale formations are responsible
for more than half of all U.S. production, vaulting the United States past Russia and Saudi
Arabia to become the largest oil-producing nation (Energy Information Administration,
2018). Because the primary shale oil plays—the Eagle Ford, the Permian, and especially
the Bakken—are located in areas far from refinery infrastructure or coastal export facilities,
crude oil transportation has emerged as a critical issue for the industry. In practice, shale
oil has moved not only by pipeline—the traditional mode for nearly all long-distance oil
transmission since at least WWII (Johnson 1967, p. 327)—but also by railroad. The volumes
and economic stakes are significant. For instance, more than 90% of the Bakken Shale’s
current production of 1.2 million bpd (worth more than $80 million per day) is transported
by pipeline and rail (North Dakota Pipeline Authority 2018).
At the same time, both pipeline and rail transportation of crude oil have attracted substantial controversy and opposition. The Keystone XL and Dakota Access Pipelines have
been the subject of prominent public protests. Neither pipeline was permitted under the
Obama administration, and under the Trump administration only Dakota Access has been
constructed. Crude-by-rail has meanwhile resulted in several high-profile accidents that have
resulted in not only spills but also fatalities (such as the 2013 derailment and explosion of a
Bakken crude oil train in Lac Megantic, Quebec, that killed 47 people).
The primary goals of this paper are to understand the economic forces driving crude oil
shippers’ transportation choices and to quantify how investment in pipeline infrastructure
substitutes with use of crude-by-rail.2 Despite the controversy, externalities, and private
economic value at stake, we are not aware of other work that addresses these questions.
Indeed, the recent rise of crude-by-rail is a puzzle, given its high private cost per barrel
relative to the amortized cost per barrel for pipelines and its provision by a rail industry
that is widely believed to exercise market power in access pricing (Busse and Keohane 2007,
Hughes 2011, Preonas 2017). One common explanation for the rise of crude-by-rail is simply
that the rapid rise in shale oil production outpaced the speed at which new pipeline capacity
could be built, so that producers effectively had no choice but to turn to the railroads. In this
paper, we instead demonstrate that these two technologies should co-exist in equilibrium and
study how they substitute with one another, emphasizing how the flexibility that railroads
1

Up-to-date
shale
play-level
production
data
are
available
from
the
EIA
at
https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/data/U.S.%20tight%20oil%20production.xlsx.
2
Throughout this paper, we follow transportation industry terminology by referring to pipeline and rail
customers as shippers. The pipelines and railroads themselves are known as carriers, not shippers.

1

provide to crude oil shippers allows railroads to successfully compete with pipelines despite
their higher costs. Because rail infrastructure already exists between the upper Midwest and
nearly every major refining center in the country, the cost of shipping crude by rail is largely
variable, so that rail shippers can avoid costs by choosing not to ship. Pipeline shippers do
not have this ability, since pipeline construction costs are entirely sunk and require up-front
commitment from shippers. Moreover, rail allows shippers to decide not just whether but
where to move crude oil, so that they can actively respond to changes in upstream and
downstream oil prices. Industry observers often make this point. For instance, a 2013 Wall
Street Journal article attributed the lack of shipper interest in a proposed crude oil pipeline
from West Texas to California to a preference for the flexibility afforded by rail transport
(Lefebvre, May 23, 2013).
Our interest in the rise of crude-by-rail is motivated in part by its substantial unpriced
externalities. Clay, Jha, Muller and Walsh (2017) estimates that external damages associated with railroad transportation of crude oil from the Bakken to the Gulf Coast are $2.02
per barrel—roughly 20% of the private transportation cost—owing primarily to freight locomotives’ NOx emissions.3 Overall, Clay et al. (2017) estimates that air pollution damages
from rail movements are nearly twice those from pipeline transportation and are also much
larger than damages from spills and accidents. These estimates raise questions about how
policies intended to reduce these externalities, by raising the cost of rail transport, would
affect investments in pipeline capacity and the volume of oil flow that would substitute away
from rail to pipelines.4 They also raise the question of how, conversely, regulatory or political foreclosure of pipeline construction would impact crude-by-rail flows, exacerbating rail’s
externalities. One goal of our paper is to provide quantitative answers to these questions.
We are further motivated by our belief that understanding substitution between pipeline
and rail transportation is interesting in its own right, both because the rise of crude-by-rail
is one of the most significant developments in the U.S. oil industry in decades, and because
the model we develop captures intuition that is applicable to other settings in which a lowcost but inflexible investment can substitute for a high-cost, flexible one.5 For instance, the
3

See table 2 in Clay et al. (2017), noting that there are 42 gallons in a barrel.
In fact, a 2008 EPA rule requires a large reduction in emission rates from newly-built locomotives
beginning in 2015 (Federal Register, June 30, 2008. Vol 73, No. 126, p. 37096.).
5
In spite of the analysis presented here, there are several reasons why crude-by-rail did not
occur at large scale between World War II and the shale boom.
First, U.S. crude oil production declined in essentially all major producing basins from the early 1970s until 2008, so
that existing pipeline capacity was sufficient to convey production until the shale boom.
(Exceptions include the Alaska North Slope and the deepwater Gulf of Mexico, where rail infrastructure does not exist.
See https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet crd crpdn adc mbblpd a.htm and
https://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/crudeoilreserves/top100/pdf/top100.pdf for data.) Second, while U.S. oil
production grew steadily between WWII and 1970, a number of factors in that era favored pipelines over rail.
4

2

logic by which relative costs and future demand uncertainty affect pipeline investment also
applies to investments in infrastructure such as urban light rail (which substitutes with more
flexible buses), natural gas distribution lines (which substitute with more flexible heating
oil delivery), baseload electric power stations (which substitute with more flexible gas-fired
peaker units), and zero marginal cost (but non-dispatchable) renewable power sources.6
These tradeoffs between cost and flexibility also have a parallel in the finance literature that
examines the relative returns of investments in illiquid versus liquid assets (see, for instance,
Amihud and Mendelson 1986 and Pástor and Stambaugh 2003).
To quantify how changes in the costs and benefits of crude-by-rail impact pipeline investment, and how barriers to pipeline investment affect rail flows, we develop a model in
which crude oil shippers can use pipelines or rail to physically arbitrage oil price differences
between an upstream supply source and downstream markets, where the oil price is stochastic.7 Pipeline transportation has large fixed costs with potentially significant economies of
scale and negligible variable costs. This cost structure is similar to many other “natural
monopoly” industries, and as a result the maximum tariff that pipelines can charge to shippers is regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission under cost-of-service rules
with common carrier access. Shippers finance pipeline construction by signing long-term
(e.g., 10-year) “ship-or-pay” contracts that commit them to paying a fixed tariff per barrel
of capacity reserved, whether they actually use the capacity or not, thereby allowing the
pipeline to recover its capital expense. Importantly, pipeline shippers must make this commitment knowing only the distribution of possible downstream prices that may be realized
Policies such as oil import restrictions and state-level control of production levels (especially by the Texas
Railroad Commission) actively worked to maintain U.S. oil price stability, reducing incentives to use flexible
transportation (see p.68-9 of Cookenboo 1955; pp.377, 427-8, and 475 of Johnson 1967; and p.12-3 of Smiley
1993). Pipelines were primarily owned by vertically integrated oil majors rather than independent carriers,
since federal regulators interpreted common carry regulation as forbidding third-party capacity contracts
(see pp.368-70, 462, 471, and 476 of Johnson 1967 and pp.113-4 of Makholm 2012). Independent shippers
did use oil pipelines at posted tariff rates; however, rate regulators during this area are widely believed to
have let pipelines earn excess returns (see pp.99 and 111-12 of Cookenboo 1955; pp.407-12, 450, and 473 of
Johnson 1967; pp.90-97 of Spavins 1979; and p.116 of Makholm 2012). These excess returns would in turn
generate incentives to invest in excess capacity (Averch and Johnson, 1962). Finally, rail service prior to the
1980 Staggers Act was tightly federally regulated, with generally higher rates and lower-quality service than
is the case today (Burton 1993, Winston 2005).
6
Prior work, such as Borenstein (2005), has studied the equilibrium allocation between baseload and
peaker electric generation, though without building the intuition developed here.
7
An alternative, “reduced form” strategy for evaluating the impact of railroads on pipeline construction
would be to collect data on pipeline investments and then run regressions to estimate how geographic or
temporal variation in railroad transportation costs and railroad use have affected investment. This strategy
is impractical, however, since: (1) pipeline investments are infrequent and lumpy (for instance, there have
only been three de novo pipelines constructed out of the Bakken since the shale boom: Enbridge Bakken,
Double H, and Dakota Access North Dakota Pipeline Authority 2017); and (2) variation in railroad costs
and utilization is driven by many of the same variables that impact pipeline investment (upstream and
downstream crude oil prices, for instance) and is therefore endogenous.

3

during the duration of the contract. If the realized downstream crude oil price is sufficiently
high to induce enough upstream production to fill the line to capacity, the resulting wedge
between the upstream and downstream prices is the pipeline shippers’ reward for their commitment.
In our model, rail provides non-pipeline shippers with a means to arbitrage upstream
versus downstream price differences without making a long-term commitment. Instead,
rail shippers simply pay a variable cost of transportation (that exceeds the pipeline tariff)
whenever they ship crude by rail, which they can decide to do (or not do) after they observe
the realized downstream price. This flexibility generates option value, which is further
enhanced by the ability of railroads to reach multiple destinations, not just the destination
served by the pipeline. A key insight from our model is that the ability to arbitrage crude
oil price differences via rail limits the returns that can be earned by pipeline shippers, since
spatial oil price differences become bounded by the cost of railroad transportation. Thus,
the availability of the rail option reduces shippers’ incentive to commit to pipeline capacity.
Pipeline capacity in our model is determined by an equilibrium condition in which the
marginal shipper is indifferent between committing to the pipeline and relying on railroad
transportation. Because the marginal return to pipeline investment is decreasing in the
pipeline’s capacity (since a larger pipeline is congested less frequently), the model yields a
unique equilibrium level of capacity commitment. We show that the equilibrium capacity
increases with the cost of railroad transportation, and we derive an expression that relates the
magnitude of this key sensitivity to estimable objects such as the distribution of downstream
oil prices, the elasticity of upstream oil supply, and the cost of pipeline investment.
We use our model to quantify the impacts of crude oil transportation policies on pipeline
and rail use, using the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL) as a case study. We calibrate the
model using a variety of sources to match the economic conditions prevailing in June, 2014,
when DAPL received firm commitments from its shippers (the line was completed in June,
2017, with a capacity of 520,000 bpd). We use data on downstream crude prices on the
U.S. West, Gulf, and East Coasts to estimate the future distribution of crude prices that
shippers faced. We obtain data on crude-by-rail flows from the U.S. Energy Information
Administration and show that these flows are responsive to price differentials, albeit with a
lag of several months to two years. This lag motivates a specification of our model in which
rail movements use short-term contracts rather than flow freely on spot markets. We obtain
railroad cost data from the U.S. Surface Transportation Board and from Genscape (a private
industry intelligence firm) to estimate railroad transportation costs as a function of volumes
shipped. These cost data show that rates charged for rail transportation, rail car leases,
and possibly other services (such as terminal fees) co-vary modestly with shipping volumes,
4

consistent with the presence of scarcity rents or market power in these markets. Finally, to
obtain an upstream supply curve for Bakken crude oil, we use elasticity estimates from the
literature on shale oil and gas (Hausman and Kellogg 2015, Newell, Prest and Vissing 2016,
Newell and Prest 2017, and Smith and Lee 2017).
After calibrating our model using these inputs, we validate it by solving for the pipeline
tariff that is implied by an equilibrium in which shippers choose to commit to the actual
DAPL capacity. The implied tariffs from our model are quite close to the actual published
DAPL tariff of $5.50–$6.25/bbl for 10-year committed shippers (Gordon, 2017), depending
on the specification used and on the assumed parameters. This result gives us confidence
that our model, stylized as it may be, captures the relevant economic forces that determine
crude oil transportation choices.
In light of the unpriced externalities associated with crude-by-rail, we first use our model
to ask how much larger DAPL would be in a world where rail shippers were forced to
internalize these externalities. We find that a $2 per barrel increase in the cost of rail
transportation, consistent with the externalities estimated in Clay et al. (2017), results in
an increase in equilibrium pipeline capacity of between 64,000 and 150,000 bpd, relative to
the actual DAPL capacity of 520,000 bpd (and total Bakken pipeline export capacity of
1.283 million bpd). These effects are likely to be lower bounds, as they do not account for
economies of scale in pipeline construction. Moreover, we show that these capacity changes
are associated with large decreases in rail shipments: the estimated elasticity of rail flows
to rail per-barrel costs ranges from -0.9 to -2.2 across our specifications. In contrast, this
elasticity takes a value of only -0.2 when we hold pipeline capacity fixed. Thus, policies
that increase the cost of rail transport—such as regulations targeting rail’s environmental
externalities—may increase pipeline investment and induce economically significant long-run
substitution from railroads to pipelines.
Next, we ask how much more rail transportation would be used in a world with stricter
pipeline regulation. We find that, were construction of the 520,000 bpd DAPL prevented,
crude-by-rail flows would increase by 303,000 to 417,000 bpd, depending on the specification.
These increases in rail flows are between 82% and 91% of the decreases in pipeline flows.8
Thus, we conclude that foreclosure of pipeline construction, in the presence of a rail option,
leads to a substantial increase in rail use, even though the substitution is not perfectly
one-for-one.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our model of pipeline
investment in the presence of a crude-by-rail option. Section 3 then describes our data and
8

Because the pipeline does not always flow at capacity, pipeline flows in our model decrease by 369,000
to 459,000 bpd rather than the full 520,000 bpd.

5

model calibration. Section 4 follows with a discussion of the empirical relationship between
rail flows and oil price differentials, and it describes how we use this relationship to inform
a version of our model in which rail shipments require short-term contracts. We discuss the
validation of our model in section 5. Section 6 then presents our results on the effects of
crude oil transportation policies. Section 7 concludes.

2

A model of pipeline investment in the presence of a
rail option

This section presents a model that captures what we believe are the essential tradeoffs
between pipeline and railroad transportation of crude oil. The central tension in the model
is the balance between the low cost of pipeline transportation and the flexibility afforded by
rail. Our aim is to capture how factors such as transportation costs and expectations about
future prices for crude oil affect firms’ decisions, on the margin, to invest in pipeline capacity
or rely on the railroads.
We begin by building intuition with a simple version of our model in which there is only a
single destination that can be reached by pipeline or rail. We then expand the model to allow
for the possibility that rail can be used to flexibly deliver crude to alternative destinations
when those destinations yield higher returns.

2.1

Setup of single destination model

The simplest version of our model involves a single “upstream” destination that supplies
crude oil and a single “downstream” destination where oil is demanded. Transportation
decisions are made by shippers who purchase crude oil at the upstream location, pay for
pipeline or railroad transportation service, and then sell the oil at the downstream location.
The essential difference between the two modes of transportation is that construction of the
pipeline—the cost of which is completely sunk and must be financed by pipeline shippers’
commitments—must occur before the level of downstream demand is realized. Railroad
shippers, on the other hand, can decide whether or not to use the railroad after observing
downstream demand.
The model assumes that rail shippers use spot crude and transportation markets, so
that rail volumes respond immediately to price variation. As we show in sections 3.3 and 4,
however, rail flows in practice follow price movements with a lag of up to two years, owing
to contracts among shippers and transporters. In section 4.2 we discuss how we augment
the model presented here to account for these contracts.
6

We model shippers as atomistic, so that they are price takers in both the upstream
and downstream crude oil markets, and in the market for transportation services. This
assumption is motivated by the large number of potential parties who may act as shippers:
upstream producers, downstream refiners, and speculative traders. The equilibrium level of
pipeline investment is then governed by an indifference condition in which, on the margin,
shippers’ expected per-barrel return to committing to the pipeline equals the amortized
per-barrel cost of the line (which is then the pipeline’s tariff for firm capacity).
We now derive this equilibrium condition and examine the forces that govern it. Begin
with the following definitions:
• Let S(Q) denote the upstream inverse net supply curve for crude oil. Q denotes the
total volume of oil exported from upstream to downstream. In the context of North
Dakota, this curve represents supply of crude oil from the Bakken formation net of
local crude demand. S 0 (Q) > 0. (For brevity, we henceforth refer to S(Q) as the
supply curve rather than “inverse net supply”.) Let Pu = S(Q) denote the upstream
oil price.
• The downstream market at the pipeline terminus (e.g., a coastal destination that can
access the global waterborne crude oil market) is sufficiently large that demand is
perfectly elastic at the downstream price Pd . Pd is stochastic with a distribution given
by F (Pd ), with support [P , P ].9
• K denotes pipeline capacity. The cost of capacity is given by C(K), with C 0 (K) > 0
and C 00 (K) ≤ 0. Shippers that commit to the pipeline must pay, for each unit of
capacity committed to, the average cost C(K)/K, thereby allowing the pipeline to
recover its costs (C(K) implicitly includes the pipeline’s regulated rate of return).
Given capacity, the marginal cost of shipping crude on the pipeline up to the capacity
constraint is zero.10
• Let Qp denote the volume of crude shipped by pipe, and let Qr denote the volume of
crude shipped by rail. Q = Qp + Qr .
• The marginal cost of shipping by rail is given by r(Qr ), where r0 ≡ r(0) > 0 and
r0 (Qr ) ≥ 0.
9

In some specifications we implement, we also allow for uncertainty in upstream supply. See section 3.5.
This zero marginal cost assumption reflects the fact that the marginal cost of pumping an additional
barrel of oil per day through a pipeline is quite small relative to the amortized cost of constructing a marginal
barrel per day of pipeline capacity.
10

7

Given a pipeline capacity K, the pipeline and rail flows Qp and Qr are determined by
the realization of the downstream price Pd . For very low values of Pd , little crude oil is
supplied by upstream producers, and the pipeline is not filled to capacity (Q = Qp < K).
Arbitrage then implies that Pu = Pd . Because the upstream supply curve is strictly upwardsloping, increases in Pd lead to increases in quantity supplied, eventually filling the pipeline to
capacity. Let Pp (K) = S(K) denote the minimum downstream price such that the pipeline
is full.
For downstream prices Pd > Pp (K), no more oil can flow through the pipeline, but rail
may be used. Crude oil volumes will move over the railroad only to the extent that the
differential between Pd and Pu covers the marginal cost r(Qr ) of railroad transport. Define
Pr (K) as the minimum downstream oil price such that railroad transportation is used. This
price is defined by Pr (K) = Pp (K) + r0 . Thus, there is an interval of downstream prices,
[Pp (K), Pr (K)], for which pipeline flow Qp = K, rail flow Qr = 0, and the upstream price is
fixed at Pp (K). For downstream prices that strictly exceed Pr (K), railroad volumes will be
strictly positive and determined by the arbitrage condition Pu = S(K + Qr ) = Pd − r(Qr ).
This arbitrage condition implies a function Qr (Pd ) that governs how rail flows increase with
Pd when Pd > Pr (K).

2.2

Equilibrium pipeline capacity in the single destination model

Consider a simple two-period version of our model. In period 1, prospective shippers decide
whether to make ship-or-pay commitments to the pipeline. Then in period 2, the pipeline is
completed with a capacity equal to the total commitment, Pd is realized, and shippers can
decide whether to also ship crude by rail.
Prospective shippers will be willing to make the up-front investment in the pipeline if
the expected return from owning the right to use pipeline capacity meets or exceeds the
investment cost. This cost, on the margin, is simply the average per-barrel cost C(K)/K.
The expected return to pipeline capacity is given by the expected basis differential Pd − Pu .
Figure 1 provides the intuition for how this expected return depends on capacity K, the
rail cost function r(Qr ), and the distribution F (Pd ). When the downstream price Pd is less
than Pp (K), the return to capacity is zero because the pipeline is not full and Pu = Pd . For
Pd ∈ [Pp (K), Pr (K)], the return Pd − Pu falls on the 45◦ line, since rail flows are zero and
Pu is therefore fixed at Pp (K). Finally, for Pd > Pr (K), the basis differential is simply equal
to the cost of railroad transportation r(Qr ), since arbitrage by rail shippers equates Pd − Pu
to r(Qr ). When Pd > Pr (K), the differential Pd − Pu strictly increases with Pd , as shown in

8

Figure 1: Expected return achieved by pipeline shippers
Return per barrel
shipped via pipeline
45º

𝑟0

Pp(K)

Pd

Pr(K)

Qp < K, Qr = 0 Qp = K, Qr = 0

Qp = K, Qr > 0

Note: Pd denotes the downstream price, with distribution F (Pd ). Qp and Qr
denote crude oil pipeline and rail flows, respectively. r0 denotes the intercept of
the rail marginal cost function r(Qr ). The shaded area, probability-weighted by
F (Pd ), represents the expected return to a pipeline with capacity K.

figure 1, iff r0 (Qr ) > 0.11
The expected return to pipeline shippers is then given by the shaded area in figure 1,
weighted by the probability distribution F (Pd ). The equilibrium capacity K will balance
this expected return (which decreases in K) against the pipeline’s average cost of C(K)/K.
Figure 1 also illustrates how the presence of the option to use rail transportation weakens
the incentive to increase pipeline capacity. Absent rail, the expected return to a pipeline of
capacity K would be the entire triangle between the horizontal axis and the 45◦ line, rather
than just the shaded trapezoid shown in the figure.
Formally, the condition that governs the equilibrium capacity level is given by equation
(1), where the first term on the right-hand side captures returns to pipeline shippers when
the pipeline is at capacity but rail is not used, and the second term captures returns when
11

The relation between Pd − Pu and Pd need not be affine, as shown in the figure.

9

Pd is sufficiently high that the pipeline is at capacity and rail flows are strictly positive:
C(K)
=
K

Z

Pr (K)

Z

P

(Pd − Pp (K))dF (Pd ) +
Pp (K)

r(Qr (Pd ))dF (Pd ).

(1)

Pr (K)

Even though we assume that shippers are atomistic, the equilibrium pipeline investment
implied by equation (1) will differ from the socially optimal investment if there are returns
to scale in pipeline construction. Social welfare is maximized when the expected return to
shipping crude oil via pipeline is equated to the marginal cost of construction C 0 (K), not
average cost C(K)/K. In the presence of scale economies, C 0 (K) < C(K)/K so that the
optimal pipeline capacity K ∗ is strictly greater than the equilibrium capacity from equation
(1). This divergence between market and socially optimal investment in the presence of
increasing returns to scale is driven by average-cost regulation of pipeline tariffs and is
emblematic of rate regulation in many natural monopoly settings.
Our model illuminates the comparative static of primary interest in this paper: how
does pipeline capacity investment respond to changes in the cost of rail transportation?
Figure 2 provides the intuition. Consider a pipeline project that, facing a railroad cost curve
with intercept r0 , would attract equilibrium commitments from shippers for a capacity of
K. Now suppose that the rail cost intercept were instead r00 > r0 . This increase in rail
transportation cost increases the basis differential realized by pipeline shippers whenever
rail transportation is used, as indicated in the upper, striped area. This increase in expected
return then increases shippers’ willingness to commit to capacity, so that equilibrium pipeline
capacity must increase. The new capacity level K 0 balances the increase in expected return
when rail is used against the decrease in expected return caused by the reduced probability
that the pipeline is fully utilized (represented by the lower shaded area in figure 2).
Formally, we obtain the comparative static dK/dr0 by applying the implicit function
theorem to equation (1).12 To simplify the problem, we assume that the railroad marginal
cost function is affine: r(Qr ) = r0 + r1 Qr . We then obtain:13
dK
=
dr0

d C(K)
dK K

RP
1 − F (Pr (K)) − Pr (K) P 0 (K+Qrr1(Pd ))+r1 dF (Pd )
.
R P (K)
RP
0 (K+Q (P ))
r
d
+ Ppr(K) S 0 (K)dF (Pd ) + Pr (K) r1 S 0S(K+Q
dF
(P
)
d
r (Pd ))+r1

(2)

In the simple case in which r1 = 0 and C(K) exhibits constant returns to scale, this
12

To derive equation (2), we also apply the implicit function theorem to the arbitrage condition S(K +
Qr ) = Pd − r(Qr ) that defines the rail flow function Qr (Pd ).
13
Note that the term involving the derivative of Pp (K) is equal to zero, and the terms involving the
derivative of Pr (K) cancel.

10

Figure 2: Comparative static: equilibrium capacity varies with rail cost intercept r0
Return per barrel
shipped via pipeline

𝑟0′

𝑟0
Increase in expected pipeline
return due to higher rail cost

Decrease in expected pipeline return
due to higher pipeline capacity

Pd

Pp(K) Pp(K′)

Note: Pd denotes the downstream price, with distribution F (Pd ). K denotes
equilibrium pipeline capacity when the rail cost curve has intercept r0 ; K 0 denotes
equilibrium pipeline capacity when the rail cost curve has intercept r00 .

expression reduces to:
1 − F (Pr (K)) 1
dK
= R Pr (K)
.
0
dr0
dF (Pd ) P (K)

(3)

Pp (K)

In words, dK/dr0 is then the ratio of the probability rail is used and the probability that the
pipeline capacity constraint binds but rail is not used, multiplied by the inverse of the slope
of the supply curve at K. The intuition for this expression is that: (1) if rail is likely to be
used, shocks to r0 are costly, so the optimal K will be sensitive to such shocks; (2) if there
is a low probability that the pipe is full but no rail is being used, the returns to capacity
do not rapidly diminish in K, so shocks to r0 can yield large changes in the optimal K; and
(3) if the upstream supply curve is steep, then the response of supply to transportation cost
shocks is low, so that increases in r0 do not call for large increases in K.
When r1 > 0, the terms involving r1 reduce the numerator of equation (2) and increase
the denominator, so that the sensitivity of K to r0 is reduced. Intuitively, large values of
r1 reduce the option value of rail transportation, so that pipeline economics are then less
sensitive to shocks to railroad transportation costs. Finally, when there are increasing returns

11

to scale, so that d(C(K)/K)/dK < 0, dK/dr0 will be larger than in the case of constant
returns.
Expression (2) also clarifies that the following information is required to obtain an estimate of dK/dr0 :
1. The distribution F (Pd ) of downstream crude oil prices at the time that shippers make
commitments.
2. The slope (or elasticity) of the upstream crude oil supply curve S(Q).
3. The parameters r0 and r1 that govern the railroad transportation cost function r(Qr ).
4. The cost structure of pipeline construction; i.e., C(K).
Section 3 discusses our calibration of these parameters, which uses estimates from our
own calculations as well as estimates from prior studies. Our numerical implementation also
models each month of the 10-year shipper commitment as a separate period, thereby allowing
the distribution F (Pd ) to vary over the life of the commitment. Our calculation of the
expected return to pipeline shippers is then the average of the expected returns over all 120
months of the commitment period.14 As a consequence, we evaluate the derivative dK/dr0
numerically rather than use equation (2). Appendix E provides details on the computation
of the model.

2.3

Modeling multiple railroad destinations

This section considers how the spatial option value afforded by railroads affects the tradeoff
shippers face between pipeline and railroad transportation. We augment the model described above by allowing for multiple downstream destinations at which crude oil prices
are imperfectly correlated with Pd , the price at the location served by the pipeline. Railroad shippers can deliver crude to these locations after observing the realized price at each,
whereas shippers on the pipeline can only deliver crude to the pipeline destination.
Specifically, we make the following changes to the model presented in section 2.1:
• Let P̃ denote the maximum of the set of prices across all downstream locations (demand
for Bakken crude is perfectly elastic at each location), and let F (P̃ | Pd ) denote the
distribution of P̃ conditional on Pd (where Pd again denotes the downstream price at
the destination served by the pipeline). By construction, P̃ ≥ Pd .
14

We weight each period’s expected return by its discount factor back to the date of the commitment.

12

• Assume that the cost of shipping by rail to any location is identical and given by r(Qr )
as described in section 2.1. This assumption implies that rail shippers will send all rail
volumes to the downstream location with the highest price and thereby obtain P̃ . We
discuss violations of this prediction in our data in section 4.
• Assume that P̃ − Pd is bounded above by r0 . This assumption implies that there will
be no railroad shipments to any location whenever the pipeline does not operate at full
capacity. This assumption substantially simplifies the model. We discuss its empirical
validity in section 3.2.3.
Appendix D derives the conditions that determine the equilibrium pipeline capacity K
and its sensitivity to r0 in this multiple rail destination model. Because rail transportation is
more valuable when it can service destinations other than the pipeline terminus, equilibrium
pipeline capacity is smaller than in the case in which rail can only serve a single destination.
In addition, the sensitivity of pipeline capacity to the cost of railroad transportation, dK/dr0 ,
is larger than in the single destination model, since there is a reduced probability that the
pipeline is full but rail is not used.
This model requires additional calibration relative to the single destination model. Beyond just needing the distribution of the pipeline downstream price F (Pd ), we also require
an estimate of F (Pe | Pd ). We discuss the estimation of this distribution in section 3.2.3.
Computational details are provided in appendix E.2.

3

Data and calibration

To quantify the amount of substitution between pipelines and railroads, we calibrate our
model to the recently constructed Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL). This section summarizes
the key facts on DAPL’s construction and our procedures for estimating the distribution of
future downstream prices anticipated by shippers, the cost function for crude-by-rail, and
the upstream oil supply elasticity. Additional detail is provided in appendix B.

3.1

Dakota Access Pipeline facts

We calibrate our model to fit market conditions in June, 2014, when DAPL received firm
commitments from its eventual customers (Energy Transfer Partners LP, 2014a). At this
time, the Brent crude oil price was $112/bbl and expected to remain high: the three-year
Brent futures price was $99/bbl.15 Per Biracree (October 18, 2016) and North Dakota
15

We use futures price data from Quandl, downloaded from https://www.quandl.com/collections/
futures/ice-brent-crude-oil-futures. Contracts were not actively traded beyond a three year horizon.

13

Pipeline Authority (2017), existing local refining capacity was (and remains) 88 thousand
bpd (mbpd), and other Bakken export pipeline capacity was 763 mbpd.16
DAPL was put into service in June, 2017 with a capacity of 520 mbpd and a reported
construction cost of $4.78 billion (Energy Transfer Partners LP, 2017).17 It is difficult to be
certain, however, of the volume of capacity to which shippers committed in June, 2014. For
one, the official June, 2014 announcement of shippers’ commitments stated a volume of 320
mbpd (Energy Transfer Partners LP, 2014a), though by September, 2014 DAPL announced
executed precedent agreements with shippers supporting a capacity of 450 mbpd (Energy
Transfer Partners LP 2014b and Phillips 66 2014). Second, back in 2012 a competing project,
the Sandpiper Pipeline, had secured shipper commitments for a 225 mbpd line from the
Bakken to Lake Superior (Enbridge Energy Partners LP 2012 and Enbridge Energy Partners
LP 2015). This project was beset by environmental permitting delays in Minnesota and was
postponed indefinitely in September, 2016 after Enbridge (Sandpiper’s main owner) and
Marathon (Sandpiper’s “anchor shipper”) invested in DAPL and cancelled their Sandpiper
shipping agreement (Shaffer September 12, 2014, Marathon Petroleum Corporation 2016,
and Darlymple August 7, 2016). It is not clear to what extent Sandpiper’s demise was
foreseen in June, 2014, when shippers initially committed to DAPL. The reference case
calibration of our model assumes a committed capacity of 520 mbpd, equal to the DAPL
capacity actually constructed and approximately equal to the total DAPL plus Sandpiper
capacity that had been announced by June, 2014 (320 mbpd for DAPL and 225 mbpd for
Sandpiper).18 As sensitivities, we will also examine results based on assumed capacities of
320, 450, and 570 mbpd.19

3.2
3.2.1

Crude oil prices
Price data

We obtained data on spot market crude oil prices from Bloomberg and Platts.20 We use the
price of Bakken crude at Clearbrook, MN as the “upstream” market price, and we use prices
for Brent, Louisiana Light Sweet (LLS), and Alaska North Slope (ANS) as benchmark prices
16

This figure includes a planned 24 mbpd expansion of the Double H pipeline that was completed in 2016.
Construction cost includes $1 billion for the Energy Transfer Crude Oil Pipeline (ETCO) from Patoka,
IL to Nederland, TX on the Gulf Coast.
18
The increase in DAPL capacity from 450 to 520 mbpd occurred following a supplemental open season
held in early 2017 (Energy Transfer Partners LP, 2017).
19
DAPL was built with the ability to expand to 570 mbpd, and it initiated an open season on the incremental 50 mbpd in March, 2018 (Darlymple August 7, 2016 and Energy Transfer Partners LP 2018).
20
We use Bloomberg prices for Brent, WTI, ANS, and LLS; and we use Platts prices for Clearbrook.
Though Bloomberg does publish a Clearbrook price series, the Clearbrook series from Platts starts on May
4, 2010, five months earlier than the series from Bloomberg.
17

14

Figure 3: Crude oil spot prices
150
Brent (East Coast)

$/bbl

100

50

2000

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

25

$/bbl

0

−25
−50

Coastal Differences to Brent
ANS (West Coast)
LLS (Gulf Coast)

2000

$/bbl

25
0

−25
−50

Midcontinent Differences to Brent
Clearbrook (ND/MN)
WTI (Cushing, OK)

2000

Note: The top panel shows the spot price for Brent crude delivered to New York harbor. The middle panel
shows the difference between prices at coastal markets (ANS, LLS) and Brent. The bottom panel shows the
difference between prices at mid-continent markets (Clearbrook, WTI) and Brent. All three panels show
daily data between Janary, 1997 and December, 2016.

for U.S. East Coast, Gulf Coast, and West Coast “downstream” destinations, respectively.21
We also use the price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) at the Cushing, OK pipeline and
storage hub as another destination.
Figure 3 plots these spot price data, aggregated to the monthly level, over 1997–2016. The
top panel shows the time series of the benchmark Brent price and illustrates the substantial
oil price decrease that occurred during the second half of 2014. The middle panel of figure 3
shows that prices at the three coastal destinations are tightly correlated, typically differing
by no more than a few $/bbl over the last 20 years. Moreover, no single destination has
21

Because Bakken crude oil is quite light relative to ANS, the ANS benchmark may understate the value
of Bakken crude on the West Coast (ANS crude is 32 API and 0.96% sulfur, and Bakken is 43.3 API and
0.07% sulfur (S&P Global Platts, 2017)). Because LLS and Heavy Louisiana Sweet (HLS) are comparable
to Bakken and ANS, respectively (LLS crude is 38.4 API and 0.388% sulfur, and HLS crude is 33.4 API
and 0.416% sulfur (S&P Global Platts, 2017)), we add the historic average price difference between LLS and
HLS, equal to $0.53/bbl, to the ANS price series in all of our calculations. We calculate this price difference
over January 6, 1988 (the first date at which both prices are available from Bloomberg) through December
31, 2016.

15

a consistent price advantage over another. In contrast, the bottom panel of figure 3 shows
that the prices at Clearbrook and Cushing were substantially discounted relative to coastal
destinations from 2011–2014.
3.2.2

Calibration of downstream oil price distribution for pipeline shippers

To calculate the expected return to pipeline shippers, our model requires an estimate of the
distribution F (Pd ) of future downstream prices that these shippers face over the duration of
their ship-or-pay commitments, which extend 13 years into the future (covering the 10-year
commitments and a 3-year construction period). We assume a lognormal distribution for Pd ,
which requires us to specify a mean and variance for each month of shippers’ commitment
period. Although DAPL sends oil to the U.S. Gulf Coast, where the relevant price is LLS,
we use the three-year Brent (East Coast) futures price of $99/bbl to measure the expected
price E[Pd ] faced by DAPL shippers throughout their commitment period, since there is no
LLS futures market and since the Brent and LLS prices have historically been quite close
(figure 3).22
We use three approaches to estimate the variance of Pd,t for each month t of shippers’
commitment, where t ranges from 37 months (the start of pipeline service) to 156 months
(13 years; i.e., contract expiration). Estimates from each of these approaches are presented
in figure 7 in appendix B.2. In our baseline specification, we assume that shippers’ expected
price volatility over a t-month horizon is given by the historic Brent oil price volatility over
a t-month horizon.23 We estimate that historic volatility increases substantially over the 37
month to 13 year horizon, from 45% to 129%. Our second method for estimating future
price volatility uses implied volatility from crude oil futures options markets, as in Kellogg
(2014). Implied volatility in June, 2014 (when DAPL firm contracts were signed) was low
relative to the historical average, so these volatility estimates are lower than in our baseline
specification. We interpret them as plausible lower bounds, since they assume that volatility
will not eventually revert to its long-run mean. Third, and finally, we take the historic onemonth horizon Brent volatility from our baseline approach and extrapolate it to longer time
horizons under the assumption that oil prices follow a random walk. The volatilities from
this approach are larger than our baseline volatilities, and we interpret them as a plausible
upper bound.
22

We use three-year futures price to measure the long-run expected price 10 years in the future, rather
than extrapolate or forecast long-run price changes, because the literature on long-run oil-price forecasting
suggests that the martingale assumption typically leads to the smallest forecast errors (Alquist, Kilian and
Vigfusson, 2013).
23
Volatility at each horizon t is calculated by taking the standard deviation of t-month differences in the
logged Brent front-month price, exponentiating, subtracting 1, and multiplying by 100.

16

3.2.3

Calibration of downstream oil price distribution for rail shippers

We use the history of daily prices for Brent, LLS, WTI, and ANS to compute Pe (the maximum of the downstream prices accessible by rail) and its empirical conditional density
f (Pe | Pd ), now treating Pd as the LLS price. Though the model from section 2.3 assumes
that shipments to all rail destinations face a common cost r0 , our cost data, discussed in
section 3.4, show some differences on the order of a few dollars per barrel. To incorporate
these differences in shipping costs, we revise our definition of what rail shippers earn to
Pe = maxi {Pi − r0,i }. Thus, Pe is the best netback (as opposed to best downstream price) a
rail shipper could receive. We then define the pricing difference D = Pe − (Pd − r0,d ) as the
amount by which the best rail netback exceeds a rail netback to LLS (the pipeline terminus).
Appendix B.2.2, figure 8 presents our estimates of the density f (D | Pd ), which includes
a point mass at D = 0 (which occurs whenever the best netback is to LLS). Consistent with
the raw price series presented in figure 3, our estimate of f (D | Pd ) implies that D is often
zero and rarely takes on a value exceeding a few $/bbl. For instance, at Pd = $99/bbl, our
estimate of E[D | Pd = 99] is $2.15/bbl.

3.3

Crude-by-rail flows

We obtained data on monthly regional crude-by-rail flows from the EIA.24 Figure 4 presents
data on crude oil rail shipments from the Midwest region (which includes North Dakota and
the Cushing, OK WTI pricing hub) to the East Coast, Gulf Coast, and West Coast, as well
as within-Midwest shipments.25 Volumes are dominated by shipments to the coasts rather
than intra-Midwest shipments, in accordance with both the depressed WTI price early in
the sample and the fact that rail transport to Cushing competed with pipelines, whereas
transportation to the coasts did not. Shipments to the coasts rise substantially beginning in
2012, plateau in late 2014, and then fall substantially. The rise and fall of crude-by-rail is
consistent with the rise and fall in spatial price differentials shown in the third panel of figure
3, though changes in rail volumes follow changes in price differentials with a non-trivial lag.
This lag is consistent with the presence of contracting in the crude-by-rail market; section 4
will use these data to make inferences about the average contract duration and then develop
a version of our pipeline investment model that accounts for rail contracts.
24

The EIA’s crude-by-rail data are available online at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/PET_MOVE_
RAILNA_A_EPC0_RAIL_MBBL_M.htm.
25
Regions are defined as Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts (PADDs). A map of PADDs is
presented in figure 9 in appendix B.3.

17

Rail flows, thousand bbl/day

Figure 4: Crude-by-rail monthly volumes shipped from the Midwest region

400

300

200

100

0
2010

2012

East Coast

2014

Gulf Coast

Midwest Region

2016

West Coast

Source: EIA. Regions are defined as Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts (PADDs); see text and
appendix B.3.

3.4
3.4.1

Railroad transportation costs
Railroad cost data

We obtained data on the rates charged by railroads to transport crude oil from the Surface
Transportation Board (STB). The STB is the United States’s regulator of interstate railroads,
and we obtained STB’s restricted-access waybill sample for 2009–2015. For each month of
our sample, we calculate the total revenue (across all shipments originating in the EIA’s
Midwest region) earned by railroad carriers and divide by the total number of bbl-miles of
crude oil shipped. Figure 5, panel (a), presents the resulting time series of average revenue
per bbl-mile.26 This figure shows that railroad transportation rates were roughly constant
around $5 per thousand bbl-mile from 2011–2014 before falling by approximately $1 per
thousand bbl-mile in 2015.27 This decrease in transportation rates follows the sharp drop in
26

To protect the confidentiality of individual carriers’ rates, we are unable to present results that are
disaggregated (either spatially or temporally) beyond the region-month level. We are also unable to present
data prior to 2011.
27
The 2015 rate decrease does not appear to merely reflect a compositional change in shipments: figure
10 in appendix B.4 shows that it persists after controlling for destination, distance travelled, the number of
carrying railroads, and the number of cars.

18

Figure 5: Crude-by-rail freight and tank car lease costs
(a) STB average revenue per bbl-mile shipped
6

Rail car lease rate, $/car/month

3000

$ per 1000 bbl-mile

5
4

30,000 gallon car
31,800 gallon car

2000

3
2

1000

1
0
2011

(b) Genscape assessments of lease rates for rail cars

2012

2013

2014

2015

0

2016

2014

2015

2016

2017

Note: STB data in panel (a) cover sampled waybills originating in the EIA’s Midwest region and terminating
in the EIA’s East Coast, Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. Data from February, April, and
July, 2011 are omitted to protect the confidentiality of carriers’ rates; data from months before July, 2011 are
therefore plotted as points rather than a line. Panel (b): Genscape’s rail car lease rates are not region-specific.

crude oil prices that began in late 2014 (figure 3) and coincides with a decrease in crude-byrail volumes (figure 4). We calculate that roughly $0.50 (i.e., half) of the rate decrease can
be attributed to a direct reduction in locomotive fuel costs; the remainder is due to either
reduced congestion or a decrease in markups.28
The STB dataset also includes information on whether each shipment was under a “tariff”
or “contract” rate. Tariff shipments are charged a publicly-posted tariff that is available to
any shipper under common-carry regulation. Contract shipments are under negotiated rates
that may include volume commitments or discounts, and typically have a term of 1-2 years,
according to industry participants. The STB data indicate that 87% of crude oil moves
on contract rates and that contract shipments enjoy an average discount of $0.52 per 1000
bbl-mile relative to tariff rates.
We also obtained data from Genscape, a private industry intelligence firm, on the cost
of leasing rail cars (which are provided by third parties, not the railroads themselves) and
the costs of other elements of crude oil transportation, such as loading and unloading terminal fees. Unlike the STB data, Genscape’s data are cost assessments rather than actual
transaction data: each week, Genscape surveys shippers to determine their estimates of the
28

We obtain this $0.50 per thousand bbl-mile figure by combining the roughly $50 per barrel oil price decrease during 2014–2015 (assuming complete pass-through to diesel prices) with information on locomotives’
fuel use per bbl-mile. Specifically, we use: (1) the calculation from Clay et al. (2017) that crude-by-rail emits
4.578 short tons of CO2 per million bbl-miles; and (2) Environmental Protection Agency (2009) stating that
combustion of one gallon of diesel results in emission of 10,217 grams of CO2 .

19

cost of making a spot crude shipment to a particular destination. The Genscape data series
begins in October, 2013.
Panel (b) of figure 5 presents Genscape’s assessments of leasing rates for rail cars. Lease
rates rise in the first part of the sample, when the oil price is high and transportation volumes
are growing, and then fall late in the sample, when the oil price is low and transportation
volumes are falling. This pattern is consistent with scarcity rents or market power during
the “boom” period that then dissipated when oil prices fell.29
3.4.2

Calibration of the crude-by-rail cost function

We estimate r0,i for each destination i using Genscape’s minimum assessed “all-in” rail
cost—including rail freight, tank car leasing, and terminal fees—for transportation between
the Bakken and i. For most destinations, this minimum cost occurs in the spring of 2016,
after: (a) millions of bbls/day of loading and unloading capacity had been constructed; and
(b) both rail car lease prices and railroad freight rates had fallen substantially. We select
the minimum reported costs because these costs coincide with both fully constructed rail
capacity and limited use of that capacity, which we view as a reasonable analogue to the
model’s notion of r0 . Our estimates of r0,i are then: $13.00/bbl for shipments to the East
Coast, $10.94 for the Gulf Coast, $9.23 for the West Coast, and $8.54 for within-Midwest
shipments to Cushing, OK.
We estimate r1 by projecting the two sources of crude-by-rail costs for which we have
credible time series, STB freight rates and Genscape tanker car lease rates, onto contemporaneous aggregate rail flows, measured with either the STB waybill sample or the EIA’s
rail flow estimates. The results, shown in table 10 in appendix B.4, are consistent with an
upward-sloping rail services supply curve, though confidence intervals admit a wide range of
total (freight services plus tanker car leasing) r1 values.
We ultimately use several values for r1 in our model. At the low end, we assume r1 = 0,
consistent with the facts that rail loading and unloading capacity now far exceed rail flows
of oil and that tanker cars should be viewed as commodities in the medium to long term.
At the high end, we assume r1 = $6/bbl per million bpd (mmbpd), consistent with the
sum of the point estimates in the freight rate and tanker car lease rate regressions when the
regressor is STB rail flows. These high costs, however, likely reflect short-run constraints
in rail terminals and tank cars during 2013–2016 that would be unlikely to persist over the
multi-year horizon relevant to the pipeline customers considered by our model. We therefore
view r1 = $6/bbl per mmbpd as an upper bound.
29

See Tita (May 29, 2014) and Arno (2015) for discussions of the boom and bust in railcar lease rates.

20

3.5

Upstream oil supply

Our model of pipeline investment includes a static supply curve for Bakken crude oil production. This construct is inherently strained given that oil is an exhaustable resource; we
adopt it here both to maintain our model’s tractability and because estimates of a dynamic
model of Bakken drilling and production do not exist in the literature and are beyond the
scope of this paper. Instead, we calibrate our model’s crude oil supply curve using a range
of elasticities that we obtain from previous work on the supply of U.S. shale oil and gas.
Because changes in oil supply come from the drilling of new wells rather than from changes
in production from existing wells (Anderson, Kellogg and Salant 2018), we use estimates of
the drilling elasticity of U.S. shale wells. Newell and Prest (2017) finds an elasticity of 1.6
for all U.S. shale oil, and Hausman and Kellogg (2015) and Newell et al. (2016) estimate
price elasticities of 0.8 and 0.7, respectively, for U.S. shale gas.30 However, drilling elasticities
likely over-estimate the impact of oil prices on upstream production over the 10-year pipeline
contract for two reasons. First, production from newly drilled wells is pooled with production
from pre-existing wells, so that the percentage change in production after a price shock is
smaller than the percentage change in drilling. Second, as explained by Smith and Lee
(2017), wells drilled following an increase in the price of oil will tend to be less productive
than wells drilled previously. Therefore, we roughly halve these drilling elasticity estimates
and use a range of Bakken supply elasticities between 0.4 and 0.8.31
To calibrate the supply curve intercept, we use the North Dakota Pipeline Authority
(NDPA) expected production forecast from April, 2014 (North Dakota Pipeline Authority,
2014). This forecast provides monthly expected production volumes throughout the ten-year
pipeline contract; average expected production during the ten-year period is 1,616 thousand
bpd (mbpd). In an alternative set of specifications, we allow for uncertainty in upstream
supply by letting the supply intercept be stochastic, using a conservative production forecast
from the NDPA that is, on average, about 200 mbpd lower than the expected production
path. We construct an “optimistic” forecast that is symmetric to this conservative forecast
and, in alternative specifications, run a version of our model in which prospective shippers
face a stochastic supply intercept (in addition to the stochastic downstream price), with a
probability of 1/3 assigned to each production path.32
30

All three of these papers use instrumental variables regressions of drilling rates on lagged prices.
Use of an elasticity higher than 0.8 would cause our model to estimate responses of pipeline capacity
to rail costs that are even larger than those presented in section 6. In addition, we calculate that a gross
minimum for the Bakken supply elasticity is about 0.3, based on the decrease in North Dakota production
from a peak of 1,178 mbpd in September, 2014 to a trough of 940 mbpd in December, 2016, relative to an
oil price that roughly halved (data accessed on March 18, 2018 from EIA at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/
pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRFPND2&f=M).
32
These probabilities are arbitrary; the NDPA does not assign probabilities to its production cases.
31

21

3.6

Pipeline economies of scale

Finally, we consider the extent to which there are increasing returns to scale in pipeline
construction; that is, we calibrate the d(C(K)/K)/dK term in equation (10). As a conservative baseline, we assume that the construction of DAPL has locally constant returns to
scale, so that this derivative is zero. As an alternative, we assume that the pipeline’s cost is
a constant elasticity function of capacity, and we use an elasticity estimate of 0.59 derived
from the Soligo and Jaffe (1998) study of Caspian Basin oil export pipelines.33

4

Crude-by-rail flows and contracting

The model from section 2 assumes that rail shippers will, in every month: (a) select the
destination with the highest downstream price, net of transportation costs; and (b) fluidly
adjust the magnitude of these shipments as downstream prices rise and fall. In practice,
however, rail shipments violate both of these assumptions: figure 4 shows that every destination has positive rail flows in every month, starting in 2012, and figures 4 and 3 together
suggest that rail volumes follow price movements with a lag.
A likely driver of these violations of assumptions (a) and (b) is the presence of contracts between shippers, railroads, end users, and logistics providers. These contracts are
frequently mentioned in industry press and publications, such as Hunsucker (2015), and
may contain provisions that guarantee minimum volumes or provide volume discounts, over
time horizons of several months to more than a year. Though we treat crude-by-rail costs
as entirely marginal in the baseline model, these contracts were presumably necessary to
finance investments in loading facilities in North Dakota and unloading facilities in refining
regions.34 Although we do not have access to individual private shipping contracts, we know
from the STB data (discussed in section 3.4) that most crude-by-rail shipments are on contracts, typically at a discount to spot rates. In this section, we first test the hypothesis that
contracts are important, by empirically examining the response of rail flows to present and
past price differentials. We then develop and alternative version of our pipeline investment
model that requires rail shipments to use contracts rather than operate on a spot basis.
33
We were not able to find a study of scale economies in U.S. oil pipelines. We obtain the estimated
elasticity of 0.59 using the engineering cost estimates presented in table 2 of Soligo and Jaffe (1998). We
regress log(cost) on log(capacity) and route fixed effects.
34
These investments are reported to be substantially cheaper, per unit of capacity, than pipeline investments. For example, at the low end, RBN Energy (2018) documents that the Plains All American loading
facility in Manitou, ND cost $40 million, with 65,000 bpd of capacity, or roughly $600 per bpd of capacity.
At the higher end, Area Development News Desk (2018) documents that Enbridge spent $145 million on an
80,000 bpd facility, or $1,8125 per bpd of capacity. Both of these figures lie substantially below the $9,200
per bpd of capacity that ETP spent on DAPL.

22

4.1

Empirical relationship between rail flows and crude prices

We correlate the destination shares of Bakken crude with the contemporaneous and lagged
oil prices at those destinations. To compute the destination shares, we combine data from
the North Dakota Pipeline Authority (NDPA) on the monthly share of each transportation
mode (local consumption, crude-by-rail, pipeline, and truck) with data from the EIA on
the monthly share of each rail destination for shipments originating in the Midwest region.
We divide the total rail share from the NDPA data into destination-specific crude-by-rail
shares using the EIA data. The combined data yield the share of North Dakota crude oil
production that is refined locally; transported by truck to Canada; transported by pipeline
to Cushing, OK;35 and transported by rail to the East, West and Gulf coasts, as well as rail
transportation within the Midwest region.36
We assume shippers to the East coast earn the Brent price for their cargoes, shippers
within the Midwest region earn WTI, shippers to the Gulf coast earn LLS, and shippers to
the West coast earn ANS. There is no publicly available light oil benchmark for any central
Canadian trading hub, so we assume that truck shipments earn the local Clearbrook price.
To measure the correlation of destination shares with destination prices, we estimate a
multinomial logit choice model. We assume that infinitesimal shippers to destination j in
month t get indirect utility from a linear combination of current and lagged prices pj,t−l , a
fixed effect δj , a time-varying unobserved mean utility shock ξj,t specific to destination j,
and an i.i.d. type-1 extreme value “taste” shock i,j,t specific to the shipper i, destination
j, and month t. We treat pipeline transportation as the “outside good” and use the Berry
(1994) logit inversion formula to correlate the log odds ratios of the destination shares sj,t
with current and lagged destination-specific prices:
log sjt − log s0,t =

L
X

βt−l (pj,t−l − p0,t−l ) + δj − δ0 + ξjt − ξ0t

(4)

l=0

Table 1 presents OLS estimates of equation (4) using contemporaneous destination prices
and price lags of 3 to 24 months. In general, the coefficient on the oldest price realization in
35

Because our data end in 2016, in advance of the completion of DAPL, we assume that the pipeline
share corresponds to pipeline shipments that reach Cushing, OK and not the Gulf Coast. There were at
least two distinct pipeline routes to Cushing: the Enbridge Mainline and Spearhead systems, which travel
east into Minnesota and Illinois and then southwest into Cushing, and the Butte and Double H pipeline
systems, which connect to the Guernsey, Wyoming trading hub, which in turn is connected to the Platte,
Pony Express and White Cliffs pipeline systems that connect to Cushing. We are not aware of any pipeline
routes to other major pricing centers.
36
Because refined consumption is empirically at or just below the reported capacity for refineries in North
Dakota during the entire time period, we subtract it from total production and focus on the destinations
that appear to be unconstrained.

23

Table 1: Multinomial logit shipment destination share regressions

Pt

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

−0.00
(0.01)

−0.07
(0.02)
0.09
(0.02)

−0.08
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.09
(0.02)

−0.07
(0.01)
0.00
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.09
(0.01)

−0.09
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.10
(0.01)

−0.08
(0.01)
−0.00
(0.01)
0.03
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.03
(0.01)
0.09
(0.01)

−0.06
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
0.03
(0.01)
0.08
(0.01)

−0.03
(0.01)
−0.01
(0.01)
−0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.03
(0.01)
0.03
(0.01)
0.05
(0.01)
0.04
(0.01)

−0.01
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
0.03
(0.01)
0.04
(0.01)
0.04
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)

400
0.15
0.00

397
0.21
0.07

386
0.30
0.14

371
0.40
0.23

356
0.52
0.34

341
0.60
0.41

326
0.65
0.46

311
0.68
0.43

296
0.68
0.37

Pt−3
Pt−6
Pt−9
Pt−12
Pt−15
Pt−18
Pt−21
Pt−24
N
R2
Within R2

Note: Multinomial logit regressions of monthly shipment destination shares onto current and lagged
monthly destination prices. Pipeline shipments to Cushing, OK, are the outside good. Shipments by
truck to Canada are priced using Bakken Clearbrook, whose price series starts in May, 2010. Thus,
in specifications with longer lags of price, there are fewer observations for shipments by truck to
Canada than for other destinations. All specifications include destination fixed effects. Newey-West
standard errors in parentheses, with a maximum lag of 4 months. The within R2 values are the
squared correlation of the destination-demeaned outcomes and their predicted values.

each specification has the most positive value. This pattern holds for specifications including
lags of up to 18 months (column 7) and is consistent with a model in which a large fraction of
shippers sign contracts that require or otherwise provide incentives for consistent shipments
over one to two years.
Another pattern in table 1 is the negative and precisely estimated coefficients on contemporaneous prices. These negative coefficients likely reflect standard supply/demand endogeneity: if ξjt constitutes a supply shock (e.g., the unobserved opening of a new loading
or unloading facility) and local crude demand is downward-sloping, contemporaneous prices
at destination j will be negatively correlated with the shock. Thus, the coefficient on contemporaneous prices will be biased downwards.
24

Log(Share) − Log(Outside Share)

Figure 6: Actual vs predicted rail shares under 18 month lagged model

East Coast

Gulf Coast

Trucks to Canada

West Coast

0

−2
−4

Actual
Predicted

0

−2
−4
2012

2014

2016

2012

2014

2016

Note: Pipeline transportation to Cushing, OK is the outside option. Because predicted rail shipments from
the Midwest region to other destinations within the Midwest are constant at the estimated fixed effect, their
actual and predicted values are excluded from this figure.

Despite the simplicity of this destination-share model, it fits the data reasonably well.
Figure 6 plots actual and fitted time series of the log odds ratios for each destination. There
are two patterns to match: rail shipments increase to parity with pipeline shipments by early
2014 and then decline, and truck shipments gradually diminish until they begin growing
again in 2016. The empirical model is able to match both of these patterns, suggesting
an important role for contracting in determining rail flows and bolstering the fundamental
concept underpinning our model that rail flows respond to oil price shocks, even those that
occur two years in the past.
To verify that these correlations are indeed indicative of a lagged relationship between
flows and prices that can be explained by contracting phenomena, we estimate a structural
model of rail flows in the presence of contracts. In the model, which we describe in detail
in appendix C, rail flows to each destination are the sum of previously contracted flows and
new flows, which respond to price differentials. The key model parameter is the average
contract length, which is identified off of the correlations shown in table 1, as well as Nevo
25

(2001) style instruments which posit a relationship between lagged flows across destinations.
We estimate an average length of 24 months, which is consistent with both the trade press
on crude-by-rail contracts and the correlations in table 1.

4.2

Embedding rail contracting into the pipeline investment model

To address the importance of crude-by-rail contracting for pipeline investment, we develop
an alternative version of the model from section 2 by requiring rail shippers to use contracts
rather than a spot market for rail services (see appendix E.3 for computational details).
Because we do not observe individual rail contracts, we do not know whether these contracts
allow the shippers to retain flexibility in when to ship (as in the case of volume discount
agreements) or completely foreclose flexibility (firm ship-or-pay commitments). Thus, as a
bounding exercise on the importance of rail contracts, we assume that rail shipments require
firm ship-or-pay commitments.
Informed by our estimated average contract length from section C, we impose that rail
shippers must sign 24-month ship-or-pay commitments in order to access the railroad. During
the contract period, rail shippers then hold the option to ship crude volumes up to the
committed capacity level, at no additional marginal cost. Thus, every 24 months, beginning
with the in-service date of the pipeline, prospective rail shippers face a problem similar to
that faced by pipeline shippers: they must decide whether to commit to rail capacity, even
though there is uncertainty regarding the future downstream crude price over the life of the
contract.
Once their 24-month contracts expire, rail shippers can decide the quantity of rail capacity
to renew, based on the current downstream price. Over the 10-year commitment period for
firm pipeline shippers, there are five rail contracting “cycles”. This modeling approach
therefore diminishes the flexibility of crude-by-rail. Instead of being able to freely adjust
volumes every month in response to downstream price shocks, rail shippers may only adjust
their capacity limit every 24 months. In addition, we assume that the 24-month ship-or-pay
commitments signed by rail shippers are location-specific, so that they can no longer take
advantage of transitory price differences across downstream locations. Thus, rail shippers in
the contracting version of the model can only realize the downstream price Pd at the pipeline
terminus.
The fact that rail shippers cannot immediately increase shipment volumes in response
to an increase in Pd means that pipeline shippers enjoy higher shipping margins following
large realizations of Pd , relative to the baseline model.37 Thus, pipeline shippers are willing
37

Pipeline shippers also suffer from lower margins following low realizations of Pd , since rail shippers will
ship at margins less than the (sunk) cost of rail. However, margins cannot fall below zero (for pipeline or

26

to commit to more pipeline capacity in the rail contracting version of the model, all else
equal. Because ship-or-pay contracts are maximally restrictive (relative to volume discounts
or rebates), we believe that this rail contracting model generates a lower bound on the value
of crude-by-rail and an upper bound on pipeline shippers’ willingness to pay for capacity.
Finally, we allow rail shippers to enjoy a reduced shipping rate relative to the baseline
model. Per our estimates from the STB data (section 3.4), we reduce the value of r0 in the
contracting model by $0.52 per 1000 bbl-miles relative to the baseline model to account for
contract discounts.38

5

Validation

Given the inputs discussed above, we validate our model by calculating the expected return
for shippers who signed ten-year firm shipping agreements on DAPL. We then compare this
expected return—which in equilibrium should equal the average per-bbl cost of the pipeline—
to the actual DAPL tariff for long-term shippers of $5.50–$6.25/bbl (Gordon, 2017).
Column (3) of table 2 presents the implied average per-bbl cost of DAPL from our
baseline (single destination, spot crude-by-rail) model, covering a range of assumptions on
the upstream supply elasticity and on r1 , the responsiveness of rail costs to rail flow (note
that the implied cost is not affected by assumptions about pipeline returns to scale). The
implied cost generally decreases with the Bakken supply elasticity because, given oil price
expectations in June, 2014, total Bakken production was expected to exceed total pipeline
export and local refining capacity. The risk that oil prices might fall so far as to decongest
the pipeline, thereby leaving pipeline shippers with zero return, is therefore increasing in the
supply elasticity.39 The implied cost increases with r1 because higher values of r1 increase
the margin earned by pipeline shippers when rail volumes are large.
When r1 takes values of $0 or $3/bbl per million bpd (mmbpd), the average cost of
DAPL implied by our baseline model is generally in the neighborhood of the actual $5.50–
$6.25/bbl tariff. The implied cost exceeds this range when we let r1 = $6/bbl per mmbpd,
consistent with this large value of r1 reflecting short-run capacity constraints during 2013–
2014 rather than the long-run rail capacity responses that would be of interest to shippers
rail) because shippers are not obligated to ship. This convexity of returns as a function of Pd leads to greater
expected returns for pipeline shippers in the contracting model.
38
Given the 1,900 mile distance from the Bakken to the Gulf Coast, the overall contract discount is roughly
$1/bbl.
39
More precisely, for a larger supply elasticity, the oil price does not have to decrease as far below the
expected price in order to decongest the line. For values of r1 > 0, the implied cost can increase with the
supply elasticity because large rail volumes increase the return to pipeline shippers, and the magnitude of
this effect can outweigh that from the increased probability that the pipeline is uncongested.

27

Table 2: Model validation
Input parameters
Supply
r1
elasticity $/bbl per mmbpd
0.4
0
0.6
0
0.8
0
0.4
3
0.6
3
0.8
3
0.4
6
0.6
6
0.8
6

Implied average cost per bbl
Baseline Multiple dest. Rail contract
model
model
model
$6.62
$5.85
$7.68
$5.71
$5.03
$7.06
$5.24
$4.62
$6.71
$7.19
$6.43
$8.45
$6.41
$5.75
$8.03
$6.11
$5.51
$7.93
$7.73
$6.99
$9.15
$7.07
$6.43
$8.88
$6.92
$6.34
$8.93

Note: The actual DAPL tariff for ten-year committed shippers is between
$5.50/bbl and $6.25/bbl. All rows assume r0 = $10.94/bbl. r1 is in units of
$/bbl per million barrels per day (mmbpd). The baseline model allows rail to
reach a single destination (Gulf Coast) and allows rail transport to proceed on
a spot market. The multiple destination model allows rail to reach the Gulf,
East, or West Coasts, using the spot market. The rail contract model allows
rail to reach a single destination and constrains rail to use 24-month ship-or-pay
contracts.

signing long-term contracts (see the discussion in section 3.4.2).
In the model that allows rail shippers to enjoy spatial option value, shown in the fourth
column of table 2, the implied cost is roughly 10% lower than in the baseline model. This
decrease is driven by the fall in shipping margin that occurs when rail shippers increase
their volumes—commensurately increasing upstream production and the upstream price—
in response to realized high prices at downstream locations other than the pipeline terminus.
The modest difference in implied cost between the spatial and baseline models is consistent
with small historical price differences across the U.S. Gulf, West, and East Coasts (figure 3).
When rail shipments require 24-month ship-or-pay contracts, shown in the right-most
column of table 2, the value of crude-by-rail diminishes and the expected margin to pipeline
shippers increases. The expected margin, and thus the implied average cost of DAPL, exceeds
$6.25/bbl in all specifications, and substantially so when the upstream supply elasticity is
0.4 or when r1 > 0. We believe that the 24-month ship-or-pay contracts we model are overly
restrictive relative to actual crude-by-rail contracts, so that the “true” model for expected
shipper returns lies between the fully flexible spatial model and the rail contract model.
Table 6 in the appendix presents implied costs using the baseline model with alternative
values for DAPL’s capacity. For capacities of 450 mbpd or 570 mbpd, implied costs are similar
to those shown in table 2 (which uses the actual installed DAPL capacity of 520 mbpd), but
28

costs are substantially higher if one assumes that only 320 mbpd of new Bakken export
capacity were committed to in June, 2014. Table 8 presents implied costs using alternative
values for future oil price volatility (discussed in section 3.2.2) and allowing for supply
uncertainty (discussed in section 3.5). Different assumptions about price volatility, which
change the model’s implied average cost by $0.57–$1.27/bbl, depending on specification, are
more important than allowing for supply uncertainty, which decreases DAPL’s implied cost
by only a few cents per barrel.

6

Results: substitution between pipeline investment
and crude-by-rail

6.1

The sensitivity of pipeline investment to rail costs

Table 3, column (4) presents our calculations of dK/dr0 —the sensitivity of pipeline capacity
to per-bbl rail costs—from the baseline model, with no spatial option value or rail contracting,
and assuming constant returns to scale in pipeline construction. The top third of this table
uses r1 = $0/bbl per mmbpd, consistent with an assumption that over the long run, crudeby-rail exhibits constant returns to scale. Under this assumption, our estimates of dK/dr0
range from 41.1 thousand bpd (mbpd) per $/bbl (for an upstream supply elasticity of 0.4)
to 61.1 mbpd per $/bbl (for an elasticity of 0.8). Given the actual DAPL capacity of 520
mbpd (and total Bakken pipeline export capacity K of 1,283 mbpd), these values translate
to elasticities of total pipeline export capacity K with respect to r0 between 0.35 and 0.52.
Because estimated air pollution externalities from rail transportation exceed $2/bbl (Clay
et al. 2017), these estimates imply substantial long-run substitution from rail to pipeline
capacity in the event that crude-by-rail’s externalities are addressed through regulation.
The middle and bottom sections of table 3 display results when we set r1 equal to $3
and $6/bbl per mmbpd, respectively. dK/dr0 decreases modestly with r1 , and our smallest
estimate is dK/dr0 = 32.0 mbpd per $/bbl (with an upstream elasticity of 0.4 and r1 =
$6/bbl per mmbpd). Because this estimate neglects railroad spatial option value, railroad
contracting, and pipeline economies of scale, and because letting r1 = $6/bbl per mmbpd
yields an implied average cost of DAPL that substantially exceeds the actual tariff, we view
it as a lower bound on the effect of the cost of railroad transportation on pipeline capacity.
Appendix table 7 shows how our estimates vary with the assumed size of the June, 2014
DAPL pipeline capacity commitment Kd . The results do not substantially deviate from
baseline results in table 3 for values of Kd between 450 mbpd and 570 mbpd. For Kd = 320
mbpd and an upstream supply elasticity of 0.4, however, the estimate of dK/dr0 is nearly
29

Table 3: Sensitivity of pipeline capacity and expected rail flow to the cost of crude-by-rail:
results from baseline model
Input parameters
Supply
elasticity

r1

0.4
0.6
0.8

Impacts of a change in r0 on K and E[Qr ]

dE[Qr ]/dr0

Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0

Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0 ,
K fixed

0.35
0.43
0.52

-26.1
-28.1
-31.8

-1.49
-1.29
-1.17

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

36.0
42.7
50.1

0.31
0.36
0.43

-22.8
-23.9
-26.1

-1.33
-1.12
-0.99

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

32.0
37.1
42.4

0.27
0.32
0.36

-20.3
-20.7
-22.1

-1.20
-1.00
-0.87

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

dK/dr0

Elasticity of
K w.r.t. r0

0
0
0

41.1
50.4
61.1

0.4
0.6
0.8

3
3
3

0.4
0.6
0.8

6
6
6

Note: All rows assume constant returns to scale in pipeline construction and that r0 = $10.94/bbl.
Capacity K and expected rail flows E[Qr ] are in thousands of barrels per day (mbpd). r1 is in
units of $/bbl per mmbpd. The baseline model allows rail to reach a single destination (Gulf
Coast) and allows rail transport to proceed on a spot market.

double its value in the baseline model.40 Appendix table 9 shows that our results are not
highly sensitive to alternative assumptions about price volatility or supply uncertainty: these
alternatives yield estimates of dK/dr0 that vary by at most 25% from our baseline estimates
in table 3, and often by much less than that.
The fifth column of table 3 shows how expected rail flows, E[Qr ], are impacted by a
change in r0 . Across the specifications, dE[Qr ]/dr0 has a smaller magnitude than does
dK/dr0 , since for low downstream oil price realizations, rail flows will be zero regardless of
the value of r0 .41 Expressed as an elasticity, however, the estimated impact of rail costs on
expected rail flows is large, ranging from -0.87 to -1.49. The right-most column of table 3
compares these elasticities to those from counterfactual calculations of dE[Qr ]/dr0 that hold
pipeline capacity K constant. Absent the response of pipeline capacity, rail volumes are
quite insensitive to changes in rail transportation costs: the elasticity of E[Qr ] to r0 is only
-0.2. Thus, our results indicate that the main channel by which environmental regulation
will reduce crude-by-rail volumes is substitution to investment in pipeline capacity.
40
Under these assumptions, the implied cost of DAPL is $9.98/bbl (appendix table 6), so that the cost of
pipeline shipment is similar to the cost of rail shipment (r0 = $10.94/bbl). Pipeline and rail transport are
therefore close substitutes, inflating the estimate of dK/dr0 .
41
Moreover, dE[Qr ]/dr0 is not very sensitive to the upstream supply elasticity because this elasticity has
two countervailing effects on dE[Qr ]/dr0 . First, large supply elasticities increase dK/dr0 , which will tend
to increase the magnitude of dE[Qr ]/dr0 . Second, large supply elasticities increase the probability that
E[Qr ] = 0, which will tend to decrease the magnitude of dE[Qr ]/dr0 .

30

Table 4: Sensitivity of pipeline capacity and expected rail flow to the cost of crude-by-rail:
alternative models for rail flexibility and pipeline economies of scale
Input parameters

Impacts of a change in r0 on K and E[Qr ]

dE[Qr ]/dr0

Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0

Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0 ,
K fixed

0.31
0.36
0.43

-22.8
-23.9
-26.1

-1.33
-1.12
-0.99

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

Multiple rail destination model
0.4
3
41.0
0.6
3
48.6
0.8
3
57.6

0.35
0.41
0.49

-26.1
-27.1
-29.9

-1.47
-1.24
-1.10

-0.18
-0.19
-0.19

Rail contracting model
0.4
3
61.6
0.6
3
67.7
0.8
3
75.2

0.52
0.58
0.64

-37.7
-36.4
-37.8

-2.20
-1.73
-1.46

-0.22
-0.23
-0.23

-34.6
-41.3
-54.7

-2.01
-1.95
-2.08

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

Supply
elasticity

r1

Baseline model
0.4
3
0.6
3
0.8
3

dK/dr0

Elasticity of
K w.r.t. r0

36.0
42.7
50.1

Baseline model, increasing returns to scale
0.4
3
57.7
0.49
0.6
3
80.5
0.69
0.8
3
118.6
1.01

Note: Baseline model allows rail to reach a single destination (Gulf Coast) and allows rail transport
to proceed on a spot market. Multiple destination model allows rail to reach the Gulf, East, or
West Coasts, using the spot market. Rail contract model allows rail to reach a single destination
and constrains rail to use 24-month ship-or-pay contracts. Increasing returns to scale model
assumes pipeline cost has a constant elasticity of 0.59 with respect to capacity. Capacity K and
expected rail flows E[Qr ] are in thousands of barrels per day (mbpd); r1 is in units of $/bbl per
mmbpd. All rows assume r0 = $10.94/bbl.

Table 4 presents results from models allowing for multiple rail destinations, rail contracting, and pipeline economies of scale. We focus on the case with r1 = $3/bbl per mmbpd
(rather than r1 = 0) to obtain conservative estimates of dK/dr0 . The fourth through sixth
rows of table 4 show that when crude-by-rail can flow to multiple destinations, the sensitivity
of both pipeline capacity and expected rail flows to changes in r0 is greater (by roughly 15%)
than in the single-destination baseline model, reflecting the intuition discussed in section 2.3.
When we require crude-by-rail to use 24-month ship-or-pay contracts, our estimates are
substantially larger than in the baseline model: the estimated dK/dr0 ranges from 61.6 to
75.2 mbpd per $/bbl, depending on the upstream supply elasticity. These increased magnitudes reflect the fact that requiring crude-by-rail to use ship-or-pay contracts makes rail
transportation more similar to pipeline transportation from the point of view of shippers.
Thus, the effective elasticity of substitution between these two technologies is large in this
31

Table 5: Changes in expected crude oil flows if Dakota Access were not constructed
Baseline model
Supply elasticity
Change in pipe flow (mbpd)
Change in rail flow (mbpd)
Change in total flow (mbpd)
∆ rail flow as % of ∆ pipe flow

Multiple rail dests.

Rail contracting

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.8

-459
408
-51
-89%

-408
346
-62
-85%

-369
303
-66
-82%

-459
417
-42
-91%

-408
355
-53
-87%

-369
311
-58
-84%

-459
416
-43
-91%

-408
353
-55
-87%

-369
309
-60
-84%

Note: Baseline model allows rail to reach a single destination (Gulf Coast) and allows rail transport
to proceed on a spot market. Multiple destination model allows rail to reach the Gulf, East, or
West Coasts, using the spot market. Rail contract model allows rail to reach a single destination
and constrains rail to use 24-month ship-or-pay contracts. Changes in pipeline, rail, and total
flows are all expectations over future downstream price distributions, and are in units of thousands
of barrels per day (mbpd). All columns assume r0 = $10.94/bbl, r1 = $3/bbl per mmbpd, and
constant returns to scale in pipeline construction.

model, at least locally to r0 = $10.94/bbl. Recall that the ship-or-pay contracting framework
for crude-by-rail used in this model is likely too restrictive for shippers relative to rail contracts that are used in practice. Thus, we view our results from the rail contracting model
as an upper bound, and the results from the baseline model as a lower bound, on the effects
of increasing r0 , conditional on the assumed parameter values and constant returns to scale
in pipeline construction.
Finally, the bottom-most section of table 4 presents results that allow for increasing
returns to scale in pipeline construction, using the baseline model for crude-by-rail flows.
Here, the values of dK/dr0 and dE[Qr ]/dr0 are substantially amplified relative to the constant
returns case, especially when the upstream supply elasticity for crude oil is 0.8, where we
estimate an elasticity of pipeline capacity with respect to r0 that exceeds one.

6.2

Crude-by-rail in the absence of Dakota Access

Substitution between pipeline and rail transport is reflected in not only the response of
pipeline investment to changes in railroads’ costs, but also the response of rail flows to
changes in pipeline capacity. This sub-section addresses the question of by how much rail
volumes would increase were DAPL not completed.
Table 5 presents the model’s counterfactual changes in expected pipeline and rail flows
of crude oil when we reduce Bakken pipeline export capacity by DAPL’s 520 mbpd. Across
models and assumed upstream supply elasticities, expected pipeline flows decrease by 369
mbpd to 459 mbpd. These magnitudes are smaller than the 520 mbpd capacity decrease
because at very low downstream price realizations, DAPL (if built) is not fully utilized. The
32

magnitude of the decrease in pipeline flows is decreasing in the upstream supply elasticity
because at high elasticities, there is a greater probability that DAPL is under-utilized. The
effect of foreclosing DAPL on pipeline flows (or rail flows) is essentially the same across the
baseline, multiple destination, and rail contracting models.
The second through fourth rows of table 5 show that the foreclosure of DAPL leads to
increases in rail flows that offset 82% to 91% of the decrease in pipeline flows, depending on
the specification. These increases are large, in that they reflect between a doubling and a
tripling of rail flows, relative to the DAPL-inclusive baseline. The net decrease in crude oil
flows out of the Bakken caused by removing DAPL’s 520 mbpd of capacity is then between
42 mbpd and 66 mbpd. Thus, railroads’ ability to effectively, even if not completely, serve as
a substitute for pipeline transportation implies that policies curtailing pipeline construction
will cause most of the precluded pipeline oil flow to divert to the railroads instead.

7

Conclusions

The development of the Bakken shale was associated with substantial investment in new
pipeline capacity and an unprecedented boom in railroad transportation of crude oil. Following the late-2014 collapse of world oil prices, however, crude-by-rail volumes fell substantially.
One interpretation of this shift is that crude-by-rail was merely a transitory phenomenon,
and that pipelines will henceforth convey nearly all overland crude oil flows. This paper
emphasizes an alternative view of these events. We see the rise and fall of crude-by-rail
volumes as underscoring the option value provided by rail transportation: rail enables shippers to vary shipment volumes and destinations in response to crude oil price shocks. This
flexibility contrasts with pipelines that require long-term, binding ship-or-pay contracts in
order to underwrite their large up-front costs. As a result, we show that rail and pipelines
can effectively substitute for one another over the long run, even though rail volumes may
ebb and flow over time. Indeed, crude-by-rail has recently staged a comeback as oil prices
have risen: volumes shipped out of the Bakken have nearly tripled from June, 2017 through
June, 2018 (North Dakota Pipeline Authority 2018).
While we focus on the question of pipeline versus railroad transportation of crude oil, we
believe that, more broadly, our model is the first to distill intuition for how costly but flexible
technologies substitute for investments in infrastructure that require large up-front commitments but have a low amortized cost. For instance, our modeling framework can be used
to evaluate and intuitively understand the tradeoffs between urban light rail, which requires
up-front investment in dedicated tracks and passenger loading stations, and re-routable passenger buses. The same comparative statics that we derive here for how pipeline and rail
33

transportation are affected by factors such as relative costs of service, scale economies, and
demand uncertainty are readily applicable to other settings involving tradeoffs between technologies that differ in the extent to which their costs are sunk versus variable.
Our results also speak directly to policy questions stemming from crude oil transportation’s environmental externalities. Clay et al. (2017) finds that the externalities associated
with crude-by-rail are particularly severe, exceeding $2 per barrel shipped. Our results imply that, had policies caused rail transporters to internalize a $2/bbl externality at the time
of the Dakota Access Pipeline’s investment decision, its capacity would have been at least
64,000 bpd larger than its actual 520,000 bpd capacity, and counterfactual rail flows would
have been lower by at least 41,000 bpd. Under more aggressive but plausible assumptions on
input parameters, the reduction in rail flows could have been greater than 75,000 bpd. We
also demonstrate that policy analyses that ignore the pipeline investment mechanism would
under-estimate the policy’s effect on rail flows by at least a factor of five.
Finally, we show that regulatory foreclosure of pipeline investment will primarily lead to
increases in rail flows rather than a decrease in overall oil production and transportation.
If those opposed to Dakota Access had succeeded in blocking its construction, we estimate
that roughly 80–90% of the displaced pipeline oil flow would have simply moved onto the
rails. Overall then, our results illustrate that pipeline and rail transportation of crude oil
are sufficiently substitutable that policies targeting one mode result primarily in a shift in
crude oil flows to the other mode, with only small impacts on total crude oil production and
transportation.

References
Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert J. Vigfusson, “Forecasting the price of oil,”
Handbook of Economic Forecasting, 2013, 2, 427–507.
Amihud, Yakov and Haim Mendelson, “Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 1986, 17, 223–249.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and Stephen W. Salant, “Hotelling Under Pressure,” Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126, 984–1026.
Area Development News Desk, “Enbridge Pipelines Completes Berthold,
North Dakota Rail Terminal,
Continues Pipeline Expansion Project,”
2018.
[Online;
http://www.areadevelopment.com/newsItems/8-19-2013/
enbridge-pipelines-sandpaper-pipeline-project-berthold-north-dakota289123.
shtml; accessed 6 September, 2018].
34

Arno, David, “Tank-Car Lease Rates Plummet on Weak Crude-By-Rail Demand,
Low Crude Prices,” Genscape Blog, 2015. [Online; http://www.genscape.com/blog/
tank-car-lease-rates-plummet-weak-crude-rail-demand-low-crude-prices; accessed 13 September, 2017].
Averch, Harvey and Leland L. Johnson, “Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory
Constraint,” American Economic Review, 1962, 52 (5), 1052–1069.
Berry, Steven T, “Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 1994, pp. 242–262.
Biracree, Tom, “Bakken Pipeline Takeaway Capacity: Dakota Access to Close the Gap,”
Oil and Gas Financial Journal, October 18, 2016.
Blas, Javier, “US oil glut shifts to Gulf of Mexico,” The Financial Times, February 26,
2013.
Borenstein, Severin, “The long-run efficiency of real-time electricity pricing,” Energy
Journal, 2005, pp. 93–116.
Burton, Mark L., “Railroad Deregulation, Carrier Behavior, and Shipper Response: A
Disaggregated Analysis,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, 1993, 5, 417–434.
Busse, Meghan R. and Nathaniel O. Keohane, “Market effects of environmental regulation: coal, railroads, and the 1990 Clean Air Act,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2007,
38 (4), 1159–1179.
Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, and Max H. Farrell, “nprobust: Nonparametric Kernel-Based Estimation and Robust Bias-Corrected Inference,” Working Paper
2017.
Chamberlain, Gary, “Asymptotic efficiency in estimation with conditional moment restrictions,” Journal of Econometrics, 1987, 34 (3), 305–334.
Clay, Karen, Akshaya Jha, Nicholas Muller, and Randall Walsh, “The External
Costs Of Transporting Petroleum Products By Pipelines and Rail: Evidence From Shipments Of Crude Oil From North Dakota,” NBER Working Paper #23852, 2017.
Cookenboo, Leslie Jr., Crude Oil Pipelines and Competition in the Oil Industry, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955.

35

Darlymple, Amy, “Sandpiper pipeline future unclear as Enbridge buys into Dakota Access,” DL-Online, August 7, 2016.
Enbridge Energy Partners LP, “Enbridge to Invest $6.2 Billion in Light Oil Market Access Program,” 2012. [Online; http://www.marketwired.com/press-release/
enbridge-to-invest-62-billion-in-light-oil-market-access-program-tsx-enb-1734840.
htm; accessed 18 March, 2018].
, “SEC 10-K Filing,” February 2015. [Online; https://www.enbridgepartners.
com/Investor-Relations/EEP/Financial-Information/Filing-Details.aspx?
filingId=10082267&docId=222781; accessed 18 March, 2018].
Energy Information Administration, “U.S. Energy-by-Rail Data Methodology,” 2017.
[Online; https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/transportation/; accessed 12 April, 2017].
, “The United States is now the largest global crude oil producer,” 2018. [Online; https:
//www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=37053; accessed 8 December, 2018].
Energy Transfer Partners LP, “Energy Transfer Announces Crude Oil Pipeline
Project Connecting Bakken Supplies to Patoka, Illinois and to Gulf Coast Markets,” 2014. [Online; http://ir.energytransfer.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=106094&p=
irol-newsArticle&ID=1942689; accessed 13 September, 2017].
, “Energy Transfer Commences Binding Expansion Open Season for Bakken Pipeline
Transport,” 2014. [Online; http://ir.energytransfer.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=106094&
p=irol-newsArticle&ID=1969920; accessed 18 March, 2018].
, “Energy Transfer Announces the Bakken Pipeline is in Service Transporting Domestic
Crude Oil from the Bakken/Three Forks Production Areas,” 2017. [Online; http://ir.
energytransfer.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=106094&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=2278014;
accessed 13 March, 2018].
, “Announcement of Expansion Open Season,” 2018.
[Online;
energytransfer.com/ops_bakken.aspx; accessed 13 March, 2018].

https://www.

Environmental Protection Agency, “Emission Factors for Locomotives,” 2009. [Online;
https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi?Dockey=P100500B.pdf; accessed 13 February,
2018].
Federal Register, “Control of Emissions of Air Pollution From Locomotive Engines and
Marine Compression-Ignition Engines Less Than 30 Liters per Cylinder; Republication;
Final Rule,” June 30, 2008. Vol 73, No. 126, p. 37096.
36

Gordon, Meghan, “Dakota Access, ETCO Oil Pipelines to Start Interstate Servce May
14,” Platts News, 2017.
Hausman, Catherine and Ryan Kellogg, “Welfare and Distributional Implications of
Shale Gas,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2015, pp. 71–125.
Hughes, Jonathan E, “The higher price of cleaner fuels: Market power in the rail transport
of fuel ethanol,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2011, 62 (2), 123–
139.
Hunsucker, Bridget, “Crude-By-Rail Evolves Into Permanent Midstream Fixture,” Genscape White Paper, 2015.
, “LLS discount to Brent could be permanent on light sweet crude invasion,” Platts Oilgram
News, November 20, 2013.
Hyndman, Rob J and Qiwei Yao, “Nonparametric estimation and symmetry tests for
conditional density functions,” Journal of nonparametric statistics, 2002, 14 (3), 259–278.
Johnson, Arthur M., Petroluem Pipelines and Public Policy, 1906–1959, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1967.
Kellogg, Ryan, “The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Evidence from Texas Oil
Drilling,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1698–1734.
Lefebvre, Ben, “Trains Leave Kinder Morgan Pipeline in Lurch,” The Wall Street Journal,
May 23, 2013.
Makholm, Jeff D., The Political Economy of Pipelines: A Century of Comparative Institutional Development, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2012.
Marathon Petroleum Corporation, “Marathon Petroleum Corporation agrees
to equity participation in Bakken Pipeline system,” 2016.
[Online; http:
//ir.marathonpetroleum.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=246631&p=irol-newsArticle_
pf&ID=2192194; accessed 18 March, 2018].
Nevo, Aviv, “Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry,” Econometrica,
2001, 69 (2), 307–342.
Newell, Richard G. and Brian C. Prest, “The Unconventional Supply Boom: Aggregate
Price Response from Microdata,” NBER Working Paper #23973, 2017.

37

,
, and Ashley Vissing, “Trophy Hunting vs. Manufacturing Energy: The PriceResponsiveness of Shale Gas,” NBER Working Paper #22532, 2016.
North Dakota Pipeline Authority, “Website Slide Deck, North Dakota Pipeline Authority, April 1, 2014,” 2014. [Online; https://ndpipelines.files.wordpress.com/2012/
04/ndpa-slides-april-1-20141.pdf; accessed 7 May, 2017].
, “US Williston Basin Crude Oil Export Options - June 1, 2017,” 2017. [Online; https://
northdakotapipelines.com/oil-transportation-table/; accessed 24 August, 2017].
, “Website Slide Deck, North Dakota Pipeline Authority, August 16,
2018,” 2018.
[Online; https://ndpipelines.files.wordpress.com/2018/08/
ndpa-monthly-update-aug-16-2018.pdf; accessed 30 August, 2018].
Pástor, Ľuboš and Robert F. Stambaugh, “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111, 642–685.

Phillips 66, “Phillips 66 Becomes Joint Venture Partner with Energy Transfer to
Build Bakken Crude Oil Pipelines,” 2014. [Online; http://investor.phillips66.
com/financial-information/news-releases/news-release-details/2014/
Phillips-66-Becomes-Joint-Venture-Partner-with-Energy-Transfer-to-Build-Bakken-Crudedefault.aspx; accessed 18 March, 2018].
Preonas, Louis, “Market Power in Coal Shipping and Implications for U.S. Climate Policy,”
Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper #285, 2017.
RBN Energy, “Crude Loves Rocking Rail
Plains, Enbridge And Global
Terminals In The Bakken,”
2018.
[Online;
https://rbnenergy.com/
plains-enbridge-and-global-terminals-in-the-bakken; accessed 6 September,
2018].
Shaffer, David, “Minnesota Regulators Order a Broader Look at Pipeline Route,” Minneapolis Star Tribune, September 12, 2014.
Smiley, Gene, The American Economy in the 20th Century, South-Western Publishing
Company, 1993.
Smith, James L. and Thomas K. Lee, “The price elasticity of US shale oil reserves,”
Energy Economics, 2017, 67, 121–135.

38

Soligo, Ronald and Amy Myers Jaffe, “The Economics of Pipeline Routes: the Conundrum of Oil Exports from the Caspian Basin,” Unlocking the Assets: Energy and the
Future of Central Asia and the Caucasus, 1998.
S&P Global Platts, “Methodology and Specifications Guide: Crude Oil,” 2017.
[Online;
https://www.platts.com/IM.Platts.Content/MethodologyReferences/
MethodologySpecs/Crude-oil-methodology.pdf; accessed 18 March, 2018].
Spavins, Thomas C., “The Regulation of Oil Pipelines,” in Edward J. Mitchell, ed., Oil
Pipelines and Public Policy, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for Public
Policy Research, 1979.
Tita, Bob, “Railcar Shortage in U.S. Pushes Up Lease Rates,” The Wall Street Journal,
May 29, 2014.
Winston, Clifford, “The Success of the Staggers Rail Act of 1980,” Related Publication
05-24, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies 2005.

39

A

Online appendix: additional results tables

Table 6: Expected margin for pipeline shippers: baseline model with alternative values for
committed DAPL capacity Kd
Input parameters
Supply
r1
elasticity $/bbl / mmbbl/d
0.4
3
0.6
3
0.8
3

Implied average cost per bbl
Kd = 320
$9.98
$8.64
$7.90

Kd = 450
$8.23
$7.18
$6.71

Kd = 520
$7.19
$6.41
$6.11

Kd = 570
$6.44
$5.88
$5.70

Note: The actual DAPL tariff for ten-year committed shippers is between $5.50/bbl and $6.25/bbl.
All rows assume r0 = $10.94/bbl. r1 is in units of $/bbl per million bpd (mmmbpd). Baseline
model allows rail to reach a single destination (Gulf Coast) and allows rail transport to proceed
on a spot market.

Table 7: Sensitivity of pipeline capacity and expected rail flow to the cost of crude-by-rail:
baseline model with alternative values for committed DAPL capacity Kd
Impacts of a change in r0 on K and E[Qr ]

Input parameters

Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0

Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0 ,
K fixed

Baseline model, DAPL capacity = 320 mbbl/d
0.4
3
63.5
0.64
-53.4
0.6
3
56.0
0.57
-40.9
0.8
3
57.8
0.58
-38.2

-1.83
-1.31
-1.09

-0.18
-0.19
-0.20

Baseline model, DAPL capacity = 450 mbbl/d
0.4
3
42.5
0.38
-30.5
0.6
3
46.3
0.42
-28.7
0.8
3
52.2
0.47
-29.7

-1.46
-1.18
-1.02

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

Supply
elasticity

r1

dK/dr0

Elasticity of
K w.r.t. r0

dE[Qr ]/dr0

Baseline model, DAPL capacity = 520 mbbl/d (main results in paper)
0.4
3
36.0
0.31
-22.8
-1.33
0.6
3
42.7
0.36
-23.9
-1.12
0.8
3
50.1
0.43
-26.1
-0.99

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

Baseline model, DAPL capacity = 570 mbbl/d
0.4
3
32.6
0.27
-18.7
0.6
3
40.8
0.33
-21.0
0.8
3
48.8
0.40
-23.8

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

-1.26
-1.09
-0.97

Note: All rows assume constant returns to scale in pipeline construction and that r0 = $10.94/bbl.
Capacity K and expected rail flows E[Qr ] are in thousands of barrels per day (mbpd). r1 is in
units of $/bbl per mmbpd. Baseline model allows rail to reach a single destination (Gulf Coast)
and allows rail transport to proceed on a spot market.

A-1

Table 8: Expected margin for pipeline shippers: baseline model with alternative values for
price volatility and supply uncertainty
Input parameters
Supply
r1
elasticity $/bbl / mmbbl/d
0.4
3
0.6
3
0.8
3

Implied average cost per bbl
Baseline
$7.19
$6.41
$6.11

High price vol
$5.92
$5.52
$5.50

Low price vol
$8.35
$7.24
$6.68

Supply uncertainty
$7.06
$6.36
$6.08

Note: The actual DAPL tariff for ten-year committed shippers is between $5.50/bbl and $6.25/bbl.
All rows assume r0 = $10.94/bbl. r1 is in units of $/bbl per million bpd (mmmbpd). Baseline
model allows rail to reach a single destination (Gulf Coast) and allows rail transport to proceed
on a spot market. Baseline volatility uses Brent history of long differences. High volatility case
uses Brent history of one-month differences, extrapolated to longer time horizons under a random
walk assumption. Low volatility case uses 18-month implied volatility in June, 2014, extrapolated
to longer time horizons using a random walk assumption. Supply uncertainty case uses baseline
price volatilities and an uncertain intercept for the upstream oil supply function.

A-2

Table 9: Sensitivity of pipeline capacity and expected rail flow to the cost of crude-by-rail:
baseline model with alternative values for price volatility and supply uncertainty
Input parameters

Impacts of a change in r0 on K and E[Qr ]
Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0

Elasticity of
E[Qr ] w.r.t. r0 ,
K fixed

Baseline model, baseline volatility (main results in paper)
0.4
3
36.0
0.31
-22.8
0.6
3
42.7
0.36
-23.9
0.8
3
50.1
0.43
-26.1

-1.33
-1.12
-0.99

-0.19
-0.20
-0.20

Baseline model, high volatility case
0.4
3
41.1
0.35
0.6
3
52.2
0.44
0.8
3
62.6
0.53

-20.6
-23.4
-26.6

-1.09
-0.91
-0.77

-0.13
-0.13
-0.12

Baseline model, low volatility case
0.4
3
34.4
0.29
0.6
3
36.9
0.31
0.8
3
41.4
0.35

-26.0
-24.4
-25.2

-1.65
-1.38
-1.24

-0.26
-0.28
-0.29

Baseline model, baseline price volatility with supply uncertainty
0.4
3
37.2
0.32
-23.2
-1.29
0.6
3
43.6
0.37
-24.1
-1.11
0.8
3
50.6
0.43
-26.2
-0.98

-0.19
-0.19
-0.20

Supply
elasticity

r1

dK/dr0

Elasticity of
K w.r.t. r0

dE[Qr ]/dr0

Note: All rows assume constant returns to scale in pipeline construction and that r0 = $10.94/bbl.
Capacity K and expected rail flows E[Qr ] are in thousands of barrels per day (mbpd). r1 is in
units of $/bbl per mmbpd. Baseline model allows rail to reach a single destination (Gulf Coast)
and allows rail transport to proceed on a spot market. Baseline volatility uses Brent history of
long differences. High volatility case uses Brent history of one-month differences, extrapolated to
longer time horizons under a random walk assumption. Low volatility case uses 18-month implied
volatility in June, 2014, extrapolated to longer time horizons using a random walk assumption.
Supply uncertainty case uses baseline price volatilities and an uncertain intercept for the upstream
oil supply function.

A-3

B

Details on data and calibration

This appendix provides additional detail on the data we collect and use to calibrate the
model. The organization of this appendix parallels the structure of section 3 in the main
text.

B.1

Dakota Access Pipeline facts

No additional detail beyond that presented in section 3.1.

B.2
B.2.1

Oil prices and estimation of downstream oil price distributions
Downstream price distribution for pipeline shippers

In our baseline specification, we assume that shippers’ expected price volatility over a tmonth horizon is given by the historic Brent oil price volatility over a t-month horizon. We
use Brent rather than LLS to be consistent with our use of futures prices for E[Pd ] and
because Brent is historically the most liquidly traded waterborne crude price. We calculate
historic volatility at each horizon t by taking the standard deviation of t-month differences
in historic logged Brent prices for t ∈ [37, 156]. For instance, the standard deviation of
37-month differences in log(price) yields the expectation, taken at the time of commitment
(June, 2014), of price volatility in the first month of pipeline service. 13-year differences yield
expected price volatility in the month in which the 10-year shipping commitments expire.
We calculate price volatilities for all horizons using Brent price data from May, 1996 (the
first observation for which a 13-year lag is available in the data) through May, 2014 (the last
full month before shippers committed to DAPL). We find that uncertainty over the future
price of Brent increases substantially over the 3-year to 13-year horizon, from a volatility of
45% at 37 months to 129% at 13 years. Figure 7 presents the full sequence of these baseline
volatilities from 37-month to 13-year horizons.42
Our second approach to estimating the price volatility faced by shippers uses implied
volatilities from crude oil futures options, as in Kellogg (2014). This approach allows shippers’ volatility expectations in June, 2014 to differ from the long-run historical average.
Implied volatility data for time horizons of up to 18 months are available from the EIA via
its monthly Short Term Energy Outlook; futures options are generally not liquidly traded
at longer time horizons.43 The 18-month future price implied volatility in June, 2014 was
19.7%; we extrapolate this volatility through the 13-year pipeline horizon under the assumption that oil prices follow a random walk, so that volatility increases with the square root
of the time horizon. Because the June, 2014 18-month implied volatility is much smaller
42

Volatility in figure 7 does not monotonically increase with the time horizon due to finite sample variation
in the Brent price history. Noise in the relationship between volatility and time horizon is effectively averaged
out when the pipeline investment model calculates the expected return to pipeline shippers over the full
duration of their 10-year commitments.
43
See https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo/special/pdf/2009_sp_05.pdf for a description of the EIA
implied volatility data.

A-4

Figure 7: Brent price volatility estimates at horizons up to 13 years

Brent price volatility (%)

200

Baseline
Lower bound
Upper bound

150

100

50

0
0

50

100

Time horizon in months

150

Note: Baseline volatilities are calculated from standard deviations of long differences in historic logged Brent crude prices. Lower bounds are calculated by
extrapolating the June, 2014 18-month implied volatility to longer time horizons
assuming a random walk. Upper bounds are calculated by extrapolating the
historic Brent one-month volatility to longer time horizons assuming a random
walk. Volatilities in percent are calculated for each horizon by exponentiating the
standard deviation, subtracting one, and multiplying by 100.

than the historical average 18-month volatility from our baseline forecast (45.6%), this approach produces lower price volatilities throughout the ten-year pipeline contract than does
our baseline method, as shown in figure 7. We interpret the volatilities from this method as
plausible lower bounds, since they assume that volatility (at any horizon) will not eventually
revert back up to its long-run mean after June, 2014. This assumption is strong: when we
estimate a GARCH(1,1) model on the monthly return on Brent spot prices, we find evidence
of substantial historic mean reversion of volatility to its long-run average.44 The estimated
GARCH equation (combining the ARCH and GARCH terms) is Vt = 0.0071 + 0.0733Vt−1 ,
where Vt is variance in month t. The coefficients imply a long-run one-month volatility of
9.1% (naturally close to the historic one-month average volatility of 9.3% in our baseline
forecast), and the small coefficient on Vt−1 implies rapid reversion back to this long-run
mean after a volatility shock.45 For instance, if volatility at t = 0 were 4.0%, volatility would
reach 9.1% by only t = 2.
Finally, to generate an upper bound on downstream price volatility, we take the long-run
44

Our GARCH model assumes an AR1 process for Brent monthly returns, which is sufficient to eliminate
serial correlation in the residuals (at up to six lags using Breusch-Godfrey tests). A GARCH(1,1) is then
sufficient to eliminate one lag of serial
p correlation in the unexplained variance of the residuals.
45
We obtain 9.1% as 100 ∗ (exp( 0.0071/(1 − 0.0733)) − 1).

A-5

Figure 8: Conditional distribution of downstream prices
(a) Probability that D = 0, Conditional on LLS

(b) Density of D Conditional on LLS, D > 0
10.0

0.6

7.5

Density

Probability

0.8

0.4

0.2

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

5.0

2.5

0.0
25

50

75

LLS Price ($/bbl)

100

125

30

60

LLS Price ($/bbl)

90

120

Source: Bloomberg, Platts, Genscape. D is the difference between the highest rail netback and the LLS rail
netback. Solid lines indicate conditional means. In panel (a), dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.
In panel (b), dashed lines indicate the 2.5% and 97.5% quantiles of the estimated conditional density.

historic one-month horizon Brent volatility (9.3%) and extrapolate it via the square root of
the time horizon (i.e., using a random walk assumption). Because the empirical relationship
between historic volatility and the time horizon increases at a rate less than that from the
square root assumption (as is apparent in figure 7), the volatilities from this final approach
are larger than our baseline volatilities.
B.2.2

Downstream price distribution for rail shippers

This sub-section discusses our non-parametric procedure for estimating the density f (D | Pd ),
which includes a point mass at D = 0 (which occurs whenever the best netback is to LLS).
Recall that our model from section 2.3 assumes that D ≤ r0,d , so that committed pipeline
shippers would never prefer to use rail instead of the pipeline. In our 20 years of spot price
data, this assumption holds for all but 8 days, so we estimate f (D | Pd ) only for D ∈ [0, r0,d ]
and exclude those 8 days from the estimation procedure.
We non-parametrically estimate the conditional density f (D | Pd ) in two steps. First,
we estimate Z(Pd ) = Pr(D = 0 | Pd ), the probability that Pd is the best downstream rail
destination. We estimate Pr(D = 0 | Pd ) by running a locally quadratic regression of an
indicator for whether D is zero onto Pd .46 Second, we estimate f (D | Pd , D > 0), using local
linear conditional density estimation methods in Hyndman and Yao (2002).47 Subsequently,
in our simulations we compute realizations of Pe, conditional on Pd , by taking binomial draws
with probability Z(Pd ). If a draw equals zero, we assign rail shipments to LLS and pay them
the LLS netback Pd − r0,d . If a draw equals one, we take a draw of D from f (D | Pd , D > 0)
and pay rail shipments that draw plus the LLS netback.
46
47

We use the nprobust R package, provided by Calonico, Cattaneo and Farrell (2017).
We use the hdrcde R package.

A-6

Figure 8 shows the estimated conditional distribution of D given Pd . Panel (a) shows
that the probability that Pd is the best rail destination is generally increasing in Pd , though
there is a departure from monotonicity when LLS prices are between $90–$105 per barrel.
LLS prices in this range occurred frequently during 2011–2014, and rarely before. For the
20 or so years prior to 2011, Brent usually traded at discount to LLS of a few dollars per
barrel. Starting in 2011, however, this discount frequently became a premium, sometimes by
as much as $10 per barrel.48 Thus, despite high LLS prices, prices on the East Coast were
even higher, and by an amount that exceeded the difference in shipping costs. This pattern
largely ceased with the relaxation of the U.S. crude oil export ban in January, 2015.
Panel (b) of figure 8 shows the density of D, conditional on D > 0 and Pd . For most values
of Pd , this density is concentrated around just a few dollars per barrel, with a downward
trend in the mode except at values of Pd in excess of roughly $80/bbl.

B.3

Crude-by-rail flows
Figure 9: Map of EIA Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts (PADDs)

Source: EIA

B.4

Railroad transportation costs and calibration of crude-by-rail
cost function

When using the STB waybill sample, we isolate the data to crude oil shipments by keeping only shipments with a Standard Transportation Commodity Code (STCC) of 1311110.
To assign a movement date (and therefore a month) to each shipment, we follow the procedure described in Energy Information Administration (2017) to convert waybill dates to
movement dates. The revenue measure we use is the sum of total freight line-haul revenue
48

See, for example Blas February 26, 2013 and Hunsucker November 20, 2013.

A-7

with fuel surcharges. Our understanding from industry experts is that this revenue includes
compensation for back-haul of empty rail cars; i.e., there are no separate, additional backhaul charges (personal communications with Kenneth Boyer (Michigan State University) and
Justin Kringstad (NDPA)). We obtain total revenue and bbl-miles across all shipments each
month using expansion factors that account for variation in sampling rates for shipments of
different sizes.
Figure 10 presents a version of figure 5, panel (a), from the paper that is residualized.
We perform a bbl-mile weighted regression of each waybill’s revenue per 1000 bbl-mile on
date fixed effects, region fixed effects, distance shipped, the number of carrying railroads,
and the number of cars. Figure 10 plots the resulting date fixed effects.
Figure 10: STB average revenue per bbl-mile shipped, residualized

$ per 1000 bbl-mile, residualized

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Note: Figure plots date fixed effects (relative to the January, 2011 observation) from a waybill-level regression of revenue per 1000 bbl-mile on date FE,
region FE, distance shipped, the number of carrying railroads, and the number of cars, weighted by bbl-miles. Data cover sampled waybills originating
in the EIA’s Midwest region and terminating in the EIA’s East Coast, Gulf
Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. Data from February, April, and
July, 2011 are omitted to protect the confidentiality of carriers’ rates; data
from months before July, 2011 are therefore plotted as points rather than a
line.

To calculate the percentage of crude oil moving on contract (rather than tariff) rates
(87%) and the average contract discount ($0.52 per 1000 bbl-mile), we use the same sample
of waybills as was used to generate figure 5, panel (a). To obtain the contract discount, we
regress revenue per 1000 bbl-mile on a tariff vs contract dummy variable and on month-ofsample fixed effects, distance travelled, the number of carrying railroads, and the number of
cars, while weighting the regression by bbl-miles. $0.52 is the regression coefficient on the
tariff vs contract dummy variable. If we do not include any control variables, we obtain a
A-8

$0.71 contract discount.
To estimate r1 , we first normalize the freight rate and tanker car leasing rate cost series
so that the units on the coefficients in the regressions are dollars per bbl per million bbl per
day (mmbpd). We do so assuming that rail cars have a volume of 30,000 gallons, that rail
cars complete 1.75 round trips per month (per communication from Genscape), and that the
average trip distance to the Gulf Coast is 1,900 miles (Clay et al., 2017). Table 10 presents
the results from regressing the resulting freight rates and tanker car lease rates on rail flows
from the STB data (columns (1) and (2)) and flows from the EIA (columns (3) and (4)).
Table 10: Components of r1

STB Flows

Freight

Tanker

1.36
(0.40)

4.50
(0.71)

EIA Flows
R2
Num. obs.

0.17
57

0.61
28

Freight

Tanker

0.56
(0.30)

2.78
(0.82)

0.06
57

0.31
28

Regressions of freight rates and tanker lease rates onto total
rail flows, as measured using STB and EIA data. Freight
rate data are monthly from January, 2011 to December,
2015, while tanker lease data are monthly from September,
2013 to December, 2015. Freight and tanker rates are scaled
so that the units on the flow coefficients are dollars per bbl
per million bbl per day.

B.5

Calibration of upstream oil supply function intercept

The expected Bakken production forecast we use is the NDPA’s April, 2014 “case 1” forecast,
which represents expected production under the prevailing EIA oil price forecast (personal
communication from Justin J. Kringstad at NDPA (June, 2018)). The production forecast,
supply elasticity, and expected oil price together pin down a supply intercept for each month
of the contract.
In addition to its expected production forecast, the NDPA also provides a conservative
(“case 2”) forecast that is, on average, about 200 mbpd lower than the expected production
path. We construct an “optimistic” forecast that is symmetric to this conservative forecast
(i.e., in each month our optimistic forecast exceeds the baseline forecast by the same amount
that the conservative forecast falls short) and solve for the series of supply intercepts that
are consistent with each of these two scenarios. We then use these pessimistic and optimistic
supply intercepts in our alternative specifications that allow for stochastic upstream oil
supply.

A-9

C

A destination share model with explicit rail contracts

To better infer average rail contract durations, we modify the empirical destination share
model from section 4 to explicitly account for rail contracts. Our goal is to decompose current
rail flows to destination j during month t, which we denote by Rj,t , into new flows, which we
hypothesize respond to contemporaneous price shocks, and old flows, or previously contracted
flows, which should be the result of previous price shocks. In the notation below, Mt is the
total output of North Dakota crude during month t and qj,t is the share of “uncontracted”
crude oil at month t that goes under contract to location j. The parameter s represents
the share of previously contracted flows that are still under contract in the next month.
Equation 5 formalizes this idea:
!
X
Rk,t
Mt+1 − s
+ qj,t+1
(5)
Rj,t+1 =
sRj,t
|{z}
k
old flows still contracted
|
{z
}
new flows available to be contracted

If we view individual contracts as infinitesimal claims to the total flow Mt that do not
retire between periods t and t + 1 with probability s ∈ (0, 1), then the average contract
1
1
. Our goal is to estimate s and therefore 1−s
.
length will be 1−s
We must first specify a model for qj,t+1 , the share of available production that goes under
contract to destination j in period t + 1. We adopt a random utility choice model. Atomistic
shippers, indexed by i, observe a vector of crude price differentials Xj,t+1 and destination
fixed effects δj that account for shipment cost differences or other fixed factors. They then
choose the location with the highest value of indirect utility Xj,t+1 β + δj + i,j,t+1 , where
i,j,t+1 is an i.i.d. logit shock.
To get an expression that relates current flows to a a destination with its lagged flows
and the determinants of new flows, first define an accounting identity for R0,t+1 , the quantity

A-10

of “outside” flows (via pipeline to Cushing) at time t + 1:
X
R0,t+1 = Mt+1 −
Rj,t+1
j

!
= Mt+1 −

X

= Mt+1 −

X

sRj,t + qj,t+1 (Mt+1 − s

X

j

Rk,t )

k

(sRj,t + qj,t+1 (Mt+1 − s (Mt − R0,t )))

j

!
= Mt+1

1−

X

−s

qj,t+1

j

X

(Rj,t − qj,t+1 (Mt − R0,t ))

j

!
= Mt+1

1−

X

−s

qj,t+1

j

X

Rj,t + s (Mt − R0,t )

j

X

qj,t+1

j

!
= Mt+1

1−

X

− s (Mt − R0,t ) + s (Mt − R0,t )

qj,t+1

X

j

!
= Mt+1

1−

X

qj,t+1

j

qj,t+1

!
− s (Mt − R0,t ) 1 −

j

X

qj,t+1

j

!
= (Mt+1 − s (Mt − R0,t )) 1 −

X

qj,t+1

j

This expression relates outside flows in period t + 1, R0,t+1 , to “available” production and
the share of it that is not contracted, which we assume is rail transport to Cushing.
Next, recall that new flow shares are given by a logit random utility model: qjt =
exp(Xjt β+δj )
P
. By the standard properties of these models, the outside share in the ex1+ k exp(Xkt β+δk )
P
qj,t+1
for any choice j.
pression for outside flows above is (1 − k qk,t+1 ) = exp(Xj,t+1
β+δj )
Finally, we can use these two relationships to write an estimable version of the contracting
model:
X
Rj,t+1 = sRj,t + qj,t+1 (Mt+1 − s
Rk,t )
k

= sRj,t + qj,t+1 (Mt+1 − s (Mt − R0,t ))
R0,t+1
P
= sRj,t + qj,t+1
1 − k qk,t+1
= sRj,t + R0,t+1 exp (Xj,t+1 β + δj )
Our data on Rj,t are likely measured with error, since they are computed by the EIA
from the STB’s sample of waybills, in which sampling rates can be below 10%.49 To account
49

This measurement error precludes using a standard log transformation to estimate the equation
log (Rj,t+1 − sRj,t ) = log R0,t+1 +Xj,t+1 β +δj +ξj,t+1 . In this specification, s must be sufficiently small such
that the term inside the left-hand-side logarithm is strictly positive for all observations. With measurement

A-11

for this issue, let µj,t be an iid measurement error that is orthogonal to Rj,t , so that observed
∗
flows are Rj,t
= Rj,t + µj,t . A feasible version of our estimating equation is then:
∗
∗
Rj,t+1
= sRj,t
+ R0,t+1 exp (Xj,t+1 β + δj ) + µj,t+1 − sµj,t .

(6)

∗
Because the measurement error µj,t is mechanically correlated with Rj,t
, we instrument
∗
for Rj,t using the second and third lags of destination price differences, in levels, squares and
∗
across destinations
cubes, as well as a Nevo (2001) style measure of the average value of Rk,t
∗
k 6= j. Lagged prices should influence Rj,t through contracting forces but will be uncorrelated
with sampling-based measurement error in the EIA data, and average lagged flows at other
destinations will capture aggregate demand shocks but not location specific demand shocks.
The instrument set also includes R0,t+1 and destination dummy variables.50 We estimate
this model off of rail flows to the Midwest Region and the East, West, and Gulf coasts using
GMM and approximately-optimal instruments in the spirit of Chamberlain (1987).51
The results of estimating equation (6) are in presented in table 11. The point estimate on
s is 0.96, which implies an average contract length of 24 months. The coefficient on downstream prices is positive, though imprecisely estimated, consistent with the latent shipping
choices being driven by variation in netbacks. Finally, the point estimates on the location
dummies are all negative (and also imprecisely estimated), consistent with rail transportation
to far away destinations being more expensive than rail transportation to other destinations
within the Midwest region, which includes North Dakota.

D

Equilibrium in the pipeline investment model when
rail can flow to multiple destinations

As in section 2.1, define Pp (K) as the minimum Pd such that the pipeline is full. Again, we
have Pp (K) = S(K). Similar to section 2.1, define Pr (K) as the minimum P̃ such that rail
is used. Again, we have Pr (K) = S(K) + r0 .
We now derive the equilibrium relationship governing the pipeline capacity built. As
before, the marginal committed shipper must pay C(K)/K regardless of the realization of
Pd or P̃ . By committing, the pipeline shipper can again earn returns in two states of the
world: (1) the pipeline is full but no rail is used, and (2) the pipeline is full and rail is being
used.
If the pipeline is full but rail is not used, the upstream price is simply given by Pp (K),
and shippers earn Pd − Pp (K). This situation occurs when Pd ≥ Pp (K) and P̃ ≤ Pr (K).
error in the Rj,t , however, especially in the early part of the sample when rail flows are small, we have found
that s then cannot be greater than roughly 0.1, implying an average contract length of only a month or two.
50
We do not use contemporaneous price differences in order to avoid bias from standard supply/demand
endogeneity of the price differences Xj,t+1 .
51
Specifically, we construct our instruments in four steps. First, we use nonlinear least squares to get a
(biased) estimate of the model’s parameters. Second, we regress our three endogenous variables onto our
instrument set and recover their predicted values. Third, we compute a version of the conditional moment
function implied by equation 6 using the predicted values, other exogenous variables in the model, and the
NLLS parameter estimates. Finally, we use as instruments the gradients of this function with respect to s,
β, and the δ’s.

A-12

Table 11: GMM estimates of the rail contract model
Estimates
s
β
δEast Coast
δGulf Coast
δWest Coast

0.96 (0.03)
0.06 (0.08)
−2.07 (1.87)
−2.66 (2.09)
−3.28 (1.87)

Num. obs.

231

Note: Table presents estimates of equation (6). s denotes the share of contracted flows that do
not expire each month, and β is the coefficient on destination j’s oil price differential relative
to Cushing. The δ’s are fixed effects for each rail destination. The outside good is shipment
within the Midwest region by rail. Two-step GMM HAC standard errors in parentheses. See
text for details.

Thus, the expected value for committed shippers that accrues when the pipe is full but rail
is not used is given by:
#
"Z
Z
P̄

Pr (K)

(Pd − Pp (K))f (P̃ |Pd )dP̃ f (Pd )dPd .
Pp (K)

(7)

Pd

When rail is used (and the pipeline is therefore full), the upstream price is given by
S(K + Qr (P̃ )), and pipeline shippers earn Pd − S(K + Qr (P̃ )). This situation occurs when
Pd ≥ Pp (K) and P̃ ≥ Pr (K). Thus, the expected value for committed shippers that accrues
when rail is used is given by:
#
"Z
Z
P̄

P̄

(Pd − S(K + Qr (P̃ )))f (P̃ |Pd )dP̃ f (Pd )dPd .
Pp (K)

(8)

Pr (K)

Equilibrium capacity K is therefore given by equation (9), which collapses to the singledestination equilibrium equation (1) if P̃ is always equal to Pd .
#
Z P̄ "Z Pr (K)
C(K)
=
(Pd − Pp (K))f (P̃ |Pd )dP̃ f (Pd )dPd
K
Pp (K)
Pd
#
Z P̄ "Z P̄
(Pd − S(K + Qr (P̃ )))f (P̃ |Pd )dP̃ f (Pd )dPd .
(9)
+
Pp (K)

Pr (K)

For a given capacity K, each term on the right-hand side of equation (9) will be smaller
than the corresponding term on the right-hand side of equation (1). Thus, the equilibrium
pipeline capacity in the presence of multiple rail destinations will be smaller than the case
in which rail can only serve a single destination.

A-13

We now apply the implicit function theorem to determine dK/dr0 :52
hR
i
R P̄
P̄
r1
(1
−
)f
(
P̃
|P
)d
P̃
f (Pd )dPd
d
Pr (K)
Pp (K)
dK
S 0 (K+Qr (P̃ ))+r1
h
i
=
R
R Pr (K)
R P̄
r1 S 0 (K+Qr (P̃ ))
d(C(K)/K)
dr0
0 (K)f (P̃ |P )dP̃ + P̄
S
f
(
P̃
|P
)d
P̃
f (Pd )dPd
+
d
d
dK
Pr (K) S 0 (K+Qr (P̃ ))+r1
Pd
Pp (K)
(10)
The most important difference between equations (10) and (2) is that the presence of
multiple rail destinations decreases the probability that the pipe is full but rail is not used.
This change causes the second term in the denominator of (10) to be smaller than the
corresponding term in (2), thereby increasing the sensitivity dK/dr0 of pipeline capacity to
the cost of rail transport.53

52

Note that the terms involving the derivative of Pp (K) are equal to zero, and the terms involving the
derivative of Pr (K) cancel.
53
When r1 > 0 the impact of multiple rail destinations on the final terms in the numerator and denominator
of equation (10) is ambiguous, so that the overall comparison of dK/dr0 between equations (10) and (2) is
also ambiguous. Nonetheless, we find in practice that dK/dr0 is larger when we evaluate our model allowing
for crude-by-rail to flow to multiple destinations.

A-14

E

Numerical implementation of pipeline investment
model

This appendix provides details on how the pipeline investment model presented in section 2
is implemented numerically. We begin with the baseline model and then discuss the models
involving multiple railroad destinations and railroad contracting.

E.1

Baseline model

The primary output of the model is a calculation of the expected return to pipeline shippers
over the duration of a ten-year shipping commitment, given input parameters. This calculation, which then feeds into a calculation of the derivative dK/dr0 , proceeds using four broad
steps:
1. For each month t of the commitment period, derive the upstream oil supply curve and
compute Pp (K) and Pr (K), the minimum downstream prices Pd at which the pipeline
is full and rail is used, respectively.
2. For each t and for each possible realization of Pd , calculate pipeline flows, rail flows,
and the pipeline shipping margin Pd − Pu .
3. For each t, calculate the expected return at t using the shipping margins calculated in
step 2 and the distribution ft (Pd ).
4. Compute the overall expected return to committed shippers across all t.
At each t, we compute the upstream supply curve intercept using the assumed value for
the supply elasticity, the June, 2014 expectation of a long-run $99/bbl oil price, and the
NDPA oil production forecast for month t. Pp (K) at t is then given by the upstream inverse
net supply curve for oil at an output level equal to the pipeline capacity K.54 Pr (K) is then
given by Pp (K) + r0 .
Given a value Pd , pipeline flows Qp are either K if Pd ≥ Pp (K) or given by the upstream
net supply curve at Pd for Pd < Pp (K). Rail flows Qr are zero if Pd ≤ Pr (K). Otherwise, Qr
is the solution to St (K + Qr ) = Pd − r0 − r1 Qr , which is analytic for r1 = 0 or can otherwise
be easily solved numerically. The margin for pipeline shippers is then Pd − St (Qp + Qr ).
In commitment month t (where t ranges from 37 months to 156 months), the standard
deviation of the lognormal distribution ft (Pd ) is calculated as discussed in section 3.2. E[Pd ]
is $99/bbl for all t. The expected margin for pipeline shippers in month t is then the integral
of Pd − S(Qp + Qr ) over ft (Pd ). We compute the integral using Simpson’s Rule with 1000
nodes.55
54

Net supply is supply minus local refining capacity of 88 mbpd.
We distribute the nodes evenly over the unit interval and then map the nodes to R+ using an inverse
lognormal distribution that has a standard deviation given by the standard deviation of ft (Pd ) at the end of
the shipping commitment period (month 156). We drop the last node, which has Pd → ∞. We use Simpson’s
Rule rather than quadrature so that the nodes on Pd are the same for all t even as the standard deviation
of ft (Pd ) varies, saving computation time.
55

A-15

Finally, to obtain the expected return over all t we multiply each expected return by the
discount factor δ t , sum over these products, and then divide by the sum of the δ t . δ is based
off an annual discount rate of 0.1 (Kellogg, 2014), so that δ = 1/1.1(1/12) .
To calculate the derivative dK/dr0 , we increment r0 by $0.10/bbl and solve for the new
equilibrium pipeline capacity K such that the pipeline’s average cost equals the expected
shipping margin. Let M0 denote the expected margin we calculate for the true DAPL and
total export capacities, denoted by Kd0 and K0 , respectively (i.e., M0 denotes the values
presented in table 2). Assuming that pipeline construction has no scale economies, the
average cost is constant at M0 regardless of the new capacity K. Otherwise, given a guess
of K, the average cost is given by ((K − K0 + Kd0 )/Kd0 )εc −1 , where εc is the elasticity of
the pipeline’s total cost with respect to capacity. The calculation of the expected pipeline
shipping margin given K and the incremented r0 proceeds as discussed above. For the
parameters used in our calibration, the expected shipping margin decreases more quickly
with K than does average cost, so that it is straightforward to solve numerically for the
unique K that satisfies equilibrium at the incremented r0 . We repeat this process for a
decrement of r0 by $0.10/bbl and then obtain dK/dr0 using a two-sided derivative.

E.2

Multiple destination model

When rail can flow to multiple destinations, the only change from appendix E.1 is to the
calculation of Qr . Rail earns the downstream price P̃ , which is distributed on f (P̃ |Pd ).
Whenever P̃ > Pr (K), Qr is then the solution to S(K + Qr ) = P̃ − r0 − r1 Qr . Otherwise,
Qr = 0. For each Pd , we then compute the expected return to pipeline shippers by integrating
the pipeline shipping margin Pd − S(Qp + Qr ) over the distribution f (P̃ |Pd ).

E.3

Railroad contracting model

When rail flows on 24-month contracts, as discussed in section 4.2, several changes are
required to our computations. We now proceed as follows:
1. Compute Pp (K) as in appendix E.1.
2. Within each 24-month rail contract cycle, and given a rail contract volume Kr , compute
rail flow Qr and the expected shipping margin for each value of Pd .
3. At the start of a 24-month cycle, and at each initial downstream price Pd , compute
the equilibrium volume of rail contracts Kr and the expected margin for shippers over
the life of the rail contract.
4. Compute the overall expected return to pipeline shippers across all five rail contract
cycles.
Within each month t of a 24-month cycle, and given capacities K and Kr , there is a
critical price Pc (K, Kr ) = St (K + Kr ) such that the pipe is full and all contracted rail
capacity is used. Whenever Pd > Pc (K, Kr ), the margin earned by both pipeline and rail
shippers is simply Pd − Pc (K, Kr ), pipeline flows Qp equal K, and rail flows Qr equal Kr .
If Pd ∈ [Pp (K) + r0 , Pc (K, Kr )], then the shipping margin is zero, Qp = K, and Qr is the
A-16

solution to St (K + Qr ) = Pd . And if Pd ≤ Pp (K), then the shipping margin is zero, Qp is
given by St (Qp ) = Pd , and Qr = 0.
Just before a 24-month cycle, rail shippers will commit to an equilibrium capacity Kr
such that the marginal capacity cost r0 + r1 Kr equals the expected shipping margin over the
24 months, given an initial price Pd that is observed when the contracts are signed. Given
Pd and a guess of Kr , calculation of this expected margin follows steps 3 and 4 discussed in
appendix E.1, but using ft (Pd ) for t ∈ [1, 24], the expected supply intercepts corresponding
to the 24 months of the cycle, and margins obtained via the calculations discussed in the
above paragraph. Because the expected margin over the 24-month contract strictly decreases
in Kr , we can solve for the unique Kr that satisfies the equilibrium condition at each initial
price Pd .
There are five rail contracting cycles over the life of pipeline shippers’ 10-year commitment. The present value (at the pipeline commitment date) of the expected margin for a
cycle beginning at date t is given by the integral of the expected margins obtained in step
3 over the distribution of initial prices ft (Pd ), multiplied by the discount factor δ t . We then
sum these margins across the five cycles and divide by the sum of the δ t .

A-17

