NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ATTRIBUTE SUBSTITUTION IN HOUSEHOLD VEHICLE PORTFOLIOS
James Archsmith
Kenneth Gillingham
Christopher R. Knittel
David S. Rapson
Working Paper 23856
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23856

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

This paper has benefited from conversations with seminar participants at Universidad Carlos III
de Madrid, CESifo, ETH Zurich, University of Mannheim, European University Institute,
London School of Economics, Toulouse School of Economics, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, the
Energy Institute @ Haas Summer Energy Camp, IIOC and NBER EEE Spring Meetings. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the California Air Resources Board. The
statements and conclusions presented are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
California Air Resources Board. The mention of commercial products, their source, or their use in
connection with material reported herein is not to be construed as actual or implied endorsement
of such products. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23856.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by James Archsmith, Kenneth Gillingham, Christopher R. Knittel, and David S. Rapson.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Attribute Substitution in Household Vehicle Portfolios
James Archsmith, Kenneth Gillingham, Christopher R. Knittel, and David S. Rapson
NBER Working Paper No. 23856
September 2017
JEL No. L62,R41
ABSTRACT
Household preferences for goods with a bundle of attributes may have complex substitution
patterns when one attribute is changed. For example, a household faced with an exogenous
increase in the size of one television may choose to decrease the size of other televisions within
the home. This paper quantifies the extent of attribute substitution in the context of multi-vehicle
households. We deploy a novel identification strategy to examine how an exogenous change in
the fuel economy of a kept vehicle affects a household's choice of a second vehicle. We find
strong evidence of attribute substitution in the household vehicle portfolio. This effect operates
through car attributes that are correlated with fuel economy, including vehicle footprint and
weight. Our findings suggest that attribute substitution exerts a strong force that may erode a
substantial portion of the expected future gasoline savings from fuel economy standards,
particularly those that are attribute-based. Elements of our identification strategy are relevant to a
broad class of settings in which consumers make sequential purchases of durable portfolio goods.

James Archsmith
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Sheilds Ave.
Davis, CA 95616
jesmith@ucdavis.edu

Christopher R. Knittel
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu

Kenneth Gillingham
School of Forestry and Environmental Studies
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
kenneth.gillingham@yale.edu

David S. Rapson
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
dsrapson@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

The idea that products can act as complements or substitutes is commonplace in economics. What
is less well understood is how households trade off particular attributes of one product with the
attributes of another. For example, a household may choose to purchase a smaller television in
one room if faced with an exogenous increase in the size of another television in the household.
One immediate implication of this “attribute substitution” is that the demand for products within
a household will not be independent. A second implication is that attribute substitution may
influence the efficiency or cost effectiveness of policies that influence the attributes of products,
such as energy efficiency standards.
Few papers have been able to empirically measure these forces. There is a literature, for example,
that suggests households engage in attribute substitution when it comes to children. Ben-Porath
and Welch (1976) and Angrist and Evans (1998) show that households that have had two children
of the same gender are more likely to have a third child, compared to two-children households
endowed with one boy and one girl. This suggests that the attributes of the first two children,
namely gender, affect the utility from having a third child. There is also evidence that households
trade off, or substitute, the characteristics of occupations across spouses. For example, households
may avoid having two occupations in the same sector as a way to reduce risk.1 While intuitive,
identification of such a phenomena in the broader labor market is difficult because matching costs
may be lower within an occupation or sector; physicians tend to meet other physicians and not
economists.
Our setting, a household’s demand for vehicles, allows us to overcome similar identification
challenges. Attribute substitution may manifest itself in a number of dimensions. For example,
households may prefer to have one SUV and one sedan, or one powerful vehicle and one fuelefficient vehicle. Identification in this case is challenging because households may also fall into
certain household “types.” Just as Anderson et al. (2015) and Mannering and Winston (1985)
show that some households have a preference for a certain brand of vehicle, some households may
also have a preference for certain attributes. In such instances, if households have a preference for,
say, horsepower or fuel economy, the attribute will be present in high or low levels across all goods
in the portfolio.
In this paper, we overcome these identification challenges through the use of a rich data set
that enables us to track households over a number of vehicle replacement and purchase decisions,
and through the use of an instrumental variables strategy. We use panel data on the portfolio of
vehicles within a household over time to estimate how a household’s choice of vehicle depends on
the attributes of the other vehicles owned by the household. Our empirical strategy focuses on
two-vehicle households, which offer a clean experiment that we will discuss in detail. We estimate
how the fuel economy of a newly-added vehicle depends on the fuel economy of the vehicle already
1

See, for example, Udry et al. (1995) and Ellis (2000).

2

held by the household and then show the implications of this dependence.
While attribute substitution is relevant across a broad range of products and settings, understanding the patterns of demand for vehicles is particularly important for a number of policy issues,
most notably the effect of fuel economy standards or gasoline taxes on vehicle choice. Empirical
models used to analyze the costs and benefits of such policies often capture many key drivers of
patterns of vehicle demand, but typically assume away interactions between preferences for multiple vehicles within a household. That is, these models of fuel economy standards assume that
consumers choose only a single vehicle or, alternatively, that the choice of each vehicle in a household is independent of the others (Bento et al., 2009; Goulder, Jacobsen, and van Benthem, 2012;
Jacobsen, 2013).
However, there are likely to be two sources of interdependence. The first is that households
may have particularly strong preferences for certain vehicle attributes that put them into different
household “types.” This source of dependence is implicitly captured in empirical models that
allow for variation in the willingness to pay for vehicle attributes. For example, the choice of
fuel economy across vehicles within a household will be positively correlated for a household that
particularly values horsepower. The second source of interdependence is that households may
have complementarities and other portfolio considerations, as suggested by Gentzkow (2007) for
newspapers and Wakamori (2011) for Japanese vehicle purchasers. Wakamori (2011) focuses on
the combination of a small automobile and minivan, but the more policy-relevant consideration in
the United States would be a case where a household endowed with a more fuel-efficient vehicle
will compensate by reducing the fuel economy (perhaps by increasing the horsepower or size) of
the second vehicle.
The presence of this second form of interdependence can alter the predictions from policy
counterfactuals related to fuel economy standards and gasoline taxes. Suppose a policy were to
increase the chosen fuel economy of the newest vehicle for a given household at time t. When
the household subsequently replaces the other vehicle at a later date, attribute substitution could
lead them to purchase a lower fuel economy vehicle than they might have otherwise. Because fuel
economy is correlated with other attributes, when there are attribute-based standards, such as the
footprint-based standards in the United States (Gillingham, 2013; Ito and Sallee, 2014; Kellogg,
2017), this effect could further drive a wedge between the economic efficiency of fuel economy
standards and Pigouvian gasoline taxes. Pigouvian gasoline taxes would still be economically
efficient in the presence of attribute-subsititution effects, but these substitution effects may affect
the counterfactual level of emissions reductions under Pigouvian taxes.
The ideal experiment to answer our research question would randomly assign the “kept” vehicle
to households in the market for a new or used vehicle and then observe the relationship between
the fuel economy of this kept vehicle and the fuel economy of the newly-acquired vehicle. Since this
ideal experiment is obviously not feasible, our identification strategy must overcome two potential
sources of endogeneity stemming from the non-random assignment of the kept vehicle. The first is

3

the choice of which vehicle to replace. Since the household preference for particular features of a
multi-car portfolio will directly inform the decision of which car to keep or drop, the attributes of the
kept car are endogeneous when using observational data. The second is related to the presence of
unobserved household preferences for vehicle attributes. Household fixed effects allow us to focus
on within-household variation and can address time-invariant unobserved preferences, but there
would still be a concern if preferences change over time. Time-varying preferences may produce a
correlation between the desired attributes of the kept and newly-acquired vehicle, again implying
that the attributes of the kept vehicle are endogenous.
We employ two sets of instruments to account for these potential sources of bias. The first
set of instruments is derived from the observation that changes in the relative price of cars in a
portfolio systematically affect the probability that the lowest fuel economy car is dropped. We
discuss and present three instruments that rely on this feature of the choice setting, with our
preferred instrument based on deviations from the expected change in relative vehicle prices at the
time when the kept car was initially purchased. To the best of our knowledge, this instrument is
new to the literature. The second instrument is the gasoline price at the time of the purchase of the
kept vehicle. A number of papers (Klier and Linn, 2010; Allcott and Wozny, 2014; Busse, Knittel,
and Zettelmeyer, 2013; Gillingham, 2011) have shown that vehicle purchase behavior is influenced
by contemporaneous gasoline prices. Given this literature and the finding in Anderson, Kellogg,
and Sallee (2013) that consumers tend to use the current gasoline price in forming expectations of
future prices, we would expect the fuel economy of the kept vehicle to be influenced by the gasoline
price at the time of that purchase. We argue that this instrument for the kept vehicle fuel economy
satisfies the exclusion restriction because after controlling for current gasoline price, past gasoline
prices should not influence the choice of the new vehicle. This assumption rests on limited serial
correlation in the residuals and assuming that consumers are using the contemporaneous gasoline
price to form expectations of future gasoline prices.
We find evidence that households substitute attributes across the vehicle portfolio. Increasing
the fuel economy of the kept car induces households to demand less fuel economy in the purchased
car. We show this using a continuous measure of the newly-acquired vehicle fuel economy as the
dependent variable and by estimating the probability a household purchases a vehicle in the upper
and lower quartiles of the fuel economy distribution. Increases in the fuel economy of the kept car
reduce the probability the household purchases a car in the lower quartile of gallons per mile (the
highest fuel economy quartile), while such increases raise the probability the household buys a car
in the upper quartile (the lowest fuel economy quartile). The effects we estimate are equilibrium
effects on the market, explicitly allowing for the entire bundle of vehicle attributes to change.
We focus on fuel economy as the measure of interest due to its high correlation with many other
attributes (Knittel, 2011) and its particular policy relevance, as we readily admit that households
may be substituting an attribute that is correlated with fuel economy, such as size or power, and
not fuel economy itself.

4

We further find that changes in gasoline prices affect household preferences in intuitive ways.
As gasoline prices increase, the effect of the kept vehicle fuel consumption and the probability of
buying a car in the lower quartile of fuel consumption becomes even more positive. In contrast,
as gasoline prices increase, the effect of the kept vehicle fuel consumption and the probability of
buying a car in the upper quartile of fuel consumption becomes even more negative.
To gauge the importance of attribute substitution, we use our reduced form results to explore
the net effects of an exogenous increase in the fuel economy of the kept vehicle. We are agnostic
as to what is causing this increase in fuel economy. It could be, for example, from fuel economy
standards, subsidizing fuel economy, or improved technology. In such a thought experiment, a
number of adjustments by the household are put in motion. The first, and the focus of our paper,
is that the attribute substitution effect implies a decrease in the fuel economy of the newly purchased
vehicle. Our estimates suggest that attribute substitution will have a large countervailing effect
on the fuel economy of the newly purchased vehicle. For example, in our preferred specification,
increasing the fuel economy of the kept vehicle by 10 percent results in a 4.8 percent decrease in
the fuel economy of the purchased vehicle.2
Understanding the full impact of our thought experiment requires estimating how an increase
in the fuel economy of the kept car alters not only the fuel economy of the newly purchased vehicle,
but also how the two vehicles are used. When the kept vehicle has higher fuel economy, the cost
per mile of driving is lower, so the well-known rebound effect implies that the kept vehicle will be
driven more miles. Two additional forces are also at play. First, a decrease in the fuel economy
of the newly-purchased vehicle will imply fewer miles traveled by this vehicle. This is a negative
rebound brought about by attribute substitution. Second, by changing the relative fuel economy
of the two vehicles within the household, miles will naturally flow away from the now less efficient
vehicle to the now more efficient vehicle. Using data on household miles driven by both vehicles, we
measure the magnitudes of these effects. We find that these effects also reduce the savings from the
exogenous increase in fuel economy from our thought experiment, but the main channel remains
through the fuel economy of the newly-purchased vehicle.
Attribute substitution erodes over 60% of the fuel savings from the fuel economy increase of
the kept vehicle on net after accounting for all of these factors. As a specific example, consider
a 10 percent increase in fuel economy from the average vehicle in our sample. Given the average
miles driven (688 per vehicle in our sample), this 10 percent fuel economy increase would directly
lead to a 69 gallon decrease in annual fuel consumption. However, due to attribute substitution
the next vehicle the household purchases will be less fuel efficient than it otherwise would have
been. This decrease in fuel economy of the newly-purchased vehicle reduces the fuel savings from
our thought experiment to 40 gallons, holding usage of the two vehicles constant. But we also find
significant changes in usage patterns that further reduce the net fuel savings. Mileage of the kept
2

We also show that the attribute substitution effect operates strongly through attributes that are correlated with
fuel economy, including vehicle footprint and weight. We do not attempt to separately identify these channels.

5

car increases significantly. A large fraction of this increase is due to shifts in miles traveled from
the now less fuel efficient purchased vehicle; however, we also find a net increase in overall mileage
across the two-vehicle portfolio. Accounting for all of the changes, the net savings of the exogenous
increase in fuel economy falls from the naive estimate of 68 gallons to 24 or 27 gallons, depending
on whether the initial vehicle was the most fuel efficient vehicle in the household.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the household
vehicle choice problem and outlines a simple theoretical model (Section 2). We then describe our
datasets, the restrictions that determine the sample used for our empirical tests, our identification
strategy and empirical approach (Section 3). We next present our results and their economic
importance (Section 4). We conclude with a brief discussion of the implications for policymakers
and empiricists (Section 6).

2

Context and Model

We begin by developing a simple economic framework of utility maximization in a setting where
consumers enjoy a portfolio comprised of multiple units of a similar good. The model builds upon
and shares elements from the frameworks presented in Gentzkow (2007) and Wakamori (2011).
We consider the possibility that the optimal level of attributes of one good in the portfolio may
be related to the level of those attributes in another. The framework maintains generality by
referring to any product that may have portfolio characteristics, but the reader may prefer to
hold in mind a multi-vehicle household (our empirical application). For simplicity, the household
is considered an autonomous decision-maker (i.e., a single consumer) such that issues of withinhousehold bargaining are not considered. When the consumer derives utility from the attributes of
each good, the model will demonstrate how preferences may lead the consumer to jointly optimize
the level of attributes across goods in their portfolio. This section will also highlight identification
challenges that motivate the estimation approach that we later deploy.
Consider a consumer that possesses one unit of the good and is purchasing another. Consider
further a standard discrete choice framework with a random utility model. Let the characteristics
of the good be given by the vector θV , where V ∈ {A, B, ...} denotes distinct bundles of attributes
embodied by the product, which we will call “types.” For example, in the case of vehicles product
types may be defined broadly, such as the class of vehicle (e.g., SUV or small car), or at a finer
level such as at the make-model level.
Suppose the consumer is endowed with a product of type A and is deciding which subsequent
product to purchase for her portfolio.3 The consumer receives utility based on the characteristics of
each product type that she holds. She may also receive utility from having a portfolio of products
with different characteristics. Let the contribution to utility from having a particular portfolio be
3

We assume that the probability of not purchasing the subsequent product is not altered with a change in an
attribute of product A. This allows us to simplify the model by ignoring the outside option.

6

given by ΓAB such that ΓAB is utility that is additional and derived from the fact that the consumer
possesses a portfolio comprised of products A and B concurrently. The indirect utility derived from
such a portfolio is given as:
uAB = f (θA ) + f (θB ) + ΓAB − α(pA + pB ),

(2.1)

where f (.) is a function that maps product attributes into consumer utility, and pV is the price of
product V .
In the context of many household durable goods, a portfolio is likely to arise from sequential
purchases. This is typically (though not necessarily) the case with multi-car households, financial
asset portfolios, some household durables (e.g., electronics, art, decor), clothing fashion, media
subscriptions, higher education choices, and more. While the utility formation described above
does not change in the case of sequential purchases, the choice of the paired product will occur
conditional on the attributes of the pre-existing item. We now shift focus to such a sequential
purchase scenario.

2.1

Implications for Product Choice

We seek to understand how an exogenous change in the attributes of the already-owned good
influences the choice of the second product. Conceptually, there exists a cross-attribute elasticity
that functions much like a cross-price elasticity. Whereas the cross-price elasticity reflects the
change in demand for one product as a function of the price of the other, the cross-attribute elasticity
reflects how the change in an attribute influences the probability of choosing a particular followon product. Extend the above framework by assuming that the consumer may choose between
options B and C for the second product. The household chooses portfolio AB rather than AC if
uAB > uAC . Thus, AB is chosen if:
f (θB ) − f (θC ) + ΓAB − ΓAC − αpB + αpC > 0.

(2.2)

This simple inequality indicates that the consumer will choose B as the second product when the
net utility of the product characteristics, cost, and portfolio utility from B dominate the net utility
of the product characteristics, cost and portfolio utility from C.
A set of policy-relevant comparative statics emerge from this framework. Consider what the
model implies for the equilibrium portfolio choice probabilities. Let g(.) be the distribution of
preferences in the population. Then conditional on purchasing a second product, for the simple
choice between B and C the choice probabilities are given as follows:

7

Z
I(uAB > uAC )dG(u),

P rAB =
Zu

I(uAC > uAB )dG(u).

P rAC =
u

Here I(·) is an indicator and G(·) is the distribution of utilities in the population.
The goal of this paper is to examine how a change in the attributes of a kept good, A, alters
choice probabilities relating to a subsequent purchase. Thus, for a given consumer we are interested
in the choice between portfolios AB and AC when θA changes. How the choice between AB and
AC changes with a change in θA reflects consumer preferences for different portfolios of products,
which is governed by the derivative of (2.2) with respect to θA :

∂ΓAB
∂θA

−

∂ΓAC
∂θA .

Many different

preferences are possible.
Allow θVm to denote the element in θV associated with the individual attribute m ∈ M . If
the endowed product A experiences an increase in a desirable attribute (i.e., θVm increases), this
lessens the need for m in a subsequent purchase if there is attribute substitution and increases it if
there is attribute complementarity. If households display a preference for attribute substitution for
attribute m, then increasing θVm for the initial good would decrease the willingness to pay for m in
the subsequent purchase. Thus, ceteris paribus, the probability of purchasing a good abundant in
attribute m would decrease. For precision, we can more formally define this preference for attribute
substitution as follows:
m , and let
Definition 1. Consider a change in the (initial) product A’s level of attribute m, θA
m < θ m . A consumer exhibits
B possess a lower concentration of m than type C such that θB
C

a preference for attribute substitution in m when

∂P rAB
m
∂θA

>

∂P rAC
m .
∂θA

m
That is, an increase in θA

increases the probability of the portfolio AB relative to the probability of portfolio AC.
For the remainder of this section and beyond, we will focus on attribute substitution rather
than attribute complementarity. There is no a priori reason why one wouldn’t observe attribute
complementarity in any number of settings; however, to limit the number of new concepts, we focus
on attribute substitution since it appears to be most relevant to the household vehicle portfolio.
Furthermore, we now begin to shift our focus towards the empirical application which examines
fuel economy of vehicles.

2.2

Considerations Relating to Household Vehicle Portfolios

It is important to note the differences between attribute substitution and a household’s potential
desire to diversify attributes. Attribute substitution implies that an exogenous increase in the fuel
economy of the kept vehicle A leads to the purchase of a lower fuel economy vehicle B, regardless
of whether vehicle A is the more fuel efficient or less fuel efficient vehicle in the household. Thus,
attribute substitution may lead to a convergence or divergence in levels of fuel intensity in the
8

portfolio. In contrast, when there is a desire for attribute diversification, the paired product choice
in the portfolio depends on whether vehicle A is the more or less fuel efficient vehicle in the household. Consider, for example, the case where vehicle A is the less fuel efficient vehicle. If households
desire diversification, increasing the fuel economy of vehicle A could lead the household to further
increase the fuel economy of vehicle B because of the preference for diversity in the portfolio. This
is the opposite of what would occur under attribute substitution. Now consider the case where
vehicle A is the more fuel efficient vehicle. Under a preference for diversification, increasing the fuel
economy of vehicle A would lead the household to decrease the fuel economy of vehicle B. Note
that in this case diversification is observationally equivalent to attribute substitution.
This discussion alludes to the challenge when attempting to empirically distinguish between
attribute substitution and a preference for diversification. Our empirical specifications will allow
the change in vehicle B’s fuel economy to depend on the relative fuel economies of the two vehicles
in order to empirically test whether the data supports attribute substitution or diversification.
Irrespective of whether the kept car is the high or low fuel economy vehicle, there is evidence of
attribute substitution if households repeatedly choose replacement cars that move the average fuel
economy towards a “target” average fuel economy for the vehicles in their portfolio.

3

Data and Identification

The cornerstone of our dataset is the universe of California vehicle registration records that occurred from 2001-2007.4 The DMV dataset includes every vehicle registered under the residential
designation code (e.g., not commercial or government). In California every vehicle must be registered annually. Each record includes the 17-digit vehicle identification number (VIN) that uniquely
identifies the vehicle, that year’s registration date, the date when the vehicle was last sold, and
various other information. A confidential version of the data includes registrant surnames and
premise address. This information allows us to construct a household-level panel dataset of vehicle
ownership in partnership with the California Air Resources Board.
Basic vehicle attributes (e.g., horsepower, weight, etc.) are available via a VIN decoder that
we purchased from DataOne Software. We augment the decoder to include vehicle fuel economy,
which is available from the US Environmental Protection Agency. Vehicle-miles traveled (VMT)
are available for each VIN whenever the vehicle is sold and upon receiving biannual Smog Check
certification.5 We thus have an average measure of miles traveled by each vehicle and, by extension,
each household for each year in our sample. The coarseness of these data are not optimal for
examining high-frequency effects of VMT-switching between vehicles in response to changes in
gasoline prices. Nonetheless, gasoline prices are a variable of interest in this study, since they affect
the household’s optimal portfolio of vehicle fuel economy. Our gasoline price data are from the Oil
4

We thank the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) for making these data available for research.
New vehicles are not required to have a smog check until six years after registration, subsequently it is a biennial
check. Hybrid electric vehicles and electric vehicles are also exempt.
5

9

Price Information Service (OPIS) at the county-month level.

3.1

Describing the Sample

In each year households are characterized by the starting and ending number of vehicles in their
portfolio. In year t a household’s starting portfolio size (N s ) is the number of vehicles registered in
that year. If the household also registers exactly N s vehicles in year t + 1 or t + 2, then the ending
portfolio size (N e ) in year t is N s . If the number of vehicles registered in years t + 1 and t + 2 are
identical to each other, but not equal to N s then the ending portfolio size is the number of vehicles
registered in the later years.6
Table 1 shows the distribution of household portfolio transitions. Rows indicate the number of
cars in year t, and columns indicate the number of cars in t + 1. The table represents all possible
household transitions. The large mass on diagonals indicates that many households do not increase
or decrease the number of cars that they register from year to year. A careful interpretation of
“0” is necessary: a household with 0 cars is not in our dataset, so transitions from 0 occur when a
Californian household without a car in t registers one in t + 1, or with observationally-equivalence,
a household moves to California from another state. Similarly, transitions to 0 occur either when
a household sells all of its registered cars, if it exits the data via a move to another state or a
dissolution of the household.
The key regressions that follow are estimated using a sample of two-car households that replace
one of their cars, a sample which we call “2x2 replacement households.”7 While other transitions
are certainly interesting, two-car replacement households provide the cleanest experiment. Households increasing the number of cars in their portfolio are likely to be experiencing an unobserved
development that increases their demand for transportation (e.g., having a baby). Furthermore, it
is unclear how to characterize the channels through which the consumers may have preferences for
attribute substitution when there are multiple kept cars. Do these households substitute attributes
based on the highest-VMT kept car, or the newest? Or is a higher dimensional analysis required?
Given that no clear answer exists to these questions, we choose the transparent path of focusing on the replacement decisions of two-car households, consistent with the simple theory model
presented above. Moving forward with our 2x2 replacement sample is valid when considering small
deviations from an interior consumer choice optimum. For such deviations, the probability of a dif6

We examine one and two years in the future as a household that may register more cars in one year than they ever
owned simultaneously. For example, consider a household that owns two cars in year t. In year t + 1 they re-register
both previously owned vehicles and the registrations expire. Then, toward the end of the year, they sell one vehicle
and replace it with a new one (which requires registration of the new vehicle). This household has registered three
unique vehicles in year t + 1 but only ever owned two at any given time. In year t + 2, barring the purchase of yet
another new vehicle, the household would return to registering two vehicles.
7
We define a household as replacing one vehicle if the starting (in year t) and ending (in year t + 1 or t + 2)
portfolios differ by one vehicle. The household may conduct multiple vehicle transactions, as long as one of the two
vehicles appears in both the starting and ending portfolios. We do not consider households where both vehicles in
the two-vehicle portfolio change as the relative timing of each purchase becomes important for defining the portfolio
at the time of each vehicle’s purchase.

10

ferent transition (e.g., not purchasing a second vehicle or purchasing a third vehicle) is not affected
by a small change in an attribute of the kept vehicle.
Table 2 shows summary statistics for all 2x2 replacement households, including segmentation
based on the fuel economy of the bought car. Households that purchase relatively fuel efficient
vehicles (gallons per mile quartile 1) tend to keep relatively fuel efficient cars as well. The converse
is true for households buying fuel inefficient vehicles, suggesting that households may have an
overall preference for either high or low fuel economy cars. In the remainder of this paper we
use fuel intensity in terms of gallons-per-mile (GPM), rather than fuel economy (miles-per-gallon),
because the fuel intensity measure better captures the fuel savings from changing the fuel economy
of the vehicle (Larrick and Soll, 2008).
Some of the analyses that follow use the quartile of fuel economy to describe bought and sold
cars. The GPM cutoffs are presented in Table 3, along with their corresponding fuel economy
analogs in miles-per-gallon (MPG) for reference.

3.2

Identification

The goal of this study is to understand attribute substitution: the effect of a change in fuel economy
of the kept car on the fuel economy and other attributes of the bought car. This is a challenging
object to identify due to the complex nature of consumer preferences over the bundles of vehicle attributes. Our empirical approach must disentangle household preferences over the level of
attributes (e.g., some households demand low fuel intensity in both cars) from a preference for
substituting attributes across vehicles in the portfolio. In terms of our simple model from section
2, we are aiming to see if

∂ΓAB
∂θA

>

∂ΓAC
∂θA

when car B is more fuel efficient than car C.

The identification challenges in our setting can be most easily understood by considering the
ideal experiment for answering our research question. Take every two-car household that is about to
exchange a vehicle, randomly assign one car to be the “kept” car, exogenously perturb the GPM of
this kept car (f k ), and see how this exogenous change affects the household’s observed choice of f b ,
the GPM of the car purchased. To see the first identification challenge, consider a case in which we
observe a cross-section of household vehicle pairs, where one is a newly-purchased second vehicle.
Using “between” variation, we may see that the purchased vehicle’s fuel intensity is increasing
in the kept vehicle’s fuel intensity. There are two (non-conflicting) reasons why this may be the
case. Households that already own a fuel efficient kept vehicle may prefer more efficient vehicles
in general, and this may be true even if they also have a preference for attribute substitution. We
ideally want to exogenously change the fuel economy of the kept vehicle A and observe its effect
on the probability of choosing vehicle B versus C, but in the cross-section we cannot separate
preferences over the level of attributes from the preferences for the mix of attributes.8
Panel data allow us to overcome this challenge by observing repeated replacement choices by the
8

A cross-sectional analysis is analogous to taking the derivative of (2.2) with respect to a composite variable of
θA and an unobserved preference variable.

11

same household. For example, a household repeatedly responding to an exogenous improvement
in the fuel intensity of the kept car by choosing a less fuel efficient second car allows us to identify
preferences over level and gradient. That is, we would be able to see whether

∂ΓAB
∂θA

>

∂ΓAC
∂θA

without

contaminating the change in θA with a change in overall preferences for fuel intensity.
However, even when utilizing repeated choices, there remain two threats to identification. First,
in observational data the attributes of the kept vehicle are not exogenously determined. That
is, there may be time-varying household attributes that affect their fuel economy decisions (e.g.,
adding a household member). Second, households often have the ability to choose which vehicle
to drop from their portfolio. For example, Jacobsen and van Benthem (2015) show that when
gasoline prices increase, households choose to scrap less-efficient vehicles more often. Both of these
features of household decision-making could bias an attempt to estimate the preference relationship
between portfolio attributes because even with repeated choices the researcher would observe the
jointly determined preference for attribute level and mix. We address them using two instrumental
variables: one intended to provide exogenous variation in which car to keep and another to perturb
the fuel intensity of the kept car. Instrumenting may also address a wide variety of other potential
confounders such as unobserved car attributes or time-varying unobserved household attributes.
Instruments 1: Price Differentials
A contribution of this work is the proposal of a new instrumental variables strategy. In our
context, we need to instrument for the choice of kept vehicle and the fuel economy of the kept
vehicle. A valid instrument will provide exogenous variation in the process that determines which
of the household vehicles is kept and which is replaced. The exclusion restriction requires that the
instrument affects the household’s choice of f b only indirectly, through the choice of which car to
keep. We assert that variation in the price differential between the kept and dropped car contains
such identifying variation. There are three functions of the price differential that we explore. For
exposition, let Ptk and Ptd be the average retail value of the kept and dropped cars, respectively, at
the time when the car is dropped (t). The first candidate instrument is the price difference at time
t: ∆P kt = Ptk − Ptd . This is highly predictive of which car is dropped (generally the less expensive
one), but one might be concerned that attributes of the car that are correlated with both the choice
of which car to drop and the price difference. This would violate the exclusion restriction.
The second potential instrument is the change in price differences between time t and time 0,
when the kept car was purchased. That is ∆∆P kd = (Ptk − Ptd ) − (P0k − P0d ). To the extent that
market forces are exogenous to portfolio preferences, this instrument has promise. However, one
may be concerned that the change in relative prices was expected by the buyer in time t, and thus
potentially correlated with preferences in time t as well.
The third candidate instrument addresses the above concerns by extracting only the portion
variation in the price difference-in-difference that occurs after the time of purchase (i.e., deviates
from expectations about the trend of relative prices). We assume that households form expectations
using lagged 1-, 3-, or 5-year depreciation rates at the make-model-model year level, and project

12

these into the future. Deviations from these projections are what we refer to as the “deviation
from trend,” and we use differences in these deviations as an instrument. We find it difficult to
come up with a violation of the exclusion restriction in this case. Recall that any concern must
posit a correlation between the portfolio preference exhibited in the initial purchase of the kept car
and the instrument. Relying on an instrument using market-level changes in relative prices that
arise only after the purchase of the kept car would be problematic only in the unlikely case that
those broader market-level changes were correlated with individual household preferences over the
vehicle portfolio.
Figures 1 (a)-(c) display the reduced form relationship between these price differentials and the
probability the sold vehicle is the least valuable in the portfolio, partialed of covariates. Each of the
instruments appears to have power. It is clear the relationship between the potential instruments,
and in particular the Price Deviation DiD, and the choice of the vehicle to drop from the portfolio
is best approximated by a cubic polynomial of the instrument. Consequently, we deploy these
instruments as third-order polynomials.
Instruments 2: Gasoline Prices at Time of Purchase
Our second instrument is the price of gasoline at the time of the kept car purchase, pgas
itk , which
provides exogenous variation in the level of kept car fuel economy. Both theory and evidence (e.g.,
Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013)) demonstrate that households consider future operating
costs of the vehicle in their purchase decision. Changes in California gasoline prices several years
prior are exogenous with respect to today’s household choice, vary extensively over the time period
of our data, and alter the expected lifecycle cost of vehicles according to each vehicle’s fuel efficiency.
Based on this logic, when gasoline prices are high at the time of the kept car purchase, we would
expect the household to purchase a more fuel efficient car than when gasoline prices are low (as
also demonstrated in Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013)). The price of gasoline at the time of
the kept car purchase thus provides exogenous variation in the potentially endogenous variable of
interest, fuel economy of the kept vehicle f k .
Recall that the relationship between f k and f b is theoretically ambiguous. If there is attribute
substitution there will be a negative correlation, but complementarity between attributes is also
b
possible and will lead to a positive correlation. Furthermore, the relationship between pgas
itk and f

may also be positive or negative.
The reduced form relationship between the the gasoline price instrument and our outcome
variable of interest, f b , is presented in Figures 2a and 2b. Many factors influence a consumer’s
choice of vehicle attributes, including f b , so a plot of the raw data reveals little about the underlying
relationship between our variables of interest. Instead, we present the variables after partialing out
b
other covariates. The x-axis and y-axis are the residuals retrieved from regressing pgas
itk and f ,

respectively, on covariates.
A clear positive relationship emerges, indicating a positive correlation between the gasoline price
at the time of purchase of the kept car and the fuel economy of the bought car. This figure provides

13

some of the first suggestive evidence of attribute substitution, whereby households increase the fuel
intensity of the bought car when gasoline prices are higher at the time of the purchase of the kept
car (accordingly leading to lower fuel intensity of the kept car).
Our preferred regression specification includes an endogenous indicator for whether the kept
vehicle was more fuel efficient than the dropped vehicle. In these specifications, we also include the
gasoline price at the time the dropped vehicle was purchased (pgas
itd ) as an additional instrument.
This gasoline price is similarly correlated to the fuel economy of the dropped vehicle but exogeneous
with respect to the household’s current choice.
Final Sample
Identifying household fixed effects requires observing at least two transactions per household,
which imposes a restriction on our viable sample. Figures 3a - 3b present histograms of the
number of transactions per household under various sample restrictions. It reveals that, while
many households must be excluded to estimate specifications with household fixed effects, we are
still left with approximately 235,000 households in the instrumental variables specification that
includes household fixed effects.

3.3

Regression Specifications

The basic regression strategies examine the relationship that GPM of the kept car has on the chosen
GPM of the bought car. The dependent variable is thus either GPM of the bought car itself (fitb ),
or quartile indicators of that variable. Regressors of interest include gasoline price at the time of
purchase, GPM of kept car (fitk ), and their interaction. The right-hand side includes an indicator
variable for whether the high or low fuel economy vehicle is kept from the original portfolio. This
allows the change in utility from a change in fuel economy of the kept vehicle to differ depending
on whether the more efficient or less efficient vehicle is kept, providing additional flexibility in our
model and allowing us to test for evidence of attribute substitution versus diversification. For
notational simplicity, denote the chosen vehicle by the following indicators:

1k>d ≡ 1{f k > f d }

(3.1)


1d≥k ≡ 1{f d ≥ f k } = 1 − 1k>d



(3.2)

Many of the regression results that follow are retrieved from estimating a linear model of the
probability of purchasing vehicles in a given GPM quartile (a nearly direct mapping from our simple
model in section 2). For ease of exposition of the results, and to allow a focus on what happens
in the top and bottom quartile, we combine vehicles in the 2nd and 3rd quartiles are into a single

14

category, “med,” as was shown in the summary statistics above. The baseline specification is:



gas
k>d + 1k>d × β
k
k
P r q(fitb ) = s = β0 + βg pgas
f k × fit + βgf k pit × fit +
it + 1
it

k
k
1d≥k
× βf d × fitk + βgf d × pgas
it
it × fit + αX Xit + εit ,

(3.3)


where the dependent variable, P r q(fitb ) = s , equals one if fitb falls within the range of quartile
s ∈ {1, med, 4}. We also estimate a continuous model where the dependent variable is fitb , keeping
the rest of the specification as presented in (3.3). GPM of the vehicles bought (b) and kept (k) by
household i in time t are denoted fitb and fitk ; i’s contemporaneous gas price in t is pgas
it , whereas
Pitgask is the price of gasoline at the time household i purchased the kept car in time t. Control
variables, denoted Xit , include vehicle attributes (e.g., class, make, value, age), nonparametric
time controls (year and month-of-year fixed effects) and household/demographic (household fixed
effects and county-level unemployment).
Deploying such a specification accounting for the endogenous explanatory variables described
above requires estimating a model with five endogenous variables: an indicator for observations
where households replace the relatively efficient vehicle in the portfolio (1k>d ), this indicator interacted with the endogenous kept vehicle GPM variables (f k and pgas ×f k ), and corresponding terms
interacted with an indicator for when households replace the relatively more fuel-intense vehicle in
the portfolio, leading to the following matrix of endogenous variables:
Zit =

h

d≥k
k
k
× pgas
× fitk 1d≥k
× pgas
× fitk 1k>d
1k>d
1k>d
it
it × fit 1it
it
it × fit
it
it

i0

.

The IV specifications deploy instruments for this vector of endogenous regressors. In each
k
specification, we instrument using the gas price at the time the kept vehicle was purchased (pgas
itk )
d
and the gas price at the time the dropped vehicle was purchased (pgas
itd ). We augment this set of

instruments with the instruments based on vehicle price differences that were briefly described in
Section 3.2 and projections from the space of exogenous variables as explained below.
Before proceeding, we describe the vehicle price difference instruments precisely. In the “Price
Difference” specification, we include the difference in the current resale value of the kept and sold
vehicles (∆Pitkd = Pitk − Pitd ) as an additional instrument. The “Price Difference-in-Difference”
specification uses the change in value for the kept and dropped vehicles between the point the
k ) − (P d − P d ).
vehicle was purchased and the current time period: ∆∆Pitkd = (Pitk − Pi0
it
i0

The third instrument, which we call “Price Deviation from Trend Difference-in-Difference”
(DfT), is constructed from the deviation of the difference between the kept and dropped vehicles
relative to their expected deprecation rates at the time of the kept car purchase. For each of
the kept and dropped vehicle we proxy the household’s expectation of annual vehicle depreciation
using an estimate of the depreciation of similar vehicles over the previous five years. Specifically,

15

for vehicle make m and model year y, and value Vm,y,t in year t, the expected depreciation is:9

E[Depm,y,t ] =

5
Y
Vm,y−s+1,t−s+1 − Vm,y−s,t−s
Vm,y−s,t−s

! 15
.

(3.4)

s=1

We can then calculate the deviation from this expected depreciation rate for each car in the
portfolio, and construct the DfT instrument. Assuming vehicle j has resale value Pj,t in year t, this
is:
k
d
) − (Pitd − E[Depdit ] · Pi,t−1
).
∆∆Vitkd = (Pitk − E[Depkit ] · Pi,t−1

(3.5)

The set of three price difference instruments is W = {∆Pitkd , ∆∆Pitkd , ∆∆Vitkd }. Following the
relationship evident in Figure 1 and the functional form of the second stage model in Equation (3.3),
we specify a vector of instruments (Vitwkd ) consisting of a cubic of a price difference instrument (one
k
of {∆Pitkd , ∆∆Pitkd , ∆∆Vitkd }), gas prices at the time the kept vehicle was purchased (pgas
itd ), and
d
the gasoline price at the time the dropped vehicle was purchased (pgas
itd ):

Vitwkd =

h

wit (wit

)2

(wit

)3

k
pgas
itk

d
pgas
itd

i

.

(3.6)

The first stage thus consists of the following system of five equations for each of the instruments
w ∈ W where Ξw
it is a vector of idiosyncratic errors:
wkd
Zw
+ ΘXit + Ξw
it = Γ0 + ΓV Vit
it .

(3.7)

Estimating Equation 3.7 using instruments V leads to very low first stage power. The endogenous regressors are a system of interactions with both an exogenous regressor (the gasoline price
at the time of bought vehicle purchase) and an endogenous binary indicator leading to a system
that is difficult to approximate using linear models. To more closely approximate the hypothesized
relationship between the endogenous variables and instruments, one may consider forming additional instruments that follow the functional form of these relationships by interacting V with the
exogenous current gas price or using pairwise interactions from the Kronecker product of instruments, V ⊗V . This however, can lead quickly to a proliferation of instruments.10 Instead, we follow
Wooldridge (2001) and form a narrow set of instruments, approximating the functional form of the
endogenous variables using interactions of projections from the space of exogenous variables.11
9
As a more concrete example, for a household in year t = 2005 owning a 2002 Honda Civic, the expected
depreciation is the geometric mean annual depreciation rate of 2001 Hondas in 2004, 2000 Hondas in 2003, 1999
Hondas in 2002, etc.
10
Our preferred specification deploys 5 instruments. Simply forming all pairwise interactions and the interactions
with gasoline prices would lead to 50 instruments, with the potential to greatly exacerbate any IV finite sample bias.
11
Wooldridge (2001) Section 9.5.2 describes this method in detail and demonstrates that if the first stage instruments
satisfy the exclusion restriction, the projections will as well.

16

We estimate the first-stage relationships for the uninteracted endogenous variables 1k>d and fitk
ck ). We then compute four new
[
k>d and f
and projections from the space of exogenous variables (1
it

instruments as interactions of these predictions:
ck
\
[
k>d × f
1k>d
× fitk = 1
it

ck × pgas
[
k>d × f
1k>d ×\
fitk × pgas
it = 1
it
it

ck
\
[
k>d ) × f
1d≥k
× fitk = (1 − 1
it

ck × pgas .
[
k>d ) × f
1d≥k ×\
fitk × pgas
it = (1 − 1
it
it

(3.8)

We augment the vector of instruments (Vitwkd ) with these four additional instruments and estimate
the full system using GMM.

4

Results

This section presents our main estimation results. We first demonstrate the importance of the
instrumental variables approach and inclusion of household fixed effects, both of which qualitatively
and quantitatively alter key coefficient estimates. We then present the marginal effects of kept car
GPM on bought car GPM, which reveal household preferences for attribute substitution. Motivated
by the correlation between GPM and other vehicle attributes, we also examine the relationship
between kept car GPM and footprint, engine displacement, and weight of the bought car. These
results provide context for the discussion of policy implications that follows.

4.1

Effect of Kept GPM on Bought GPM

Table 4 presents the baseline regression results from new and used car purchases. The effect of kept
vehicle fuel intensity is allowed to vary depending on whether households make the (endogenous)
decision to keep the more (1k>d ) or less (1d≥k ) fuel-intense vehicle in the portfolio. Column 1
estimates the parameters using OLS, ignoring potential unobserved household-level heterogeneity
and endogeneity. Column 2 instruments using gas price at the time of kept vehicle purchase,
gas price at the time of dropped vehicle purchase, the “Price deviations from trend” instruments,
and projections from the space of exogenous variables described in Section 3.3 (this suite of IVs
is referred to as “GP+DfT+I”). Column 3 assumes all variables are exogenous but controls for
household-level unobserved heterogeneity using household fixed effects. Finally, Column 4–our
preferred specification–estimates parameters using the GP+DfT+I instruments and household fixed
effects.
It is clear from this progression of specifications that it is important to account for both endogeneity and unobserved household heterogeneity. Specifications without household fixed effects
primarily rely on variation across households and do not reflect the thought experiment described
earlier, which uses within-household variation. In many cases, the inclusion of household fixed
effects flips the sign of the estimated coefficient, indicating that source of variation (within versus
across) may lead to important differences in interpretation. Deploying instruments has the overall
17

effect of magnifying coefficient estimates. This not surprising in a setting in which many factors
enter into the household vehicle purchase decision, including those outside of our channels of interest. The extent of bias associated with OLS underscores the importance of valid instruments.
We expose each IV model to the Cragg-Donald minimum eigenvalue test for weak identification.
The statistics associated with each of our baseline regressions in Table 4 offer reassurance that the
instruments are indeed strong.
When the regression is identified using across-household variation (columns 1 and 2), the evidence indicates that households will tend to replace their dropped car with one that is qualitatively
similar in GPM to the kept car. For example, the coefficient in the first row of column 1 indicates
that when the household drops the more fuel-intense vehicle, an increase in the fuel intensity of
the kept vehicle is correlated with an increase in the fuel intensity of the bought vehicle. The same
result also holds in row 2 of column 1, where increasing the fuel intensity of the kept vehicle is
correlated with an increase in the fuel intensity of the bought vehicle. Both of these results suggest that when looking across households, we see higher fuel intensity in the kept car (regardless
of which one is dropped) being correlated with higher fuel intensity in the bought car. This is
consistent with different households having different “types,” such as a preference for fuel sippers
or gas guzzlers (presumably due to correlated attributes including power, comfort, safety, etc).
It is only when we explore within-household variation that attribute substitution can be seen.
Our preferred results in column 4 for new cars show such an effect. Both the first and second rows
of column 4 indicate that an increase in fuel intensity of the kept car decreases the fuel intensity of
the bought car. For households that dropped the more fuel-intense car (kept the more fuel-efficient
car), this implies that the household responds to an exogenous increase in fuel economy of the
already more-efficient kept car by acquiring a less-efficient car. This is consistent with substitution
across attributes: if the kept car is made more efficient, the household prefers to substitute fuel
economy for other attributes in the bought car, reducing the fuel economy of the bought car.12
For households that kept the more fuel-intense car, the results in column 4 imply that the
household responds to an exogenous increase in the fuel economy of the less-efficient kept car by
acquiring an slightly less-efficient bought car. This does not correspond to the natural definition of
diversification, but rather, it again implies a preference for attribute substitution: if the kept car
is made more efficient, the household again prefers to substitute fuel economy for other attributes
in the bought car.
Next we present marginal effects of fitk on fitb , which reveal the presence and extent of a portfolio
effect that arises in vehicle fuel economy. Table 5 shows results from specifications using fitb (continuous) as the dependent variable as estimated at different gasoline prices. We separately compute
marginal effects for cases where households choose (endogenously) to drop the more (f d ≥ f k ) or
12

In the case of the kept vehicle being more-efficient, this result is also consistent with households diversifying their
portfolio, for it suggests that if the more-efficient kept car has an even further increase in fuel economy, households
would respond by decreasing the fuel economy of the less-efficient bought car. Note this study is focused on attribute
substitution, rather than a preference for diversification.

18

less (f k > f d ) vehicle and report these effects in alternating columns. Figures 4a and 4b offer a
graphical representation of the population average marginal effect in the highest and lowest GPM
quartiles.
We focus on results from the preferred specification in columns 7 and 8 in Table 5. Negative
coefficients reflect a household’s revealed desire to buy a car with more (less) GPM as the GPM
of its kept car decreases (increases). All of the marginal effects have a negative sign, and all are
statistically significant.
The overall story is clear: households incorporate portfolio considerations in their vehicle purchase decisions and have a preference for substitution across attributes. That is, if we were to
increase the fuel intensity of the kept car, households would buy a second car that has attributes
associated with lower fuel intensity.
For households that keep their more fuel-efficient car, the magnitude of the attribute substitution
effect increases with the gasoline price. This may be due to the relative importance of fuel economy
(or attributes correlated with fuel economy) in household decisions when gasoline prices are higher.
Thus far, all of the qualitative results hold similarly for both new and used car purchase instances.
Figures 4a and 4b display the marginal effects of fitk on the probability of buying a car in the
highest (red and least fuel efficient) or lowest (blue and most fuel efficient) GPM quartile. The
qualitative story remains the same. Over most of the gasoline price range, increasing the GPM
of the kept car increases (decreases) the probability of purchasing a car in the most (least) fuel
efficient quartile. This finding is qualitatively similar across new and used cars.

4.2

The Role of Non-GPM Attributes

Our empirical specification intentionally omits many kept-car vehicle attributes from the set of
control variables. This allows us to interpret the portfolio effect in what we believe is the most
policy-relevant way: allowing other vehicle attributes to change along with GPM. We now directly
explore the effect of changing kept car GPM on three vehicle attributes: footprint, engine displacement, and weight. We chose these attributes because they appear with good coverage in our
dataset and because of their economic relevance. Ceteris paribus, increases in weight, power, and
size decrease fuel efficiency, and thus it is likely that the results we have discussed thus far are (at
least in part) operating via these attribute channels.
Table 7 displays marginal effects from specifications that are analogous to columns 7 and 8 of
Table 5, except with the alternative attribute of the bought car as the dependent variable.13 For
each attribute, a negative estimate can be interpreted as households demanding less of that bought
car attribute as fitk increases. All point estimates are negative, however some are statistically
indistinguishable from zero, such as when the outcome is engine displacement in used vehicles.
This provides evidence in favor of the hypothesis that the GPM portfolio effect that we observe is
operating at least in part through portfolio preferences over other attributes.
13

We also condition on the same attribute of the kept vehicle, which we assume to be exogenous.

19

We can compare the magnitude of the portfolio effect between households keeping their fuel
efficient car with those that keep their fuel inefficient car. These results are also consistent with
the hypothesis that households keeping their more efficient car exhibit a stronger portfolio effect in
attributes that are correlated with fuel economy. The effect on the gradients in gasoline price also
conform to our baseline results from Table 5.
The importance of the effect on vehicle footprint has direct policy relevance. Fuel economy
standards in many countries worldwide are vehicle attribute-based (e.g., footprint in the US and
weight in several countries), whereby larger or heavier cars receive a less stringent fuel economy
requirement. To the extent that the portfolio effect manifests through preferences for vehicle
size, there will be consequences for the realized effectiveness of fuel economy standards relative to
expectations. We now turn to an exercise designed to illustrate the implications for policy.

5

Gauging the Strength of the Attribute-Substitution Effects

In this section we quantify the strength of the forces we uncover in Section 4. We do this through
two thought experiments. First, we measure the net effect of an increase in the fuel economy of the
kept vehicle allowing for the fuel economy of the bought vehicle to change in ways consistent with
the results in Section 4. The second thought experiment uses empirical estimates on the welfare
costs associated with Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards to measure the added
welfare costs associated that result from attribute substitution.
To be clear, we do not claim to provide a complete counterfactual analysis. For example, we
do not allow for firms (or potential used car suppliers) to react in terms of the vehicles they offer
or the pricing of those vehicles. The calculations do, however, provide us with evidence as to the
power of the attribute substitution forces at work and their relevance for counterfactual analysis of
policies designed to increase fuel economy.
Our first thought experiment investigates the net effect on gasoline consumption of increasing
the fuel economy of a household’s initial (“kept”) vehicle by 10%. We are agnostic as to what
leads to the increase in fuel economy of the initially purchased vehicle. One could imagine, for
example, a one-time increase in fuel economy standards or some other vehicle-level incentive that
operates only at the time of the purchase of the kept vehicle, such as the Cash for Clunkers program.
Because incentives might exist for used-car purchases, we also include used vehicles in the thought
experiment. We report the results for used cars in the appendix.
Such a thought exercise will put in motion a number of forces. Our estimates in Section 4
imply that, given an increase in the fuel efficiency of the kept vehicle, the next vehicle purchased
by the household will be less fuel efficient. We show below that this has a dramatic effect on the
net fuel savings. The exogenous increase in the fuel economy of the kept vehicle may also lead
to changes in usage patterns across the household’s two vehicles. For one, we might expect to
see a rebound effect: increasing the fuel efficiency of the kept vehicle reduces the marginal cost

20

of driving, leading to more miles traveled within the household.14 We might also expect to see
the usage across vehicles in the household change given that the relative fuel economies of the two
vehicles has changed. Furthermore, this shifting of mileage will be exacerbated by the fact that the
newly purchased vehicle becomes even less fuel efficient due to attribute-substitution.
To implement this thought experiment, we augment our empirical results on attribute substitution with estimates on how changes in fuel economy affect a household’s total vehicle miles traveled,
as well as how these miles are divided across the two vehicles within the household. The details of
this empirical exercise are provided in Appendix A. We exploit two sources of variation in vehicle
operating costs: variation in gasoline prices over time while holding the vehicle portfolio fixed and
changes in operating costs resulting from changes in the fuel intensity of vehicles in the portfolio.
For each vehicle i ∈ {1, 2} in a two-vehicle portfolio, we compute the fuel cost in dollars per mile
DP Mi as the price of gasoline, in dollars per gallon, times the fuel intensity, in gallons per mile.
As these are two-vehicle portfolios, attributes of the other vehicle included in the regression are
subscripted j.
We construct a yearly panel of two-vehicle households. For each vehicle i in year t, we compute
the mean annual VMT (V M Tit ) as miles driven between the closest preceding (at time t) and upcoming (at time t) odometer measurements for that vehicle.15 We estimate the impact of operating
costs on VMT using the following specification:
log(V M Th,i,t ) = βi DP Mh,i,t + βj DP Mh,j,t + Ξh + Θh,t + Ψ(t, t) + Ai (i) + Aj (j) + εh,i,t ,

(5.1)

where Ξh are household fixed effects, Θh,t are fixed effects for the county of residence of household
h in year t, Ψh,t are fixed effects controlling for seasonality in driving,16 A() are controls for
vehicle attributes,17 and εh,i,t is an idiosyncratic error which may have arbitrary correlation within
households.
Estimates from Equation (5.1) are shown in Table 8. The top panel shows the impact of vehicle
operating costs on VMT of the more fuel-intense vehicle and the second set show the impacts for
the relatively fuel-efficient vehicle. In either case, an increase in the cost of driving (DP M ) of one
vehicle introduces an incentive to shift VMT from that vehicle to the other vehicle in the household
portfolio. We focus here on Column (5) which includes operating costs, household fixed effects,
14

See Borenstein (2015) and Gillingham, Rapson, and Wagner (2016) for more on the rebound effect.
We obtain odometer readings through DMV records each time a vehicle is transacted and at the time of biannual
smog checks for vehicles six years and older.
16
Demand for VMT follows seasonal patterns and odometer readings do not necessarily occur at the same time
each year for a given vehicle. In fact, one may be concerned that the timing of odometer readings may be correlated
with demand for VMT. We deploy two sets of controls to account for seasonality in the VMT measurement. First,
in a simpler specification, we include fixed effects for the quarter-of-year of the upcoming odometer reading. In our
preferred specification, we interact these fixed effects with counts of each quarter-of-year elapsed since the previous
odometer reading.
17
All specifications include nonparametric controls for the age of both vehicles in the portfolio and indicators for
leased vehicles. Additional attribute controls in our preferred specification include indicators for vehicle class and
continuous measures of vehicle curb weight, wheelbase, vehicle width, and engine displacement.
15

21

county of residence fixed effects, seasonality fixed effects (captured by the quarter the odometer
was read), and controls for vehicle age, attributes, and leases. We discuss each column as well as
robustness in the appendix.
The results on usage shifting are intuitive. Increasing the cost per mile of a given vehicle in the
household reduces the number of miles that particular vehicle is driven, but increases the mileage
of the other vehicle. For example, for the average vehicle in our households (i.e., a gallons per mile
of 0.052) and at a gasoline price of $3 per gallon, the estimates in Panel 1 of Column (5) imply
that increasing the dollars per mile of vehicle 1, the more fuel intensive vehicle in the household,
by 10% (i.e., a change of 0.0052 · 3) decreases the number of miles driven by vehicle 1 by 5.76%
(−3.697 · 0.0052 · 3). The estimates in Panel 2 suggest that a large portion of these miles will be
shifted to vehicle 2. In particular, that same 10% change in vehicle 1’s cost per mile increases
vehicle 2’s miles driven by 3.35% (2.152 · 0.0052 · 3).
With the estimates on usage in hand, we can calculate the full impact of our thought experiment: increasing the kept vehicle’s fuel economy by 10%. Table 9 breaks down the effect into
the components discussed above for the average vehicle in our data and at a gasoline price of $3.
Because our estimates differentiate by whether the kept vehicle is the most or least fuel-efficient
vehicle in the household there are two panels. The first row in each panel reports the baseline
annual gasoline consumption for the kept (initial) and purchased vehicles (follow-on). Given technical progress and the positive trend in fuel prices in our data, the fuel consumption of the bought
vehicle is lower than for the initial vehicle.
The second row reports the first effect of our thought experiment. By construction the fuel
consumption of the initial vehicle falls by 10%. Given the attribute substitution effect, this will
increase the fuel consumption of the follow-on bought vehicle by 29 gallons; this is over 42% of
the fuel savings from the 10% improvement of the initial vehicle. The next two rows report the
impact from changes in usage. The first effect comes directly from the 10% increase in the fuel
efficiency of the initial vehicle. This shifts mileage from the follow-on vehicle to the initial vehicle,
holding constant the fuel efficiency of the follow-on vehicle. For the two average vehicle types in
our sample, this increases fuel savings because miles traveled are shifting to the now more-efficient
vehicle. The net effect is theoretically ambiguous because the 10% increase in fuel efficiency of the
initial vehicle also leads to a net increase in miles driven.18 The savings from this shift in miles
traveled to the initial vehicle is necessarily larger if the initial vehicle is more efficient (panel b), but
given the closeness in the fuel efficiencies of the average initial and follow-on vehicles, the two panels
18

In households where the kept vehicle is much less fuel efficient than the follow-on bought vehicle, this direct
effect could decrease the fuel savings from our thought experiment. The reader might wonder whether our VMT
specification should include the possibility of a knife-edge around the point where the kept vehicle’s fuel efficiency
equals the follow-on vehicle’s fuel efficiency. A complete analysis of VMT shifting is beyond the scope of this paper
but the topic of current research. An argument against such a knife-edge is that comfort and fuel economy tend to
be inversely related. Therefore even if the kept vehicle is less efficient compared to the follow-on bought vehicle, a
marginal increase in the fuel efficiency of the kept vehicle will lead to more miles traveled because it is, on average,
the more comfortable vehicle within the household.

22

are similar. The next row then calculates the impact of the additional vehicle-usage shifting that
comes from the fact that the follow-on vehicle’s fuel economy will be changed through attribute
substitution. We refer to this as the indirect effect on VMT. This shifts additional miles from
the follow-on bought vehicle to the initial vehicle and reduces the fuel savings from our thought
experiment.
Once all of the forces are considered, the fuel savings from our thought experiment falls from
the naive estimate of 68.8 gallons to either 27.3 (panel a) or 24.4 (panel b) gallons. Therefore
accounting for all of the effects reduces the fuel savings by over a 60% in both cases. These results
are quite startling and may have unfortunate implications for the effectiveness of policies that
explicitly regulate fuel economy, especially if such policies are short term in nature. Specifically,
these calculations are most relevant to a fuel economy standard that increases, but then plateaus.
These forces would also be especially relevant for such policies as Cash for Clunkers, which provided
a one-time subsidy with the aim of improving new vehicle fuel economy. Our estimates would
suggest that over 60% of the initial fuel economy savings from Cash for Clunkers would have been
eroded from attribute substitution and rebound.
One could argue that these estimates are conservative. The used car market, which is not
covered by fuel economy standards, is another channel through which attribute substitution may
manifest. Increases in the fuel economy of initial kept vehicles due to an increased standard will
increased demand for used fuel-inefficient vehicles. The increase in demand will lead used gas
guzzlers to be more valuable, and thus more slowly retire from the fleet (similar to the effect
documented in Jacobsen and van Benthem (2015)).
Our second thought experiment focuses on the welfare costs of CAFE. It is simpler in nature
and relies on the empirical estimates of the welfare costs of CAFE in Jacobsen (2013). The thought
experiment is a sustained change in the average fuel economy required under CAFE of 1 MPG.
Therefore, the fuel economy of both the initial (kept) and follow-on (bought) vehicles are forced to
increase by 1 MPG. Jacobsen (2013) calculates the equivalent variation from such a 1 MPG change
in CAFE, but his calculations do not include the additional welfare costs that would operate through
attribute substitution. The welfare costs accounting for attribute substitution will be larger because
the desired fuel economy of the follow-on vehicle will now be lower. Therefore forcing the follow-on
vehicle’s fuel economy to increase by 1 MPG will have a larger welfare consequence.19
We can put numbers to this effect. Table 8 in Jacobsen (2013) implies that the average equivalent
variation across all households from a 1 MPG increase in CAFE standards is $264 (in year 10). Our
results suggest that the welfare costs for the bought vehicle will be larger because the desired fuel
economy for the average bought vehicle in our data decreases by 0.41 MPG due to the increase in
19

To observe this effect, one would likely have to have a continual increase in the standard, rather a one-time
increase, due to technological progress. For example, Knittel (2011) estimates that technological progress increases
fuel economy by roughly 2 percent per year if other attributes are held constant. Based on this estimate, the standard
would thus have to increase by 2 percent per year for the follow-on bought vehicle’s fuel economy to be diminished
by the full amount we estimate.

23

the initial vehicle’s fuel economy. Therefore, a sustained 1 MPG increase in fleet fuel economy will
be a 1.41 MPG increase in the average “desired” fuel economy of follow-on vehicles, again noting
that these are not true counterfactual estimates. This would in turn increase the welfare costs by
41% to $372.

6

Conclusions

Much in the same way that products can be complements or substitutes, households may view
attributes of one product as substitutable with or complementary to attributes of another. This
observation is potentially relevant to understanding consumer decisions relating to a broad set of
goods ranging from financial asset portfolios, household durables and clothing fashion to media subscriptions, higher education, and more. We develop an identification strategy to separate household
preferences for level effects from attribute substitution within the household portfolio. Aspects of
the methodology may be generally applied to many of the aforementioned household goods. This
paper focuses on the vehicle market due to both the particular suitability of the choice setting for
identifying attribute substitution and the potential implications for transportation market regulations.
The effects of a number of polices applied to the vehicle market depend crucially on consumer
choice patterns. Empirical estimates of vehicle choice typically assume that the vehicle choices
within a household are made independently. We provide evidence that this assumption does not
hold. Using panel data on the portfolio of vehicles within a household and an instrumental variables
approach, we find evidence that households exhibit a preference for attribute substitution. Exogenous increases in the fuel economy of the kept car lower the fuel economy of the purchased car. We
show this using both a continuous measure of fuel economy, as well as by estimating the probability
a household purchases a vehicle in the upper and lower quartiles of the fuel economy distribution.
An increase in the fuel economy of the kept car reduces the probability the household purchases
a car in the lower quartile of gallons per mile, while such an increase reduces the probability the
household buys a car in the upper quartile.
We also find that gasoline prices affect the preference for attribute substitution in intuitive ways.
As gasoline prices increase, the effect of the fuel intensity of the kept vehicle on the probability
of buying a car in the lower quartile of fuel intensity becomes even more positive. In contrast, as
gasoline prices decrease, the effect of fuel intensity of the kept vehicle on the probability of buying
a car in the upper quartile of fuel intensity becomes even more negative. These effects manifest
through substitution across vehicle attributes beyond fuel economy. We find evidence households
view attributes such as vehicle size (footprint), weight, and horsepower as substitutes across their
portfolio of vehicles.
These results have substantial economic importance for the understanding of major policies
to improve the fuel economy of the light duty vehicle fleet, such as fuel economy standards and

24

subsidies for more fuel-efficient vehicles (e.g., Cash-for-Clunkers). We use our results to estimate
the net effect of a one-time exogenous increase in fuel economy of the kept vehicle and find that the
attribute substitution effect can erode as much as 60% of the fuel savings from the increase in fuel
economy. Moreover, our results suggest that this erosion of the savings is likely to be especially
problematic under attribute-based standards, such as the current footprint-based standard in the
United States and other countries in the world.
While this research setting considers household purchases in the vehicle market, these results
highlight the challenges in design or evaluation of any policy intending to alter consumer choices
over a portfolio of goods. When households view the attributes of those goods as substitutes, any
shift in the attributes of one good will shift the unconstrained optimal choice for attributes of
other goods in the portfolio in the opposite direction. This will lead to subsequent purchases which
potentially erode or magnify effects of the policy or, if the policy also prevents the unconstrained
optimal purchase, increases the true welfare costs of the policy.

25

References
Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny. 2014. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (5):779–795.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, Ashley Langer, and James M. Sallee. 2015. “The Intergenerational Transmission of Automobile Brand Preferences.” The Journal of Industrial Economics
63 (4):763–793. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/joie.12092.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. 2013. “What Do Consumers Believe About
Future Gasoline Prices?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66 (3):383–403.
Angrist, Joshua D. and William N. Evans. 1998. “Children and Their Parents’ Labor Supply:
Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size.” The American Economic Review 88 (3):450–
477. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/116844.
Ben-Porath, Yoram and Finis Welch. 1976. “Do Sex Preferences Really Matter?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 90 (2):285–307.
Bento, Antonio M., Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Roger H. von Haefen. 2009.
“Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased US Gasoline Taxes.” American Economic
Review 99 (3):667–699.
Borenstein, Severin. 2015. “A Microeconomic Framework for Evaluating Energy Efficiency Rebound
and Some Implications.” Energy Journal 36:1–21.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. “Are Consumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review 103 (1):220–
256.
Ellis, Frank. 2000. “The Determinants of Rural Livelihood Diversification in Developing Countries.”
Journal of Agricultural Economics 51 (2):289–302.
Gentzkow, Matthew. 2007. “Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarity: Online Newspapers.” American Economic Review 97:713–744.
Gillingham, Kenneth. 2011. “How Do Consumers Respond to Gasoline Price Shocks? Heterogeneity
in Vehicle Choice and Driving Behavior.” Manuscript: Yale University.
———. 2013. “The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards Versus Feebates.” NEPI Working Paper
.
Gillingham, Kenneth, David Rapson, and Gernot Wagner. 2016. “The Rebound Effect and Energy
Efficiency Policy.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 10:68–88.

26

Goulder, Lawrence H., Mark R. Jacobsen, and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2012. “Unintended Consequences from Nested State and Federal Regulations: The Case of Pavley Greenhouse-Gas-perMile Limits.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 63:187–207.
Ito, Koichiro and James Sallee. 2014. “The Economics of Attribute-Based Regulation: Theory and
Evidence from Fuel-Economy Standards.” NBER Working Paper 20500 .
Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013. “Evaluating U.S. Fuel Economy Standards In a Model with Producer and
Household Heterogeneity.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (2):148–187.
Jacobsen, Mark R. and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2015. “Vehicle Scrappage and Gasoline Policy.”
American Economic Review 105 (3):1312–1338.
Kellogg, Ryan. 2017. “Gasoline Price Uncertainty and the Design of Fuel Economy Standards.”
NBER Working Paper 23024 .
Klier, Thomas and Joshua Linn. 2010. “New Vehicle Characteristics and the Cost of the Corporate
Average Fuel Economy Standard.” Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 10-50.
Knittel, Christopher R. 2011. “Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-Offs and Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector.” American Economic Review 101 (7):3368–3399.
Larrick, Richard and Jack Soll. 2008. “The MPG Illusion.” Science 320 (5883):1593–1594.
Mannering, Fred and Clifford Winston. 1985. “A Dynamic Empirical Analysis of Household Vehicle
Ownership and Utilization.” The RAND Journal of Economics 16 (2):215–236. URL http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2555411.
Udry, Christopher, John Hoddinott, Harold Alderman, and Lawrence Haddad. 1995. “Gender Differentials in Farm Productivity: Implications for Household Efficiency and Agricultural Policy.”
Food Policy 20 (5):407–423.
Wakamori, Naoki. 2011. “Portfolio Considerations in Differentiated Product Purchases: An Application to the Japanese Automobile Market.” Bank of Canada Working Paper 2011-27 .
Wooldridge, Jeffery M. 2001. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. The MIT
Press.

27

Table 1: Number of Unique Households by Portfolio Size
Start
Portfolio Size
1
2
3
4+

1
7,262,111
1,172,278
168,745
35,810

End Portfolio Size
2
3
1,360,594
4,632,425
849,703
141,618

187,558
839,546
2,169,948
381,226

4+
75,150
259,098
675,040
1,489,926

Each cell represents the count of unique households from 2001 to 2007 observed to have the starting portfolio size
shown in each row and the ending portfolio size shown in the column. These counts provide a measure of the
number of households providing identifying variation in each portfolio cell. A single household may appear in
multiple cells if their portfolio changes over time but is counted at most once in each cell. For example, two-car
household that replaces one car every year would add one to the count of the (2,2) cell. If instead, that household
adds a third vehicle in 2004 and returns to a two-car portfolio in 2006 it would add one to the count of the (2,2)
cell, one to the count of the (2,3) cell, one to the (3,3) cell, and one to the count of the (3,2) cell. Each household
may have zero, one, or multiple vehicle transactions during this time period.

28

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Continuous Variables - 2x2 Replacement Households

Kept Vehicle GPM
Bought Vehicle GPM
Dropped Vehicle GPM
Gasoline Price at Bought Purchase (US$)
Gas Price at Kept Vehicle Purchase (US$)
(Kept - Sold) Value DfT (US$)
Kept Vehicle Age (yr)
Dropped Vehicle Age (yr)
Kept vehicle value (US$)
Bought Vehicle Value (US$)
Dropped Vehicle Value (US$)

N Transactions
N Households

All
Households

Bought GPM
Qtile 1

Bought GPM
Qtile 2 or 3

Bought GPM
Qtile 4

0.0522

0.0507

0.0523

0.0533

(0.0106)

(0.0106)

(0.0105)

(0.0108)

0.0516

0.0388

0.0503

0.0664

(0.0108)

(0.0037)

(0.0036)

(0.0063)

0.0511

0.0478

0.0507

0.0549

(0.0103)

(0.0098)

(0.0094)

(0.0112)

2.380

2.434

2.377

2.335

(0.747)

(0.763)

(0.745)

(0.733)

2.064

2.105

2.056

2.041

(0.539)

(0.558)

(0.534)

(0.527)

4.483

22.629

2.567

-9.056

(848.059)

(731.634)

(850.055)

(942.603)

7.320

7.466

7.450

6.919

(5.924)

(5.962)

(5.944)

(5.828)

9.948

10.651

9.990

9.187

(5.899)

(5.849)

(5.847)

(5.957)

9,905

9,082

9,953

10,626

(8,352)

(7,295)

(8,457)

(9,024)

11,283

7,468

11,819

13,911

(9,162)

(5,267)

(9,999)

(9,273)

7,794

6,149

7,957

9,072

(7,871)

(5,970)

(8,126)

(8,671)

2,004,312
1,452,896

491,010
392,168

1,003,044
768,517

510,258
413,367

Summary statistics of continuous variables for 2x2 replacement households. Standard deviations shown in
parentheses.

Table 3: Distribution of observed fuel economy

Percentile
25th Percetile
Median
75th Percentile

Gallons per Mile
(GPM)

Miles Per Gallon
(MPG)

0.045
0.052
0.059

22.0
19.3
17.0

29

Table 4: Regression Estimates
OLS
(1)
No IV/FE

IV
(2)
No FE

HHFE
(3)
No IV

HHFEIV
(4)
FE+IV

0.4170

-0.0376

0.0881

-0.6440

(0.0097)***

(0.0788)

(0.0390)**

(0.2879)**

New

1d≥k × GP M k
1

k>d

×

GP M k

1d≥k × GP M k × pgas
1

k>d

×

GP M k

×

pgas

pgas
N Non-singleton

0.2205

-0.0691

-0.0821

-0.5686

(0.0076)***

(0.0489)

(0.0311)***

(0.1775)***

-0.0325

-0.0933

-0.2562

-0.3121

(0.0041)***

(0.0232)***

(0.0154)***

(0.0526)***

-0.0110

-0.0422

-0.1905

-0.1907

(0.0032)***

(0.0120)***

(0.0126)***

(0.0444)***

0.0004

0.0027

0.0117

0.0131

(0.0002)**

(0.0009)***

(0.0008)***

(0.0025)***

384,692

384,692

140,209

140,209

Cragg-Donald Stat

58.544

159.57

Used

1d≥k × GP M k
1

k>d

×

GP M k

1d≥k × GP M k × pgas
1k>d × GP M k × pgas
pgas
N Non-singleton

0.2561

0.3495

-0.0473

0.1660

(0.0104)***

(0.0726)***

(0.0407)

(0.2342)

0.1584

0.1709

-0.1852

-0.1456

(0.0079)***

(0.0499)***

(0.0327)***

(0.1402)

-0.0176

0.0153

-0.2582

-0.4104

(0.0043)***

(0.0327)

(0.0162)***

(0.0327)***

-0.0101

0.0068

-0.1907

-0.2612

(0.0034)***

(0.0161)

(0.0130)***

(0.0268)***

0.0005

-0.0008

0.0112

0.0169

(0.0002)**

(0.0012)

(0.0008)***

(0.0015)***

395,754

395,754

140,256

140,256

Cragg-Donald Stat
Instrumental Vars
Fixed Effects

61.194
N/A
None

GP+DfT+I
None

140.38
N/A
HH

GP+DfT+I
HH

Regression of the continuous bought vehicle GPM on covariates. Standard errors robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity clustered by household shown in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively. 1d≥k (1k>d ) is an indicator denoting the dropped vehicle was the most (least) fuel intense
vehicle in the portfolio prior to the purchase. “GP+DfT+I” instrument deploys gas price at the time of kept vehicle
purchase, gas price at the time of dropped vehicle purchase, the “Price deviations from trend” instruments, and
projections from the space of exogenous variables described in Section 3.3 as instruments for endogenous regressors.

30

Table 5: Marginal Effect of Kept Vehicle GPM on Bought Vehicle GPM
OLS
(1)
fd ≥ fk

OLS
(2)
fk > fd

IV
(3)
fd ≥ fk

IV
(4)
fk > fd

HHFE
(5)
fd ≥ fk

HHFE
(6)
fk > fd

HHFEIV
(7)
fd ≥ fk

HHFEIV
(8)
fk > fd

0.3519

0.1986

-0.2241

-0.1534

-0.4242

-0.4630

-1.2681

-0.9500

(0.0046)***

(0.0035)***

(0.0985)**

(0.0592)***

(0.0218)***

(0.0180)***

(0.2731)***

(0.1744)***

New
pgas = $2.00
pgas

= $3.00

pgas = $4.00
31

0.3194

0.1876

-0.3174

-0.1956

-0.6804

-0.6535

-1.5802

-1.1407

(0.0059)***

(0.0046)***

(0.1143)***

(0.0671)***

(0.0259)***

(0.0219)***

(0.2807)***

(0.1891)***

0.2869

0.1766

-0.4106

-0.2377

-0.9366

-0.8440

-1.8923

-1.3314

(0.0090)***

(0.0071)***

(0.1322)***

(0.0760)***

(0.0366)***

(0.0309)***

(0.2975)***

(0.2123)***

0.2208

0.1382

0.3802

0.1845

-0.5637

-0.5665

-0.6549

-0.6679

(0.0049)***

(0.0036)***

(0.0716)***

(0.0566)***

(0.0211)***

(0.0172)***

(0.2177)***

(0.1269)***

Used
pgas = $2.00
pgas

= $3.00

pgas = $4.00

0.2032

0.1281

0.3955

0.1913

-0.8219

-0.7572

-1.0653

-0.9291

(0.0061)***

(0.0047)***

(0.0909)***

(0.0659)***

(0.0250)***

(0.0204)***

(0.2165)***

(0.1283)***

0.1856

0.1180

0.4108

0.1981

-1.0801

-0.9479

-1.4757

-1.1903

(0.0093)***

(0.0073)***

(0.1163)***

(0.0774)**

(0.0364)***

(0.0297)***

(0.2201)***

(0.1352)***

Marginal effects of kept vehicle GPM from a regression of the continuous bought vehicle GPM on covariates. Standard errors robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity clustered by household shown in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. f d ≥ f k (f k > f d )
show marginal effects when the dropped vehicle was the most (least) fuel intense vehicle in the portfolio prior to the purchase. “GP+DfT+I” instrument deploys
gas price at the time of kept vehicle purchase, gas price at the time of dropped vehicle purchase, the “Price deviations from trend” instruments, and projections
from the space of exogenous variables described in Section 3.3 as instruments for endogenous regressors.

Table 6: Bought Vehicle Attributes
Footprint
(1)

Displacement
(2)

Curb Weight
(3)

New

1d≥k × GP M k
1k>d × GP M k
1d≥k × GP M k × pgas
1k>d × GP M k × pgas
pgas

-622.10

-151.36

8.6899

(248.38)**

(87.16)*

(8.7104)

-649.78

-119.58

-2.8888

(172.78)***

(74.96)

(5.3321)

-175.43

-21.369

-10.513

(41.40)***

(3.933)***

(1.311)***

-96.082

-10.170

-7.4679

(34.592)***

(3.207)***

(1.2278)***

7.2982

0.8328

0.4730

(1.9291)***

(0.1886)***

(0.0654)***

-0.0423

0.2289

-0.0566

(0.1219)

(0.5109)

(0.1237)

N Non-singleton

142,402

143,460

142,418

Cragg-Donald Stat

148.55

135.05

240.42

25.28

-55.09

-1.6599

(194.05)

(127.48)

(8.2521)

Kept Vehicle Attribute

Used

1d≥k × GP M k
1

k>d

1

d≥k

1

k>d

×

GP M k

×

GP M k

×

GP M k

×

pgas

×

pgas

pgas
Kept Vehicle Attribute

41.12

-67.42

-1.1678

(154.82)

(120.72)

(6.4835)

-147.14

-40.276

-9.1561

(35.88)***

(7.687)***

(1.7653)***

-83.254

-24.895

-5.6494

(28.691)***

(4.791)***

(1.4737)***

5.2106

1.6169

0.3580

(1.5968)***

(0.3208)***

(0.0803)***

-0.5259

0.2393

-0.3978

(0.1348)***

(0.9707)

(0.2420)

N Non-singleton

138,163

140,410

138,384

Cragg-Donald Stat

129.50

127.98

154.13

Footprint
f t2

Engine Disp.
L

Curb wt.
tons

Outcome
Unit

Regression of the continuous bought vehicle GPM on covariates. Standard errors robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity clustered by household shown in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively. 1d≥k (1k>d ) is an indicator denoting the dropped vehicle was the most (least) fuel intense
vehicle in the portfolio prior to the purchase. All specifications deploy the preferred GP+DfT+I instrumental
variables.

32

Table 7: Bought Vehicle Attributes - Kept GPM Marginal Effects
Footprint
(1)
d
f ≥ fk

Footprint
(2)
k
f > fd

Curb wt.
(3)
d
f ≥ fk

Curb wt.
(4)
k
f > fd

Displacement
(5)
d
f ≥ fk

Displacement
(6)
k
f > fd

New
pgas = $2.00
pgas

33

pgas

= $3.00
= $4.00

-972.96

-841.94

-12.337

-17.824

-194.09

-139.92

(235.81)***

(183.91)***

(7.621)

(5.002)***

(89.82)**

(75.63)*

-1,148.4

-938.0

-22.850

-25.292

-215.46

-150.08

(240.2)***

(198.5)***

(7.371)***

(5.276)***

(91.38)**

(76.16)**

-1,323.8

-1,034.1

-33.364

-32.760

-236.83

-160.25

(251.4)***

(217.6)***

(7.350)***

(5.802)***

(93.07)**

(76.83)**

-269.00

-125.38

-19.972

-12.467

-135.64

-117.21

(188.86)

(177.48)

(8.536)**

(7.909)

(141.16)

(128.78)

Used
pgas = $2.00
pgas

= $3.00

pgas = $4.00

-416.15

-208.64

-29.128

-18.116

-175.92

-142.10

(196.31)**

(194.25)

(9.198)***

(8.907)**

(148.13)

(132.88)

-563.29

-291.89

-38.284

-23.765

-216.20

-167.00

(209.72)***

(213.57)

(10.127)***

(10.023)**

(155.17)

(137.03)

Marginal effects of kept vehicle GPM from a regression of the continuous bought vehicle GPM on covariates. Standard errors robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity clustered by household shown in parentheses. *,**,*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. f d ≥ f k (f k > f d )
show marginal effects when the dropped vehicle was the most (least) fuel intense vehicle in the portfolio prior to the purchase. All specifications deploy the
preferred GP+DfT+I instrumental variables.

Table 8: Regression of Log VMT on Fuel Cost Per Mile
Outcome

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.557

-3.705

-3.709

-3.711

-3.697

(0.057)***

(0.113)***

(0.113)***

(0.114)***

(0.114)***

-0.806

2.433

2.435

2.449

2.435

(0.065)***

(0.139)***

(0.139)***

(0.140)***

(0.141)***

-0.420

-3.926

-3.925

-3.968

-3.953

(0.071)***

(0.145)***

(0.145)***

(0.145)***

(0.146)***

-0.363

2.105

2.100

2.153

2.152

(0.058)***

(0.116)***

(0.116)***

(0.116)***

(0.117)***

2,942,024

2,942,024

2,942,024

2,905,962

2,903,315

N Households

854,299

854,299

854,299

845,665

845,121

Household FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

County FE

N

N

Y

N

Y

Seasonality FE

N

N

N

Y

Y

Attribute Controls

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

log(V M T1 )

DP M1
DP M2

log(V M T2 )

DP M2
DP M1

N

Regression of vehicle log VMT on covariates. Variables subscripted with 1 denote the more fuel intense
vehicle and 2 denotes the less fuel intense vehicle. Vehicle cost per mile (DP M ) instrumented using
gasoline price at the time the vehicle was purchased and its interaction with current gasoline prices. All
regressions include household fixed effects, nonparametric controls for the age of both vehicles in the
portfolio, county-level unemployment, and indicators for leased vehicles. Standard errors clustered by
household shown in parentheses. Seasonality fixed effects account for seasonal patterns in driving behavior
and consist of the quarter of year of the most recent VMT measurement interacted with counts of each
quarter type since the previous VMT measurement. Attribute controls include indicators for vehicle class
and continuous measures of vehicle curb weight, wheelbase, vehicle width, and engine displacement.

34

Table 9: Effect of a 10% Decrease in Fuel Intensity of Portfolio Fuel Consumption, New Vehicles
(a) Initial Vehicle is Least Efficient

Initial
Vehicle

Follow-on
Vehicle

Portfolio
Total

Base Fuel Consumption (gal/yr)

688.18

610.24

1,298.42

Direct Effect (gal/yr)

-68.82

29.05

-39.77

[-10.00%]

[4.76%]

[-3.06%]

Direct AS Effect on VMT (gal/yr)
Indirect AS Effect on VMT (gal/yr)
Total Effect (gal/yr)

40.07

-16.39

23.68

[5.82%]

[-2.69%]

[1.82%]

12.17

-23.40

-11.23

[1.77%]

[-3.83%]

[-0.86%]

-16.57

-10.75

-27.32

[-2.41%]

[-1.76%]

[-2.10%]

(b) Initial Vehicle is More Efficient

Base Fuel Consumption (gal/yr)
Direct Effect (gal/yr)
Direct AS Effect on VMT (gal/yr)
Indirect AS Effect on VMT (gal/yr)
Total Effect (gal/yr)

Initial
Vehicle

Follow-on
Vehicle

Portfolio
Total

688.18

610.24

1,298.42

-68.82

29.05

-39.77

[-10.00%]

[4.76%]

[-3.06%]

42.85

-17.52

25.32

[6.23%]

[-2.87%]

[1.95%]

10.76

-20.69

-9.93

[1.56%]

[-3.39%]

[-0.76%]

-15.21

-9.16

-24.38

[-2.21%]

[-1.50%]

[-1.88%]

Effect if a 10% decrease in fuel intensity of a vehicle through the purchase of the next vehicle. Direct Effect
is the effect from the exogeneous shock to the fuel intensity of the kept vehicle and the resulting change in
fuel intensity of the follow-on purchase. Direct AS Effect is the own-vehicle effect in fuel consumption due
to the change in operating costs. Indirect AS Effect is the cross-vehicle effect. Base fuel consumption and
vehicle VMT are the sample mean for two car households. VMT effect assume a gasoline price of $3 per
gallon.

35

Figure 1: Instrumental Variables Reduced Form Relationships

0

.5

.02

.6

.04

.06
Density

.08

Probability Sold Vehicle
was least valuable
.7
.8

.1

.12

(a) Price Difference IV

0

5

10

15

20
25
30
Absolute difference
in vehicle value (1000 $)

35

40

45

50

36

Kernel Regression:

Prediction

95% Pointwise CI

Density

OLS:

linear

cubic

quadratic

.6
.8
Probability Sold Vehicle
was least valuable
-2000

0

.4

0

.4

.08
.06
Density
.04
.02

Density
2.0e-04 4.0e-04 6.0e-04 8.0e-04

.1

.8
Probability Sold Vehicle
was least valuable
.6
.7
.5

.001

(c) Price Deviation from Trend DiD IV
.12

(b) Price DiD IV

0

5

10

15
20
25
30
35
Absolute difference-in-difference
in vehicle value (1000 $)

40

45

50
Kernel Regression:

Kernel Regression:

Prediction

95% Pointwise CI

Density

OLS:

linear

cubic

quadratic

0
Difference in unanticipated change
in vehicle value ($)
Prediction

2000

95% Pointwise CI

Density
OLS:

linear

cubic

quadradic

All 2x2 households. Probabilities conditional on a vehicle purchase (new or used) estimated within $1,000 bins. Binomial 95% confidence intervals shown in
dashed lines. Values of the instruments in the Price Difference IV and Price DiD IV less than or greater than zero perfectly predict the least valuable vehicle in
the portfolio and graphs are shown for the absolute value of these variables.

Figure 2: Reduced form relationship: Gas price at time of kept car purchase
(a) New Vehicle Purchases

(b) Used Vehicle Purchases

Plot of the reduced-form relationship between gasoline price at the time of kept vehicle purchase and the fuel
economy (in GPM) of the purchased vehicle. Both variables are partialed of all other regression covariates. Graphs
are limited to the 1st through 99th percentiles of residual kept vehicle gasoline price. Excludes observations where
the household fixed effect perfectly predicts the outcome. Blue line is a kernel regression with Epanechnikov kernel
and bandwidth 0.1. The gray band is the 95% confidence interval using the same kernel and bandwidth. The green
line is the linear relationship estimated using OLS. Red circles are mean residuals for each 0.005 in kept vehicle
GPM. The size of each circle is proportional to the number of observations used to compute the mean residual.

37

Figure 3: Number of Transactions per 2x2 Replacement Household

1,017,037

600,000
400,000

347,198

200,000

# Households

800,000

1,000,000

(a) Full Sample

65,800
2,982

450

51

0

19,378

1

2

3
4
5
6
# Portfolio Changes per Household

7

8

7

8

484,651

300,000
200,000

# Households

400,000

500,000

(b) IV Sample

100,000

127,335

2,700

167

7

0

14,159

1

2

3
4
5
6
# Portfolio Changes per Household

Distribution of the total number of observed vehicle transactions for each household from 2001 to 2007 for (a) the
full sample of 2x2 replacement households and (b) households for which the data support deploying our IVs. In
specifications including household fixed effects the fixed effect perfectly predicts the decision of a household if it
only engages in one transaction. Other model parameters are identified by households engaging in multiple
transactions from 2001 to 2007.

38

Figure 4: Marginal Effect of Kept Vehicle GPM on Bought Vehicle GPM

Marginal effect of Kept Vehicle GPM
On Purchase Probability
-100
-50
0
50

100

(a) New Vehicle Purchases

1

2

3

Gas Price

Bought GPM Quartile:

1

4
4

Marginal effect of Kept Vehicle GPM
On Purchase Probability
-100
-50
0
50

100

(b) Used Vehicle Purchases

1

2

3

Gas Price

Bought GPM Quartile:

1

4
4

Population average marginal of the kept vehicle GPM on the probability model a household purchases a vehicle in
the 1st (blue) or 4th (red) quartile of the GPM distribution for used vehicle purchases. Estimated as a linear
probability model using the specification shown in Equation (3.3) and the GP+DfT+I instruments. 95% confidence
intervals robust to heteroskedastiticy and clustered by household shown in dashed lines.

39

A

Substituting Vehicle-Miles Traveled

When the cost of transportation services changes differentially across vehicles in the portfolio,
households may adjust their usage on the intensive margin by substituting towards the less expensive vehicle. We investigate the relationship between vehicle operating cost per mile and the
household’s allocation of VMT across the vehicles in its portfolio. We exploit two sources of variation in vehicle operating costs: variation in gasoline prices over time while holding the vehicle
portfolio fixed and changes in operating costs resulting from changes in the fuel intensity of vehicles in the portfolio. For each vehicle i ∈ {1, 2} in a two-vehicle portfolio, we compute the fuel cost
in dollars per mile DP Mi as the price of gasoline, in dollars per gallon, times the fuel intensity, in
gallons per mile. As these are two-vehicle portfolios, attributes of the other vehicle included in the
regression are subscripted j.
We construct a yearly panel of two-vehicle households. For each vehicle i in year t, we compute
the mean annual VMT (V M Tit ) as miles driven between the closest preceding (at time t) and upcoming (at time t) odometer measurements for that vehicle.20 We estimate the impact of operating
costs on VMT using Equation A.1,
V M Th,i,t = βi DP Mh,i,t + βj DP Mh,j,t + Ξh + Θh,t + Ψ(t, t) + Ai (i) + Aj (j) + εh,i,t

(A.1)

where Ξh are household fixed effects, Θh,t are fixed effects for the county of residence of household
h in year t, Ψh,t are fixed effects controlling for seasonality in driving,21 A() are controls for
vehicle attributes,22 and εh,i,t is an idiosyncratic error which may have arbitrary correlation within
households.
Estimating the causal impact of operating costs on VMT consumption using a household panel
presents challenges to identification. A household’s vehicle operating costs are the product of the
current gasoline price, which we assume to be exogenous, and the fuel intensity of the household’s
vehicles. Over time the change in a household’s preference for vehicles with low fuel intensity, or
other attributes correlated with low fuel intensity, may be correlated with changes in demand for
VMT over time. For example, a positive household income shock may increase demand for vehicle
horsepower (increasing fuel intensity) but also increase demand for driving in general. Similar to
previous regressions, we instrument for operating cost per mile using the gasoline price at the time
20

We obtain odometer readings through DMV records each time a vehicle is transacted and at the time of biannual
smog checks for vehicles six years and older.
21
Demand for VMT follows seasonal patterns and odometer readings do not necessarily occur at the same time
each year for a given vehicle. In fact, one may be concerned that the timing of odometer readings may be correlated
with demand for VMT. We deploy two sets of controls to account for seasonality in the VMT measurement. First,
in a simpler specification, we include fixed effects for the quarter-of-year of the upcoming odometer reading. In our
preferred specification, we interact these fixed effects with counts of each quarter-of-year elapsed since the previous
odometer reading.
22
All specifications include nonparametric controls for the age of both vehicles in the portfolio and indicators for
leased vehicles. Additional attribute controls in our preferred specification include indicators for vehicle class and
continuous measures of vehicle curb weight, wheelbase, vehicle width, and engine displacement.

40

the vehicle was purchased and its interaction with current gasoline prices. Finally, as households
may shift VMT between the more and less fuel-intense vehicles in response to changes in operating
costs, we estimate separate regressions for the more (subscript 1) and less (subscript 2) fuel intense
vehicle in the portfolio.
Estimates from Equation (A.1) are shown in Table 8. The top two sets of coefficients show the
impact of vehicle operating costs on VMT of the more fuel-intense vehicle and the second set show
the impacts for the relatively fuel-efficient vehicle. In either case, an increase in the cost of driving
(DPM) of one vehicle introduces an incentive to shift VMT from that vehicle to the other vehicle
in the household portfolio.
The specification in column (1) includes only operating costs, household fixed effects, and
controls for vehicle age and leases. Here an increase in the operating cost of one vehicle appears
to decrease the VMT of both vehicles in the portfolio. This may be reasonable in the presence of
large income effects, but we suspect that it may be driven by omitted vehicle attributes. Column
(2) adds controls for vehicle attributes to the previous specification. Here, all estimated parameters
are of larger magnitude and the sign on the cross-effect for both vehicles becomes positive. That
is, an increase in the operating cost of vehicle A reduces VMT of vehicle A but increases the VMT
of vehicle B. These effects are similar in magnitude across the more and less fuel-intense vehicles in
the portfolio, but the difference between the direct and indirect effects are larger for the relatively
fuel-efficient vehicle, implying that households shift VMT demand from less to more fuel efficient
vehicles in the face of increasing operating costs.
These results are robust to inclusion of alternative controls. The next three columns include
additional fixed effects to account for various forms of unobserved heterogeneity. Column (3) adds
fixed effects for the county of residence of household h in year t. Column (4) adds indicators for the
quarter-of-year of the upcoming odometer reading to the specification in column (2). Column (5)
is our preferred specification and includes county fixed effects from column (3) and provides robust
controls for seasonality in driving patterns. It does so by using fixed effects for quarter-of-year of
the upcoming odometer reading interacted with counts of each quarter-of-year elapsed since the
previous odometer reading. This will flexibly control for determinants of VMT such as the number
of summer seasons (high VMT) that elapsed between odometer readings. Coefficient estimates are
quite similar cross Columns (2) to (5), showing our results are robust to the specific set of included
fixed effects.

41

