                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HOW CREDIT CYCLES ACROSS A FINANCIAL CRISIS

                                    Arvind Krishnamurthy
                                         Tyler Muir

                                      Working Paper 23850
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23850


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2017, September 2020




We thank Michael Bordo, Gary Gorton, Robin Greenwood, Francis Longstaff, Emil Siriwardane,
Jeremy Stein, David Romer, Chris Telmer, Alan Taylor, Egon Zakrajsek, and seminar/conference
participants at Arizona State University, AFA 2015 and 2017, Chicago Booth Financial
Regulation conference, NBER Monetary Economics meeting, NBER Corporate Finance meeting,
FRIC at Copenhagen Business School, Riksbank Macro-Prudential Conference, SITE 2015,
Stanford University, University of Amsterdam, University of California-Berkeley, University of
California-Davis, UCLA, USC, Utah Winter Finance Conference, and Chicago Booth Empirical
Asset Pricing Conference. We thank the International Center for Finance for help with bond data,
and many researchers for leads on other bond data. We thank Jonathan Wallen and David Yang
for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Arvind Krishnamurthy and Tyler Muir. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Credit Cycles across a Financial Crisis
Arvind Krishnamurthy and Tyler Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 23850
September 2017, September 2020
JEL No. E0,G01

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the behavior of credit and output across a financial crisis cycle using in- formation from
credit spreads and credit growth. We show the transition into a crisis occurs with a large increase
in credit spreads, indicating that crises involve a dramatic shift in expectations and are a surprise.
The severity of the subsequent crisis can be forecast by the size of credit losses (change in
spreads) coupled with the fragility of the financial sector (as measured by pre-crisis credit
growth), and we document that this interaction is an important feature of crises. We also find that
recessions in the aftermath of financial crises are severe and protracted. Finally, we find that
spreads fall pre-crisis and appear too low, even as credit grows ahead of a crisis. This behavior of
both prices and quantities suggests that credit supply expansions are a precursor to crises. The
2008 financial crisis cycle is in keeping with these historical patterns surrounding financial crises.


Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu

Tyler Muir
University of California at Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
tyler.muir@anderson.ucla.edu
1     Introduction
We characterize the dynamics of credit markets and output across a financial crisis cycle,
contributing to a literature that examines the empirical links between credit and the macroe-
conomy. This literature has sought answers to two main questions: (1) What is the aftermath
of a financial crisis, and in particular, what factors lead to a more protracted post-crisis re-
cession? See papers by Bordo et al. (2001), Cerra and Saxena (2008), Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009), Claessens et al. (2010), Bordo and Haubrich (2012), Jordà et al. (2011), Schularick
and Taylor (2012), Romer and Romer (2014). (2) What does the run-up to a crisis look
like, and what credit variables help to predict a crisis? See papers by Schularick and Taylor
(2012), Jordà et al. (2011), Baron and Xiong (2017), López-Salido et al. (2017), Mian et al.
(2017).
    We revisit these questions with new data. In particular, our research brings in information
from credit spreads, i.e., the spreads between higher and lower grade bonds within a country,
while much of the research cited above has focused on quantity data such as credit-to-GDP.
In US data, credit spreads are known to contain information on the credit cycle and recessions
(see Mishkin (1990), Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012), Bordo and Haubrich (2010), and López-
Salido et al. (2017)). However, the US has only experienced two significant financial crises
over the last century. We collect information on credit spreads internationally dating back
150 years and across 19 countries, and thus more comprehensively examine the relation
between credit and financial crises.1
    We summarize our findings as follows:

    • A large increase in credit spreads presages the economy’s transition into a financial
      crisis. Crises involve a sudden shift in investors’ expectations and, therefore, are a
      surprise.

    • The severity of a financial crisis, in terms of the decline in output, is informed by the
      size of the increase in credit spreads coupled with the extent of the pre-crisis growth
      in credit.

    • Crises are preceded by unusually high credit growth and unusually narrow credit
      spreads; that is, frothy credit-market conditions.

    • Frothy credit market conditions help to forecast the incidence of crises.
   1
     In work that was begun contemporaneously, Mian et al. (2017) examine credit spreads in international
data going back to the 1970s.


                                                   1
   The first two findings describe what happens in a crisis and what factors are associated
with worse crises, which is question (1) that prior research has addressed. This work, in
particular Schularick and Taylor (2012), demonstrates that growth in credit-to-GDP in the
years before a crisis presages a worse crisis. We complement this result by showing that the
extent of the rise in credit spreads at the start of a crisis – loosely, the size of the shock –
coupled with pre-crisis credit growth better describes the aftermath of a crisis than either
the shock or the credit-growth run up, separately. As we discuss below, this interaction
result conforms well to existing theoretical models of financial crises.
    The second two findings describe the preconditions for a financial crisis, which is question
(2) of prior research. Our answer is froth, consistent with Baron and Xiong (2017), Schularick
and Taylor (2012). Relative to this work, we show that low credit spreads and high credit
growth offer the sharpest signal of a coming crisis. Prior work has shown that each of these
signals separately has contains information for predicting crises. We replicate this finding
in our data, adding the new result that a combined signal has the most information for
predicting cries. We also show that these signals do not forecast recessions. The information
is special to crises. Finally, we run out-of-sample regressions where we construct our signals
using data only upto time t and use the signal to forecast a crisis after date t. While the
statistical significance of our results are weakened in this exercise, our basic finding continue
to hold. Our results support narratives where credit supply expansions play an important
role in the run-up to a crisis.
   While we find a strong association between froth and crises, we find a much weaker
association between froth and average future declines in output. Moreover, out-of-sample,
the sign on the relationship changes and is not statistically different than zero. Our results
indicate that froth is associated with a greater likelihood of the left-tail crisis event, but
not especially a change in mean output realizations. This result is inconsistent with that
reported in López-Salido et al. (2017), Mian et al. (2017). On the other hand, these papers
do not especially study financial crises and study smaller samples than we do.

   Our results shed light on theories of financial crises. Theoretical models describe crises as
the result of a shock or trigger (losses, defaults on bank loans, the bursting of an asset bubble)
that affects a fragile financial sector. Denote these losses as zi,t (Et [zi,t ] = 0, for country-i,
time t). Theory shows how the shock is amplified, with the extent of amplification driven by
the fragility of the financial sector (low equity capital, high leverage, high short-term debt
financing). Denote Fi,t as the fragility of the financial sector. Then models suggest that
the severity of the crisis should depend on Fi,t × zi,t . A sizable shock to a fragile financial


                                                 2
sector results in a financial crisis with bank runs as well as a credit crunch, i.e., a decrease in
loan supply and a rise in lending rates relative to safe rates. Asset market risk premia also
rise as investors shed risky assets. All of this leads to a rise in credit spreads a reduction
in the quantity of credit and a deep recession. See Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2010), He and Krishnamurthy (2012), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2012), Moreira
and Savov (2014), and Krishnamurthy and Li (2020) for theoretical models of credit markets
and crises. We label this theoretical characterization of financial crises as the “FZ” model
of crises.
   The FZ model is supported by our empirical evidence. Jordà et al. (2011) show that
growth in credit-to-GDP helps forecast the occurrence of a crisis as well as the severity of
the crisis. Growth in credit from the banking sector is largely funded by bank debt issues
and hence through increased leverage of the banking sector (see Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2015)). This suggests that growth in credit-to-GDP can measure the increase in
fragility of the financial sector (Fi,t ). We show that a jump in spreads, which can represent
the shock zi,t , coupled with fragility best characterizes the severity of a crisis. This result
gives an answer to the question of why some episodes which feature high spreads and financial
disruptions, such as the failure of Penn Central in the US in 1970 or the LTCM failure in
1998, have no measurable translation to the real economy. While in others, such as the
2007-2009 episode, the financial disruption leads to a protracted recession. Our answer is
that in the former case, fragility was not particularly high, while in the latter case, fragility
was high.
   Additionally, the evidence indicates that the relevant spread information is embedded in
the change in spreads rather than the level of spreads. The result is consistent with the FZ
model. Bank assets are credit sensitive whose prices will move along with credit spreads.
Thus the change in spreads from pre-crisis to crisis will be closely correlated with bank
losses, and measure the z-shock in the FZ model. The result is also inconsistent with other
models of the relation between spreads and subsequent GDP outcomes. Spreads may be
passive forecasters of GDP outcomes because they are forward looking measures of expected
default by corporations. But under this passive forecast model, the level of spreads at time
t, si,t , should be the best signal regarding future output growth. Indeed we find that in
non-financial recessions, the level of spreads at time t rather than the change in spreads
better predicts output declines. This is the common finding in the literature examining
the forecasting power of credit spreads for GDP growth (see Friedman and Kuttner, 1992,
Gertler and Lown, 1999, Philippon, 2009, Gilchrist and Zakrajsek, 2012). Under this passive-
forecast model, one would expect that the change in spreads is more directly related to the

                                                3
change in the expectation of output growth rather than the level of output growth. Thus
our finding on the importance of the change in spreads appears most consistent with the FZ
model.
   Our second set of results relating froth to crises are consistent with narratives in which
expansions in credit supply are an important precursor to crises. Kindelberger (1978) is a
prominent reference for this narrative, which has been taken up more recently by a number
of studies (see Jordà et al., 2011, 2013, Baron and Xiong, 2017, Mian et al., 2017). Jordà et
al. (2011) show that unusually high credit growth helps to predict crises, but their evidence
does not speak to the important question of whether it is credit supply or credit demand
that sets up the fragility before crises. Our results suggest that it is unusually high credit
growth coupled with unusually low spreads that help to predict crises.
   Credit spreads reflect the risk-neutral probability (true probability times risk-premium
adjustment, denoted Q), of a large loss and the (risk-neutral) expectation of output declines
following a crisis:

      si,t−1 = γ i,0 + γ 1 ProbQ (zi,t > z) × EtQ [Lossi,t |crisis]

where, Lossi,t is increasing in Fi,t . Holding ProbQ (zi,t > z) fixed, we may expect that as
Fi,t rises before a crisis, that credit spreads also rise. We show that the opposite is true.
Unconditionally, spreads and credit growth are positively correlated. But if we condition
on the 5 years before a crisis, credit growth and spreads are negatively correlated. That is,
investors’ risk-neutral probability of a large loss, ProbQ (zi,t > z) falls as credit growth rises.
We show that spreads are about 25% “too low” pre-crisis, after controlling for fundamental
drivers of spreads, because of this effect. The fall in spreads and rise in quantity are suggestive
of an expansion in credit supply and indicate that froth in the credit market precedes crises.
   These two sets of results, describing the evolution of crises based on fragility × losses
and describing the runup to crises in terms of froth, are our main findings. They provide
guidance for theories of financial crises. Models such as Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), He
and Krishnamurthy (2012) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2012) are FZ models and are
the types of models that can match the evolution and aftermath of a crisis. However, these
models will not match the pre-crisis spread evidence. In the models, a prolonged period in
which fragility and leverage rises will also be coupled with an increase in spreads and risk
premia. That is, the logic of these models is that asset prices are forward looking and will
reflect the increased risk of a crisis as fragility grows. The spread evidence is more consistent
with models of belief formation in which agents discount the likelihood of a crisis. In Moreira
and Savov (2014), severe crises are preceded by periods of low spreads where agents think

                                                    4
a crisis is unlikely and hence increase leverage. In this case, if an unlikely large negative
shock occurs, the crisis will be severe. In behavioral models such as Gennaioli et al. (2013)
and Bordalo et al. (2018), agents’ beliefs are systematically biased and this bias is a driver
of fragility and crises. Krishnamurthy and Li (2020) evaluate the rational, diagnostic, and
FZ model of crises in a unified framework. Finally, models of agent beliefs such as Caballero
and Krishnamurthy (2008), Moreira and Savov (2014), Gennaioli et al. (2013) and Bordalo
et al. (2018) also imply that crises will be triggered by a large “surprise.” We have discussed
how spread changes correlate with the subsequent severity of a crisis because the change
proxies for credit losses. Another possibility is that the change in spreads directly measures
the surprise to investors, and is thus consistent with these theories.
     The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe our data. Section
4 presents our result on patterns during a crisis and its aftermath. Section 5 describes pre-
crisis patterns. Section 6 explores the robustness of our results to pre- and post-war data as
well as alternative dating conventions. An appendix detailing the data sources is in Section
A.


2      Data and Definitions
In order to describe patterns around financial crises, we need to know what is a financial
crisis. We primarily use crisis dates from Jordà et al. (2011) as well as Jordà et al. (2013)
(henceforth, JST). The data from Jordà et al. (2011) and Jordà et al. (2013) date both the
year of the crisis as well as the business cycle peak associated with the crisis. This typically
occurs before the actual bank run or bank failure. We mainly focus on the JST business cycle
peak dates. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Baron et al. (2019) offer two other prominent
crisis chronologies covering our sample. We discuss these alternative chronologies in Section
6.

                                     [Table 1 about here.]

     Our data on credit spreads come from a variety of sources. Table 1 details the data
coverage. Much of our data covers a period from 1869 to 1929. We collect bond price, and
other bond specific information (maturity, coupon, etc.), from the Investors Monthly Man-
ual, a publication from the Economist, which contains detailed monthly data on individual
corporate and sovereign bonds traded on the London Stock Exchange from 1869-1929. The
foreign bonds in our sample include banks, sovereigns, and railroad bonds, among other
corporations. The appendix describes this data source in more detail. We use this data to

                                                5
construct credit spreads, formed within country as high yield minus lower yield bonds. Lower
yield bonds are meant to be safe bonds analogous to Aaa rated bonds. We select the cutoff
for these bonds as the 10th percentile in yields in a given country and month. An alternative
way to construct spreads is to use safe government debt as the benchmark. We find that our
results are largely robust to using UK government debt as this alternative benchmark.2 We
form this spread for each country in each month and then average the spread over the last
quarter of each year to obtain an annual spread measure.3 This process helps to eliminate
noise in our spread construction. Lastly, we deal with compositional changes in the sample
by requiring at least 90% of the bonds in a given year to be the same bonds as the previous
year. Our data appendix describes the construction of spreads during this period in more
detail.
        From 1930 onward, our data comes from different sources. These data include a number of
crises, such as the Asian crisis, and the Nordic banking crisis. We collect data, typically from
central banks on the US, Japan, and Hong Kong. We also collect data on Ireland, Portugal,
Spain and Greece over the period from 2000 to 2014 using bond data from Datastream,
which covers the recent European crisis. For Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Norway,
Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Korea we use data from Global Financial Data when
available. We collect corporate and government bond yields and form spreads. Our data
appendix discusses the details and construction of this data more extensively.
        Finally, data on real per capita GDP are from Barro and Ursua (see Barro et al. (2011)).
We examine the information content of spreads for the evolution of per capita GDP.

                                         [Figure 1 about here.]

    Figure 1 plots the incidence of crises as dated by JST over our sample (i.e. the intersection
of their sample and our sample that contains data on bond spreads).


3         Normalizing Spreads
There is a large literature examining the forecasting power of credit spreads for economic
activity (see Friedman and Kuttner (1992), Gertler and Lown (1999), Philippon (2009), and
    2
     One issue with UK government debt is that it does not appear to serve as an appropriate riskless
benchmark during the period surrounding World War I as government yields rose substantially in this
period. Because of this we follow Jordà et al. (2011) and drop the wars year 1913-1919 and 1939-1947 from
our analysis
   3
     We use the average over the last quarter rather than simply the December value to have more observations
for each country and year. Our results are robust to averaging over all months in a given year but we prefer
the 4th quarter measure as our goal is to get a current signal of spreads at the end of each year.

                                                     6
Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012)). Credit spreads help to forecast economic activity because
they contain an expected default component, a risk premium component, and an illiquidity
component. Each of these components will correlate with a worsening of economic conditions,
and a crisis. Almost all of the prior literature examines the forecasting power of a credit
spread (e.g., the Aaa-Baa corporate bond spread in the US) within a country. As we run
regressions in an international panel, there are additional issues that arise.
   Table 2 examines the forecasting power of spreads for 1-year output growth in our sample.
We run,
                       
               yi,t+1
      ln                    = ai + at + b0 × spreadi,t + b−1 × spreadi,t−1 + εi,t+1 ,       (1)
                yi,t

where yi,t is real per capita GDP in country i at time t. We include country and time
fixed effects. Country fixed effects pick up different mean growth rates across countries. We
include time fixed effects to pick up common shocks to growth rates and spreads, although
our results do not materially depend on whether time fixed effects are included. Driscoll-
Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are reported in parentheses. We use this error structure for
all of the panel data regressions we present. We have also checked our results when double
clustering standard errors. The results are broadly similar. Given that we have a relatively
small cross-section of countries, we think that double clustering is not appropriate and hence
report Driscoll-Kray standard errors (see, e.g., Petersen (2008) on computing standard errors
when there are few clusters).

                                               [Table 2 about here.]

   Column (1) shows that spreads do not forecast well in our sample. But there is a simple
reason for this failing. Across countries, our spreads measure differing amounts of credit risk.
For example, in US data, we would not expect that Baa-Aaa spread and Ccc-Aaa spread
contain the same information for output growth, which is what is required in running (1) and
holding the bs constant across countries. In the 2007-2009 Great Recession in the US, high
yield spreads rose much more than investment grade spreads. It is necessary to normalize
the spreads in some way so that the spreads from each country contain similar information.
We try a variety of approaches.
  In, column (2), we normalize spreads by dividing by the average spread for that country.
That is, for each country we construct:

      ŝi,t ≡ Spreadi,t /Spreadi                                                            (2)


                                                         7
A junk spread is on average higher than an investment grade spread, and its sensitivity to
the business cycle is also higher. By normalizing by the mean country spread we assume that
the sensitivity of the spread to the cycle is proportional to the average spread. The results
in column (2) show that this normalization considerably improves the forecasting power of
spreads. Both the R2 of the regression and the t-statistic of the estimates rise.
   The rest of the columns report other normalizations. The mean normalization is based on
the average spread from the full sample, which may be a concern. In column (3) we instead
normalize the year t spread by the mean spread up until date t − 1 for each country. That is,
this normalization does not use any information beyond year t in its construction. In column
(4), we report results from converting the spread into a Z-score for a given country, while in
columns (5) we convert the spread into its percentile in the distribution of spreads for that
country. All of these approaches do better than the non-normalized spread, both in terms of
the R2 and the t-statistics in the regressions. But none of them does measurably better than
the mean normalization. Finally, our approaches to normalization are implicitly making a
homogeneity assumption that countries with on average higher spreads (or higher spread
volatility) are no different than countries with on average lower spreads. In other words,
the information content for crisis-outcomes is contained in the deviations of the spread at a
given time from the average spread for that country. We check this assumption by splitting
the sample into high spread countries and low spread countries and then running regressions
within each subsample. These results are reported in columns (6) and (7). The coefficient
estimates on the normalized spreads are economically and statistically the same across these
samples validating our homogeneity assumption. We will focus on the mean normalization
in the rest of the paper: a variable we refer to as ŝi,t . Our results are broadly similar when
using other normalizations.


4    Crisis and Aftermath
Figure 2 provides a first look at our data on credit, spreads, and output. Date 0 on the figure
corresponds to the date of a JST-dated crisis. The top-left panel plots the path of the mean
across-country normalized spread, relative to the mean normalized spread for country-i, from
5-years before the crisis to 5-years after the crisis. We see that spreads are 20% below their
average value in the years before the crisis. Note that a one-sigma of the normalized credit
spread is very near one, so that the spreads are equivalently 0.2sigma’s below their mean
value. They rise in the crisis, going as high as 50% over their mean value in the year after
the JST crisis date, before returning over the next 5 years to the mean value. The top-right

                                               8
panel plots the path of the quantity of credit. The credit variable is expressed as the average
across-country percentage change in the quantity of credit from 5-years before the crisis to
a given year, after demeaning by the sample growth rate in credit for country-i. That is,
positive values imply that credit growth since time −5 has been faster than average. We see
that credit grows faster than average in the years leading up to the crisis at time zero. After
this point, credit reverses so that by time +5 the variable is back near the country average.
The bottom-left panel plots GDP, again as average percentage change from 5-years before
the crisis, after demeaning by the sample growth rate in GDP for country-i. GDP grows
slightly faster than average in the years preceding the crisis. GDP falls in the crisis below
trend and remains low up to 5 years after the crisis.

                                    [Figure 2 about here.]

   These patterns in credit and output are consistent with prior evidence, in particular the
work of Jordà et al. (2013). The magnitudes as reflected in Figure 2 are also in line with
that paper. The panel on spreads is new simply because prior work examining historical
crisis dates lacked data on spreads. But the pattern documented in the figure should not
be surprising and is consistent with the prior work on spreads we have cited. Spreads rise
in a crisis when default risk, risk premia, and liquidity premia rise and then fall as these
components fall.

4.1    Credit and crisis intensity
The patterns in Figure 2 reflect the average behavior across all JST crisis dates. There is
considerable heterogeneity within these crises. Table 3 presents statistics. Across the 39
JST crisis dates in our sample, the mean decline in GDP over the 3 years subsequent to the
date of the crisis is −2.6%, but the standard deviation is 8.5%. Our paper delves into the
cross-section, examining the variation within crises and asking what factors are associated
with a worse crisis. Prior research, in particular Schularick and Taylor (2012), demonstrates
that growth in credit-to-GDP in the years before a crisis presages a worse crisis.

                                     [Table 3 about here.]

    Figure 3(a) presents a histogram of 5 year GDP growth around a crisis as dated by Jordà
et al. (2013). Both GDP losses and spread spikes are skewed. Figure 3(b) presents a scatter
plot of the spread changes against future 5 year GDP growth for the financial crisis dates.
There is a clear negative relation, and the rest of this section explores this negative relation
in greater detail.

                                               9
                                        [Figure 3 about here.]

   We estimate variants of the following specification:
              
        yi,t+k
   ln            = ai + at + 1crisis,i,t × b0crisis Zi,t + 1no−crisis,i,t × b0no−crisis Zi,t + c0 xt + εi,t+k
         yi,t
                                                                                                          (3)

The dependent variable is per-capita GDP growth from t to t + k. The variables Zi,t include
the normalized credit spread as well as credit growth in country−i at time t. This is a panel
data regression that includes both crisis and non-crisis dates. We are particularly interested
in the coefficient bcrisis on the credit variables interacted with the crisis dummy. Note that
the regression conditions on the occurrence of a crisis at time t. By definition, output will
be low in the years after t. Thus bcrisis measures the relation between credit variables in the
year when the crisis starts and the subsequent severity of the crisis, within the set of crisis
dates. Our regressions also include a country fixed effect and a year fixed effect. We also
include two lags of annual GDP growth in xt to control for GDP trends that may not be
accounted for by the time and country dummies.
   We start with a baseline where we pool crises and non-crises, forcing the b coefficients to
be the same across these events. Columns (1) of Table 4 presents these results, with panel
A for 3-year growth and panel B for 5-year growth. We note that a high spread at time t
forecasts lower GDP growth going forward at both the 3 and 5 year horizons.
    Column (2) presents the main result of this section. We include both the spread at date
t as well as the change in the spread from t − 1 to t, both interacted with the crisis dummy.
We see that the change in the spread helps to explain subsequent GDP growth. We return
to a discussion of why the change in the spread matters more than the level of the spread in
the next section. The standard deviation of spread changes is approximately one, so that a
one-sigma increase in spreads forecasts about a 7% drop in GDP over the next 3-years. At
the 5-year horizon, a one-sigma increase in spreads forecasts about an 8% decrease in GDP.
   We note that the result reported in column (2) describes variation across crisis episodes.
That is, there is a mean decline in output in JST crises as illustrated in Figure 2. The
result in column (2) indicates that if spreads spike one-sigma more than the average spike in
spreads of around 0.5, then output falls by an additional 6 − 7% relative to the mean path
of Figure 2.

                                         [Table 4 about here.]



                                                    10
    Next, we consider the importance of credit growth which is the variable that Jordà et
al. (2013) have found to correlate with crisis outcomes. Column (3) of the table includes
∆credi,t which measures credit growth in the 3-years preceding the crises and is normalized
to have unit standard deviation. We see that credit growth also helps to explain the intensity
of crises. The coefficient estimate of −0.60 means that a one-sigma change in credit growth
leads to a lowering in crisis GDP growth of about 0.60% (this is similar to Jordà et al.
(2013)’s result that a one-sigma increase in credit growth leads to a lowering in crisis GDP
growth of about 1%).4 Another point of reference is Mian et al. (2017), who show that a
one-sigma increase in private debt-to-GDP growth over the last 3 years is associated with a
2.1% decline in output over the next 3 years. The Mian et al. (2017) results are from a more
recent sample, beginning in 1970, and do not explicitly condition on crises.
      Comparing columns (2) and column (3), we see that the coefficient on spread changes
is not appreciably altered with the introduction of the credit growth variable. That is,
spreads and credit growth have independent forecasting power for output growth. This
latter result is similar to Greenwood and Hanson (2013) who find that a quantity variable
that measures the credit quality of corporate debt issuers deteriorates during credit booms,
and that this deterioration forecasts low returns on corporate bonds even after controlling
for credit spreads. Greenwood and Hanson (2013)’s finding is in U.S. data, while our result
derives from a larger cross-country sample.
      To provide a sense of the importance of credit spreads and credit growth in explaining
crisis outcomes, we run a regression of output growth on the credit variables but restricting
the sample to the 39 JST dates. The standard deviation of 3-year GDP growth across
these crisis episodes is 8.5%. If we only consider the credit spread change as independent
variable (along with a constant), the standard deviation of the predicted 3-year GDP growth
from the regression is 3.5%. If we only consider the credit growth variable, the standard
deviation is 2.8%. If we consider both of these variables, as well as their interaction, the
standard deviation is 6.0%. That is, the two variables, credit spread changes and credit
growth account for the bulk of the across-crisis variation in 3-year GDP growth. Similar
statistics apply for the 5-year GDP growth case. Results are available upon request.
    The regressions in columns (2) and (3) report coefficients on the independent variable of
interest interacted with a crisis dummy. Crises are episodes where GDP declines. One may
be concerned that the coefficients reflect these declines in a mechanical way. To deal with
this concern, in column (4) we include a JST crisis dummy separately. The coefficient on
  4
    If we omit changes in spreads from this regression we find a coefficient of around -1% on the credit
growth term, consistent with Jordà et al. (2013).


                                                  11
the spread change is not appreciably altered.

4.2     Credit spread spikes versus levels
The result in column (2) of Table 4 indicates that changes in spreads rather than the level
of spreads helps to explain GDP outcomes in crises. In column (5), we report a regression
where we only include the spread in the year of the crisis and not the spread change. It is
apparent that there is important information in the spread change that is not contained in
the level of the spread.
   Columns (6) - (9) present results showing that the association between spread spikes and
worse crises is a crisis-specific result. In columns (6) and (7) we consider dates that are not
crisis dates. We focus on the set of dates for which JST crises do not occur in any of the
next 5 years. We see from comparing (6) and (7), and noting that the coefficient estimates
are nearly the same, that information in spreads is contained in the spread at date t rather
than in the change from date t − 1 to t. Columns (8) and (9) focus on recession dates, as
dated by JST. Here also we see that there is a statistically strong relation between spreads
and subsequent GDP growth, but not especially between spread changes and subsequent
GDP growth.
   The empirical importance of the change in spreads for explaining output in crises, but
not for recessions, is consistent with FZ crises theories. Since the financial sector primarily
holds credit-sensitive assets, the change in spreads can proxy for financial sector losses. As
losses suffered by levered financial institutions play a central role in trigger/amplification
theories of crises, under these theories we should expect that the change in spreads, more so
than the level of spreads, should correlate with the subsequent severity of a crisis.
   To be more formal, suppose that spreads are:

      si,t = γ̄ i + γ 1 Et [Lossi,t ] + li,t .

where Lossi,t are expected
                    h      default
                            i      losses which we would expect to be decreasing in expected
                              yi,t+k
output growth, Et ln           yi,t
                                       , li,t is an illiquidity component of spreads, and γ̄ i is the mean
value of the spread.
   In a crisis, illiquidity/fire-sale effects in asset markets cause li,t to spike up, leading to
unexpected losses to the financial sector (i.e., a large zi,t shock). Thus, although the term
γ 1 Et [Lossi,t ] is more directly correlated with subsequent output growth, the term li,t is more
directly correlated with zi,t which is particularly informative for output growth during crises.
On the other hand, outside of crises (or in the recovery from a crisis), spreads are better


                                                        12
represented as,

         si,t = γ̄ i + γ 1 Et [Lossi,t ].

That is, outside crises, we would expect that all of the information for forecasting output
growth would be contained in the time t value of the spread. Spreads in this case are a
passive forecaster of output declines.5 Our results in Table 4 confirm these predictions and
the differential importance of spread changes in crises and recessions.

4.3        Crisis triggers and amplifiers
The start of a crisis is associated with a spike in spreads and larger spikes in spreads are
associated with worse crises. These results were derived from examining JST dated crises.
We next ask what information is contained in spread spikes without conditioning on the
occurrence of a JST crisis. Table 5 presents quantile regressions of output growth over the
next year on ∆ŝi,t . Standard errors are clustered by year (Parente and Silva, 2016). We see
that the forecasting power of spreads for output increases as we move to the lower quantiles
of the output distribution. At the median, the coefficient on ∆ŝt is around −0.7, while it is
around −1.1 at the 25th quantile. These results indicate that a spike in spreads shifts down
the conditional distribution of output growth, fattening the left tail.

                                            [Table 5 about here.]

       When do spikes in spreads lead to the tail event of a deep and protracted crisis? The
FZ theory tells us that a negative shock (high zi,t ) coupled with a fragile financial sector
(high Fi,t ) triggers a chain of events involving disintermediation, a credit crunch, output
contraction, and further losses. We further investigate whether this view of crises is consistent
with the data.

                                            [Table 6 about here.]

       To explore this possibility we construct a financial-sector fragility indicator. We create
a variable (HighCreditt ) that counts the number of years in the past 5 years that annual
credit growth has exceed its full sample median. We divide this count by 5, so that if
HighCreditt = 1 then credit growth has been above median in each of the last 5 years.
   5
    Indeed, much of the literature examining the forecasting power of credit spreads for GDP growth finds a
relation between the level of spreads and GDP growth (see Friedman and Kuttner (1992), Gertler and Lown
(1999), Philippon (2009), and Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012)).

                                                     13
Jordà et al. (2011) show that 5 lags of annual credit growth has explanatory power for
crises. Our variable is motivated by their findings, with our discrete dummy approach more
apt to describe non-linearities in the data as the FZ theory would suggest. We interact this
HighCredit variable with the change in spreads, ∆b
                                                 si,t , thus tracing out the impact of a shock,
zi,t , when the financial sector is fragile. We see that an increase in the spread at date t when
HighCreditt = 1 substantially reduces the path of output. The coefficient in column (3) of
the upper panel of Table 6 is −2% which is directly comparable to the coefficient on spreads
in the unconditional regression of column (1) of Table 4 of −1.06%. Then, when credit
growth has been continuously above median, the association between a change in spreads
and future output is about twice as large.
    We summarize these findings graphically in Figure 4. We plot the path of output condi-
tional on an increase in the spread of one-sigma (one unit) at year 0. The top panel plots
the unconditional path of output conditional to an increase in spreads. That is, the plot
indicates how much lower output would be relative to average if spreads are one unit higher
at year 0. We see that output is lower by about 1% out to 5 years. The dashed lines indicate
two-standard deviation bands. The bottom panel is the same experiment but conditional
on the high credit dummy being one at year 0. That is, this panel indicates the interaction
effect of spreads and leverage of the FZ theory. We see that the output path is lowered by
about 2.5% out to 5 years. The middle panel is for the JST crisis dates. The effects for the
JST dates are larger, with output declines of 7% out to 5 years. The larger effect for the JST
dates could indicate that the JST dates are subject to an ex-post dating bias. That is, since
these dates are based on qualitative information, it possible that they implicitly condition
on a subsequent GDP decline. See Romer and Romer (2014) for a further discussion of this
point. In this case, our middle panel, which is based entirely on quantitative information
and has no look-ahead bias, is a better indicator of the GDP decline in a crisis. On the
other hand, it is also possible that the qualitative information used in choosing the JST
dates brings in a dimension that is absent from our high credit dummy and this information
better picks out crisis dates.6
    The bottom panel of Table 6 presents these results in a different way, using a simple
interaction of credit growth and changes in spreads. Note that the regressions in the top
panel implicitly condition on the entire sample since the HighCredit variable is defined
relative to the full-sample median of credit growth. The results in the bottom panel are
   6
     We note that the results in the middle panel of Figure 5 do not include time fixed effects (the results in
the top panel include both time and country fixed effects). The 92nd percentile episodes of credit growth
are global phenomena, so that these regressions are largely based on time series variation.



                                                      14
free of this look-ahead bias. We focus on 3-year credit growth here rather than 5-year credit
growth. The results are broadly similar but somewhat stronger when using 3-year credit
growth as the fragility metric. We also control for credit growth and the change in spreads
on their own, so the interaction term tells us the marginal effect on output when both spreads
increase and credit growth is high. At the 3 year horizon the coefficient is −0.64, meaning
a one-standard deviation increase in the interaction term suggests an extra marginal effect
of 0.64% lower growth at this horizon. This result is consistent with the FZ view that an
increase in spreads together with high fragility is associated with larger output declines.
  We have discussed our results through the lens of the FZ trigger-and-amplifier model.
We interpret the spike in spreads as proxying for a large loss to financial intermediaries. A
second interpretation of the spread spike result is in terms of the “surprise” to investors. In
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008), Gennaioli et al. (2013), Moreira and Savov (2014), and
Krishnamurthy and Li (2020) the extent of the surprise is a key feature of crises. In these
models, larger surprises are associated with more severe financial crises. But it is important
to note that a theory that seeks to explain crises solely based on shifts in investor beliefs
is not consistent with the data. One needs a theory which involves the interaction of the
surprise and leverage. Moreira and Savov (2014) and Krishnamurthy and Li (2020)’s models
deliver this interaction result.
                                       [Figure 4 about here.]


5     Pre-crisis Period
We next turn our attention to the pre-crisis period. A large increase in spreads is associated
with a more severe financial crisis. Is the large change in spreads from the pre-crisis period
because the level of spreads pre-crisis is “too low?” That is, are crises preceded by frothy
financial conditions? There has been considerable interest in this question from policy makers
and academics (Stein, 2012, López-Salido et al., 2017). We use our international panel of
credit spreads to shed light on this question.

5.1    Pre-crisis spreads and credit growth
We have shown that large losses coupled with high credit growth lead to adverse real out-
comes. A credit boom is observable in real time. Credit spreads reflect the risk-neutral
probability of a large loss and the output effects of large loss/fragile financial sector:
      si,t−1 = γ i,0 + ProbQ (zt > z) × EtQ [Lossi,t |crisis]                                 (4)

                                                   15
where, Lossi,t is increasing in Fi,t . We have shown that Fi,t is high before a crisis and that
higher Fi,t is associated with larger output losses in the crisis. By itself, this factor would
cause spreads to rise. Yet, we have noted that spreads are low before a crisis, suggesting that
the term ProbQ (zt > z) is low and moreover offsets the fragility-loss component of spreads.
We investigate this further.

                                    [Table 7 about here.]

   In Table 7, columns (1) and (2) of Panel A present regressions where the left hand side is
the spread at time t, and the right hand side includes a dummy for the five years before an
JST crisis, as well as lagged 3-year growth in credit and lagged GDP growth. Importantly,
we control for a post-crisis dummy as well which is equal to one in the three years after a
crisis (when spreads typically peak). This means the pre-crisis dummy should be judged
relative to other “normal times” and is not mechanically low because spreads during crises
are high. The coefficient on the dummy is −0.34, indicating that spreads are 34% “too-low”
pre-crisis (or 0.34 sigma’s lower than the normal time mean). Column (2) of Table 7 explores
whether unusually low spreads are associated with more severe crises. We break the set of
JST crises into mild and severe crises, splitting based on the median 3-year GDP growth in
the crisis. The coefficient on the dummy for more severe crises is larger than the coefficient
on the dummy for mild crises, confirming the low-spread/worse-crisis relation.
   An important point is that spreads are low ahead of a crisis despite the fact that credit
growth is high before a crisis (as shown in Jordà et al. (2011)). Column (3) of the table
makes this clear. We include an interaction of credit growth with the dummy for the 5
years ahead of the crisis. One can see that in the full sample credit growth and spreads are
positively correlated (coefficient of 0.98 in column 1). The feature that appears unique to
the pre-crisis period is that both spreads are low and credit growth is high (coefficient on
interaction of −1.42).
   Figure 5 provides a visual representation of the behavior of spreads before and during
crises. The blue line in the top panel is the mean actual spread for each of the 5 years before
and after a JST crisis. The red line is the fitted spread from a regression of spreads on lags
of GDP growth as well as credit growth. Thus this fitted spread represents a fundamental
spread based on the relation between spreads and GDP and credit growth over the entire
sample. The figure shows that spreads are too low pre-crisis and jump up too high during
the crisis before subsequently coming down.

                                    [Figure 5 about here.]

                                              16
   In terms of equation (4), we can view these results as suggesting that investors’ risk-
neutral expectations of a large loss, ProbQ (zt > z), falls as credit growth rises, and this fall
is enough to more than offset the fragility effect of credit growth. Note that such a fall could
occur either through a fall in the risk premium investors charge for bearing credit risk, as
may occur in models with time-varying risk premia, or because investors pre-crisis rationally
believe that a crisis is unlikely, as in Moreira and Savov (2014), or through a behavioral
model where investors’ probability assessments are biased, as in the neglected risk model of
Gennaioli et al. (2013) or the diagnostic expectations model of Bordalo et al. (2018). The
regressions in Table 7 do not allow one to distinguish between these possibilities in part
because they condition on a crisis occurring at time t. That is, these regressions do not
establish that low spreads forecast crises, they only establish that crises are preceded by
low spreads (i.e., it is possible that there are non-crisis events that justify investors’ low
ProbQ (zt > z) assessment).
   Finally, column (4) of Table 7 examines the behavior of spreads before recessions. The
coefficient on spreads is negative (−0.13), but not statistically different than zero. There is
froth before a crisis but not necessarily a recession.

5.2       Credit supply expansions predict crises
In Table 8 we construct a variable, labeled “HighFroth,” based on the difference between the
fitted and actual lines in Figure 5. That is, our froth variable first regresses credit spreads
on fundamentals (two lags of GDP and credit growth). We set a dummy= 1 if this froth
variable is below its median. We then take a 5-year average of this dummy variable and
label this HighFroth. The variable construction is analogous to the HighCredit variable
construction we have used earlier. This variable thus captures an episode where spreads
have been persistently low.7

                                         [Table 8 about here.]

       Table 8, Panel A, presents results using a Probit regression analogous to Jordà et al.
(2011). Column (1) uses only our HighFroth measure. We see that HighFroth meaningfully
predicts a crisis. Column (2) is based on credit growth (the HighCredit variable defined
earlier). There is an association between high credit growth and crises, although our results
   7
    We have also run regressions with the froth variable constructed in a simple manner: HighFroth= 1 if
the average spreads over the last 5 years is below the median. The results are qualitatively similar but not
as sharp as those we present in the text.



                                                    17
are not as strong as those reported in Schularick and Taylor (2012).8 Columns (3) and (4)
forecasts crises using the interaction of HighFroth and HighCredit. We see that episodes of
low spreads and high credit growth are the strongest signals of a future crisis.
       In Panel B of Table 8 we repeat the forecasting exercise for recessions. There is a weak
negative relation between these measures and the incidence of recessions. That is, high
credit growth and low spreads do not precede recessions and, if at all, precedes booms. This
is the natural business cycle correlation one would expect. In US data from 1929 to 2015,
López-Salido et al. (2017) find that low spreads are a precursor to economic downturns. This
is a sample where most downturns are recessions and not financial crises. Thus our results,
from a large data sample, do not confirm their findings.
       In Panel C of Table 8 we ask whether the HighFroth and HighCredit interaction fore-
casts declines in GDP and not just the occurrence of crises. We have seen that High-
Froth/HighCredit conditions forecast crises strongly and forecast booms weakly. The ques-
tion is whether the crisis effect outweighs the boom effect. We find that episodes of low
spreads and high credit growth are precursors to GDP declines, suggesting that the crisis
effect indeed outweighs the boom effect. As expected, since crises are unlikely events, the
results are not as strong as for the crisis regressions of Panel A. Additionally, Mian et al.
(2017) in a sample of OECD countries from 1970 onwards document an economically and
statistically strong relation between episodes of high credit growth and subsequent GDP
growth. In our data, which extends back much further, the relation is considerably weaker.

                                          [Table 9 about here.]

       Table 9 repeats the forecasting regressions of Table 8 using a Logit specification. In the
Probit model, the fitted values do not have to lie on the unit interval and thus are hard to
interpret as probabilities. We thus shift to a Logit specification. The results reveal the same
strong association between low spreads and high credit growth and subsequent crises but
not recessions. Figure 6 presents these Logit results graphically by plotting the cumulative
probability of a crisis at each horizon when credit growth is low (HighCredit=0)and spreads
are not abnormally low (HighFroth=0) and also when credit growth is high (HighCredit=1)
and spreads are abnormally low (HighFroth=1). Visually it is apparent that prolonged
   8
     We define HighCredit based on the dummy approach rather than the continuous 3-year credit growth
variable used by Schularick and Taylor (2012). We also use a smaller sample then they do since our regressions
utilize both spreads as well as credit growth, and we report standard errors clustered by country and year.
In our sample, if we replace the HighCredit variable with lagged 3-year growth in credit and run the Probit
regression of Table 8, the t-statistic on credit growth is 1.65.



                                                     18
periods of low spreads and high credit growth raise the probability of a financial crisis
substantially.

                                     [Figure 6 about here.]


                                     [Table 10 about here.]

   The results in Table 8 are based on regressions over the full sample so that the froth
variable uses future data in its construction. This raises the question of whether our froth
variable can predict crises out-of-sample. Table 10 presents the out-of-sample evidence. We
construct the froth and credit growth variables in a rolling manner, beginning 20 years after
the start of our sample. Panel A of the Table reports the crisis prediction regressions. There
is a positive relation between the independent variables and the occurrence of crises, although
the results are considerably weakened in the out-of-sample regressions. The recession results
of Panel B are similar to that of Table 8. In the GDP results of Panel C, the sign of the
association changes to now reveal a weak positive association between HighFroth/HighCredit
and subsequent GDP growth.
   Overall, these results are supportive of the view that credit supply expansions precede
crises. That is, from the work of Jordà et al. (2011) and Baron and Xiong (2017), we
know that credit growth is a predictor of crises. But credit growth can occur both with
increased credit demand as well as increased credit supply. Relative to Jordà et al. (2011),
we include information on credit spreads, which are a proxy for the price of credit. This
additional information indicates that it is credit supply expansions that is associated with
crises. These results are strongly present in Table 8 but are weaker in the out-of-sample
tests.
   On the other hand, our data does not reveal a robust relation between credit supply
expansions and mean GDP downturns. The strongest results are that the tail event of a
crisis is more likely following a credit supply expansion. We also note that there is little
relation between credit supply expansions and future recessions. One way to understand
this set of results is that froth raises the likelihood of a crisis but not a recession, and since
crises are relatively low likelihood events, has little discernible effect on the mean path of
future GDP.
   What do these results teach us about models? First, in models such as Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2010), He and Krishnamurthy (2012) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2012),
which are FZ models, a prolonged period in which fragility and leverage rises (Fi,t rises)

                                               19
will also be coupled with an increase in spreads and risk premia, contradicting the evidence.
Moreira and Savov (2014) and Krishnamurthy and Li (2020) build an FZ model with time
variation in beliefs regarding a crisis. In this model, it is possible to match the evidence that
severe crises are preceded by periods of low spreads where agents think that risk is low and
hence drive an expansion in credit supply. That is Fi,t could rise while ProbQ (zt > z) falls
so that on net spreads fall before a crisis. It is additionally possible as behavioral models
such as Gennaioli et al. (2013) and Bordalo et al. (2018) argue that the fall in ProbQ (zt > z)
is more than under a rational benchmark. The only evidence that points clearly in favor of
this model is Panel C of Table 8 where the credit supply expansion precedes a mean decline
in GDP. However, as noted, this result is among the weakest associations we report in our
study.


6     Robustness
This section reports the robustness of our results to different cuts of the data. We tackle two
main issues. Our sample runs from the 1870s to the present, which has also seen considerable
economic and financial development. Thus a natural question to ask is whether our results
change substantially across this sample. We thus run our regressions on the post-World War
II sample and compare the results to our main full-sample results. Second, we have presented
a number of results based on the dates of Jordà et al. (2013). Our results do depend on
crisis dating methodology. Here we also present results using Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)
and Baron et al. (2019).

6.1      Robustness to post-war data
We show that our main conclusions are not driven solely by the earlier data by revisiting
our key interaction regressions of high credit interacted with spreads using only data from
1950 onwards. This is useful for several reasons. First, the economic environment may be
different in the later part of the sample. Second, our early data on bond prices collected from
the Investor’s Monthly Manual is noisier on some dimensions and requires more judgment
in establishing spreads for each country.
    Table 11 shows that our results on crises, GDP outcomes and their interaction with
spreads are not significantly affected when considering only post-1950 data (although stan-
dard errors do increase). This table should be compared to Table 4. Table 12 relates the
interaction between credit booms and spread spikes to subsequent GDP outcomes. Results


                                               20
are in line with the full-sample results of Table 6. Finally, in Table 13 we investigate the
stability of the coefficient estimates in the output prediction regressions of Table 6 across
the pre- and post-war samples. We fit our regressions in pre-war data and then compare
the mean-squared forecast errors out-of-sample in post-war data using the coefficients from
the earlier exercise. There are 288 postwar observations across the countries in our sam-
ple. The column labeled Baseline uses two lags of GDP growth, country fixed effects, and
the change in interest rates. Spread uses only data from spreads in the regression, Credit
uses only credit growth. Both uses spreads and credit individually, and Interaction uses the
interaction term between credit and spreads. In panel A, we use the High Credit dummy
defined earlier to represent credit growth, while in panel B we take the growth in credit as
a continuous measure. These results indicate the relationships we document are stable pre-
and post-war.

                                    [Table 11 about here.]


                                    [Table 12 about here.]


                                    [Table 13 about here.]


6.2    Alternate chronologies
We investigate the robustness of our results to the alternative crisis chronologies by Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009) (RR) and Baron et al. (2019) (BVX). There are three tables where crisis-
dating affects the results: Tables 4, 7, and 8. In Table 14 we investigate the relationship
between spikes in spreads and subsequent GDP growth using the alternate dating, revisiting
the main result of Table 4. The coefficient on the relationship falls for the BVX dates relative
to the JST dates but remains statistically significant. The relationship for the RR dates is
weak. This appears to occur because RR date the crisis later on average than either BVX
or JST. Getting the timing right matters because if the dates are too late – e.g., if we dated
the recent US crisis in 2010 rather than 2008 – then the estimates of output losses in the
aftermath of the crisis will be smaller. BVX date crises using declines in bank equity values
which, because they are based on forward looking asset prices, will occur before an actual
banking panic. Baron et al. (2019) discuss these timing concerns of RR in greater depth.

                                    [Table 14 about here.]

                                              21
  Table 15 revisits the pre-crisis froth regressions of Table 7 for the BVX and RR dates.
Comparing the results between JST, RR and BVX, we see that dating matters less for these
regressions. We consistently find a pattern of low spreads ahead of crises. The extent of the
low spread is diminished for the RR dates, likely because RR date crises later than other
dating conventions, at a time when spreads have already risen. The point estimates for the
BVX and the JST dates are very similar, although the standard errors for the BVX dates
are larger.

                                    [Table 15 about here.]

   Table 16 presents regressions forecasting crises using the froth and credit variables, based
on RR and BVX’s alternative crisis dates. Panel A reports result for the RR dates, and we
see that the results are much weaker than our main JST results. This finding is not surprising
given the timing concerns with the RR dates we have noted above. Panel B presents the
BVX dates. These results are surprisingly weak. Recall that BVX date crises based on large
reductions in bank equity values, while JST date crises based on realized bank runs or bank
closures. Our finding is that the credit variables predict events which are banking panics
but not bank equity market declines. Panel C probes this finding further. We focus on the
set of dates where both a BVX crisis and a JST crisis occur within 5 years of each other.
In our credit spread sample, there are around 40 crises using the JST dates but 56 for the
BVX dates. However, only a little over half of the BVX dates are also dated as having a
JST crisis occur within a 5 year window, meaning there are many instances in which bank
equity declines but a banking panic does not occur. The froth and credit variables helps to
predict the joint BVX and JST dates, indicating a failure to predict the events where the
equity market declines but a banking panic does not ensue. Thus, a note-worthy result from
this table is that the froth variables are most informative in predicting banking panics.

                                    [Table 16 about here.]



7     Conclusion
This paper studies the behavior of credit spreads and their link to economic growth during
financial crises. The recessions that surround financial crises are longer and deeper than
the recessions surrounding non-financial crises. The slow recovery from the 2008 crisis is in
keeping with historical patterns surrounding financial crises. We have reached this conclusion

                                              22
by examining the cross-sectional variation between credit spreads and crisis outcomes rather
computing the average GDP performance for a set of specified crisis dates. We also show the
transition into a crisis begins with a large change in spreads. The severity of the subsequent
crisis can be forecast by the size of credit losses (zi,t = change in spreads) coupled with the
fragility of the financial sector (Fti , as measured by pre-crisis credit growth growth). Finally,
we find that spreads fall pre-crisis and are too low, even as credit grows ahead of a crisis.
   These patterns of how credit cycles across a financial crisis are the stylized facts that
macro-financial models of crises should seek to fit. Our paper also provides magnitudes for
the dynamics of output, credit, and credit spreads across a financial crisis that quantitative
models can target.
   Existing theories involving financial frictions qualitatively match some of the stylized
facts documented here (e.g., Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), He
and Krishnamurthy (2012), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2012), and Moreira and Savov
(2014)). In particular, these theories match the non-linearities we document in terms of
the “F × z” amplification facts we show here. This includes the fact that the interaction
of credit losses, or spike in spreads, together with fragility in terms of high credit growth
combine to forecast negative GDP events. While these theories do well to match the stylized
facts on both the aftermath and transition into a financial crisis, they miss that spreads are,
on average, low before a crisis as credit booms. This latter observation suggests that agents
lower their risk-neutral probability assessment of a crisis during the credit boom. Moreira
and Savov (2014) build a model in which agents update their probability assessment of
a crisis shock following Bayes rule. The logic of their model indicates that crises will be
preceded by low spreads. Another possible reconciliation of this evidence is the diagnostic
expectations model of Bordalo et al. (2018). In that paper, biased expectations can lead
agents to reduce their assessment of the likelihood of a crisis below a rational benchmark
and can thus be consistent with the pre-crisis evidence. However, a pure behavioral model
cannot speak to the interaction effect we have presented: low spreads coupled with high
fragility are the best signals regarding a crisis. We see a possible model that incorporates
both a financial frictions view with a model that explains the pre-crisis behavior in terms of
risk neutral expectations that generate low spreads as promising for explaining the stylized
facts documented here. Work along these lines is in Maxted (2019) and Krishnamurthy and
Li (2020).




                                               23
A      Data Appendix
Credit spreads from 1869-1929. Source: Investor’s Monthly Manual (IMM) which publishes
a consistent widely covered set of bonds from the London Stock Exchange covering a wide
variety of countries. We take published bond prices, face values, and coupons and convert
to yields. Maturity or redemption date is typically included in the bond’s name and we use
this as the primary way to back out maturity. If we can not define maturity in this way,
we instead look for the last date at which the bond was listed in our dataset. Since bonds
almost always appear every month this gives an alternative way to roughly capture maturity.
We check that the average maturity we get using this calculation almost exactly matches the
year of maturity in the cases where we have both pieces of information. In the case where
the last available date is the last year of our dataset, we set the maturity of the bond so that
its inverse maturity (1/n) is equal to the average inverse maturity of the bonds in the rest
of the sample. We equalize average inverse maturity, rather than average maturity, because
this results in less bias when computing yields. To see why note that a zero coupon yield for
a bond with face value $1 and price p is − n1 ln p. Many of our bonds are callable and this will
have an effect on the implied maturity we estimate. Our empirical design is to use the full
cross-section of bonds and average across these for each country which helps reduce noise in
our procedure, especially because we have a large number of bonds. For this reason, we also
require a minimum of 10 bonds for a given country in a given year for an observation to be
included in our sample. Lastly, we deal with composition by requiring at least 90% of the
bonds in a given year to be the same bonds as the previous year. When this is not the case,
we define spread increments by looking at the change in yields of the bonds in the current
year which were also available in the previous year and define the spread in the current year
as last years spread plus this increment. However, we find that this situation is rare – only
in about 5% of the sample do we not meet the requirement that at least 90% of the bonds
in the given year were also in the previous year
    US spread from 1928-2014. Source: Moody’s Baa-Aaa spread. We start this series in
1928 because the US has composition issues in the IMM data in 1928-1929, hence using this
spread alleviates the issues (see above).
   Japan spread from 1989-2001. Source: Bank of Japan.
    South Korea spread from 1995-2013. Source: Bank of Korea. AA- rated corporate bonds,
3 year maturity.
    Sweden spread from 1987-2013. Source: Bank of Sweden. Bank loan spread to non-
financial Swedish firms, maturities are 6 month on average.


                                              24
    European spreads (Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Greece) from 2000-2014. Source: Datas-
tream. We take individual yields and create a spread in a similar manner to our historical
IMM dataset.
    Other spreads from 1930 onwards: For other countries we use data from Global Financial
Data when available. We use corporate and government bond yields from Global Financial
data where the series for each country is given as “IG-ISO-10” and “IG-ISO-5” for 5 and 10
year government yields (respectively), “IN-ISO” for corporate bond yields. ISO represents
the countries three letter ISO code (e.g., CAN for Canada). We were able to obtain these for:
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Korea.
To form spreads, we take both 5 and 10 year government bond yields for each country.
Since the average maturity of the corporate bond index is not given, it is not clear which
government maturity to take the spread over. We solve this problem by running a time-
series regression of the corporate yield on both the 5 and 10 year government yield for each
individual country. We take the weights from these regressions and take corporate yield
spreads over the weighted average of the government yields (where weights are re-scaled
                                                        5
to sum to one). Therefore we define spread = ycorp − (wygov + (1 − w)y 1 0gov ). The idea
here is that the corporate yield will co-move more with the government yield closest to its
own maturity. We can assess whether our weights are reasonable (i.e. neither is extremely
negative) and find that they are in all countries but Sweden. The Swedish corporate bond
yield loads heavily on the 5 year and negatively on the 10 year suggesting that the maturity
is less than 5 years. In this case we add a 2 year government yield for Sweden (from the Bank
of Sweden) and find the loadings satisfy our earlier condition. Finally, for Euro countries,
we use Germany as the relevant benchmark after 1999 as it likely has the lowest sovereign
risk.
    GDP data. Source: Barro and Ursua (see Robert Barro’s website). Real, annual per
capital GDP at the country level. GDP data for Hong Kong follows the construction of
Barro Ursua using data from the WDI.
    Crisis dates. Source: Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor / Schularick and Taylor (“JST”
dates), Reinhart and Rogoff (“RR” dates, see Kenneth Rogoff’s website), Baron, Verner and
Xiong (”BVX” dates, from Matthew Baron).
   Leverage, Credit to GDP data. Source: Schularick and Taylor.




                                             25
References
Matthew Baron and Wei Xiong. Credit expansion and neglected crash risk. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 132(2):713–764, 2017.

Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong. Banking crises without panics. Working
 Paper, 2019.

Robert Barro, Emi Nakamura, Jon Steinsson, and Jose Ursua. Crises and recoveries in an
  empirical model of consumption disasters. working paper, 2011.

Pedro Bordalo, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. Diagnostic expectations and credit
  cycles. The Journal of Finance, 73(1):199–227, 2018.

Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich. Credit crises, money and contractions: An
  historical view. Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(1):1 – 18, 2010.

Michael D. Bordo and Joseph G. Haubrich. Deep recessions, fast recoveries, and financial
  crises: Evidence from the american record. NBER working paper, 2012.

Michael Bordo, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria.
  Is the crisis problem growing more severe? Economic policy, 16(32):51–82, 2001.

Markus K Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov. A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector. Working Paper, (236), 2012.

Ricardo J Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Collective risk management in a flight to
  quality episode. The Journal of Finance, 63(5):2195–2230, 2008.

Valerie Cerra and Sweta Chaman Saxena. Growth dynamics: The myth of economic recovery.
  The American Economic Review, 98(1):439–457, 2008.

Stijn Claessens, M Ayhan Kose, and Marco E Terrones. The global financial crisis: How
  similar? how different? how costly? Journal of Asian Economics, 21(3):247–264, 2010.

Benjamin M. Friedman and Kenneth N. Kuttner. Money, income, prices, and interest rates.
  The American Economic Review, 82(3):pp. 472–492, 1992.

Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. A model of shadow banking. The
  Journal of Finance, 68(4):1331–1363, 2013.


                                           26
Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
 cycle analysis. Handbook of monetary economics, 3(3):547–599, 2010.

Mark Gertler and Cara S. Lown. The information in the high-yield bond spread for the busi-
 ness cycle: evidence and some implications. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 15(3):132–
  150, 1999.

Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. The
  American Economic Review, forthcoming, 2012.

Robin Greenwood and Samuel G Hanson. Issuer quality and corporate bond returns. The
  Review of Financial Studies, 26(6):1483–1525, 2013.

Zhiguo He and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Intermediary asset pricing. The American Economic
  Review, forthcoming, 2012.

Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Taylor. Financial crises, credit booms, and
   external imbalances: 140 years of lessons. IMF Economic Review, 59(2):340–378, 2011.

Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Taylor. When credit bites back. Journal of
   Money, Credit and Banking, 45(s2):3–28, 2013.

Charles P Kindelberger. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. 1978.

Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and John Moore. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2):pp.
  211–248, 1997.

Arvind Krishnamurthy and Wenhao Li. Dissecting mechanisms of financial crises: Interme-
  diation and sentiment. 2020.

Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. The impact of treasury supply on
  financial sector lending and stability. Journal of Financial Economics, 118(3):571–600,
  2015.

David López-Salido, Jeremy C Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek. Credit-market sentiment and the
  business cycle. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3):1373–1426, 2017.

Peter D. Maxted. A macro-finance model with sentiment. 2019.

Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. Household debt and business cycles worldwide. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4):1755–1817, 2017.

                                           27
Frederic S Mishkin. Asymmetric information and financial crises: a historical perspective.
  National Bureau of Economic Research, 1990.

Alan Moreira and Alexi Savov. The macroeconomics of shadow banking. working paper,
  2014.

Paulo MDC Parente and João MC Santos Silva. Quantile regression with clustered data.
  Journal of Econometric Methods, 5(1):1–15, 2016.

Mitchell A. Petersen. Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
  Approaches. The Review of Financial Studies, 22(1):435–480, 06 2008.

Thomas Philippon. The bond market’s q. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3):1011–
  1056, 2009.

Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff. This time is different: Eight centuries of
  financial folly. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2009.

Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. New evidence on the impact of financial crises in
 advanced countries. working paper, 2014.

Moritz Schularick and Alan M Taylor. Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage
 cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review, 102(2):1029–61, 2012.

Jeremy C Stein. Monetary policy as financial stability regulation. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 127(1):57–95, 2012.




                                            28
List of Figures
  1   This figure plots the incidence of crises over time across various countries from
      1870-2008. We show to total number of countries experiencing a crisis in each
      given year. We use crisis dates measured by Jordà et al. (2013). We only plot
      these variables for countries and dates for which we have credit spread data
      to give a sense of the crises covered by our data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30
  2   This figure plots the behavior of credit spreads, GDP, and the quantity of
      credit around a financial crisis with the crisis beginning at date 0. GDP and
      credit growth are expressed as the average across-country percentage change
      in the quantity from 5-years before the crisis to a given year, after demeaning
      by the sample growth rate in the quantity for country-i. That is, positive
      values in the credit path imply that credit growth since time −5 has been
      faster than average. Spreads are normalized by dividing by the unconditional
      mean consistent with our normalization in the main text. We use crisis dates
      from Jordà et al. (2013). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
  3   Spreads and GDP declines around JST crisis episodes (Jordà et al. (2013)) .             32
  4   This figure plots the impulse responses of GDP to an innovation of one stan-
      dard deviation in our spread measure (approximately equal to a unit change
      in spreads) during recessions (top panel), JST financial crises (middle panel),
      and high credit growth episodes (bottom panel). Impulse responses are com-
      puted using local projection measures where we forecast GDP independently
      at each horizon. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33
  5   This figure plots the path of spreads, fundamental spreads, and cumulative
      credit growth in the years surrounding a financial crisis (using JST dates).
      The paths are formed by running regressions with dummies at various dates.
      “Fundamental spreads” are computed as the predicted value from a regression
      of spreads on fundamentals including two lags of GDP growth and the change
      in credit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
  6   We plot the cumulative probability of a crisis at each horizon when we con-
      dition on credit market conditions. HF (high froth) is a dummy equal to 1 if
      abnormal credit spreads (the residual of spreads regressed on two lags of GDP
      and credit growth) over the last 5 years have been below their median. HC is
      a dummy equal to 1 if credit growth over the past 5 years has been high. We
      compare the future probability of a crisis when credit markets appear “frothy”
      (HC and HF both equal 1) to when they are not (both equal to zero). In the
      bottom panel we compare this to only cases where credit is high (HC=1). See
      text for more details. Standard errors double clustered by country and year.             35




                                             29
Figure 1: This figure plots the incidence of crises over time across various countries from
1870-2008. We show to total number of countries experiencing a crisis in each given year. We
use crisis dates measured by Jordà et al. (2013). We only plot these variables for countries
and dates for which we have credit spread data to give a sense of the crises covered by our
data.

                       6




                       4
    Number of crises




                       2




                       0

                           1870   1890   1910   1930      1950   1970   1990      2010
                                                       Year




                                                   30
Figure 2: This figure plots the behavior of credit spreads, GDP, and the quantity of credit
around a financial crisis with the crisis beginning at date 0. GDP and credit growth are
expressed as the average across-country percentage change in the quantity from 5-years
before the crisis to a given year, after demeaning by the sample growth rate in the quantity
for country-i. That is, positive values in the credit path imply that credit growth since time
−5 has been faster than average. Spreads are normalized by dividing by the unconditional
mean consistent with our normalization in the main text. We use crisis dates from Jordà et
al. (2013).

                   Spread Path                                    Credit Path
     .6




                                                       5
                                                       4
     .4




                                                     2 3
                                                    Crisis
     .2
     0




                                                       1
     -.2




                                                       0




           -5             0                5                 -5         0              5
                        time                                          time


                     GDP Path
     2
     0
     -2
     -4
     -6
     -8




           -5             0                5
                        time




                                               31
                        15




                                                                                                      15
                        10




                                                                                                      10
            Frequency




                                                                                          Frequency
                        5




                                                                                                      5
                        0




                                                                                                      0
                             -1       0            1                  2          3                         -30   -20       -10     0    10   20
                                           Spread Changes                                                                  GDP Growth



        (a) This figure plots the distribution of spread changes and future 5 year GDP
        growth around JST financial crises
                                              20
                                              10
                                     5 Year GDP Growth
                                        -10   -20
                                              -300




                                                           -1          -.5        0       .5                           1        1.5
                                                                               Spread Change
                                                         coef = -6.6624073, se = 2.2915386, t = -2.91



                                  (b) This figure plots spread changes against future 5
                                  year GDP growth around JST financial crises

Figure 3: Spreads and GDP declines around JST crisis episodes (Jordà et al. (2013))




                                                                                     32
Figure 4: This figure plots the impulse responses of GDP to an innovation of one standard
deviation in our spread measure (approximately equal to a unit change in spreads) during
recessions (top panel), JST financial crises (middle panel), and high credit growth episodes
(bottom panel). Impulse responses are computed using local projection measures where we
forecast GDP independently at each horizon.
                                GDP to spread (unconditional)
               0


              -1


              -2
                   0        1           2           3           4          5
                                   GDP to spread (crisis)
               0

              -5

             -10

                   0        1           2           3           4          5
                                 GDP to spread (High Credit)
               0

              -2

              -4

                   0        1           2           3           4          5




                                            33
Figure 5: This figure plots the path of spreads, fundamental spreads, and cumulative credit
growth in the years surrounding a financial crisis (using JST dates). The paths are formed by
running regressions with dummies at various dates. “Fundamental spreads” are computed
as the predicted value from a regression of spreads on fundamentals including two lags of
GDP growth and the change in credit.
                 .6
                 .4
                 .2
                 0
                 −.2




                       −5                        0                          5
                                               time

                                   Spread              Fundamental Spread



                                            Credit Path
                       5
                       43
                 Crisis
                 2     1
                       0




                            −5                    0                         5
                                                time




                                              34
Figure 6: We plot the cumulative probability of a crisis at each horizon when we condition
on credit market conditions. HF (high froth) is a dummy equal to 1 if abnormal credit
spreads (the residual of spreads regressed on two lags of GDP and credit growth) over the
last 5 years have been below their median. HC is a dummy equal to 1 if credit growth over
the past 5 years has been high. We compare the future probability of a crisis when credit
markets appear “frothy” (HC and HF both equal 1) to when they are not (both equal to
zero). In the bottom panel we compare this to only cases where credit is high (HC=1). See
text for more details. Standard errors double clustered by country and year.
                          0.7

                          0.6

                          0.5

                          0.4
              P(Crisis)




                          0.3

                          0.2

                          0.1

                            0
                                 1     2                      3                      4   5
                          -0.1
                                                             Year

                                     P(Crisis|HC_HF=0)              P(Crisis|HC_HF=1)


                          0.8

                          0.7

                          0.6

                          0.5
              P(Crisis)




                          0.4

                          0.3

                          0.2

                          0.1

                           0
                                 1     2                      3                      4   5
                                                             Year

                                           P(Crisis|HC=0)           P(Crisis|HC=1)




                                                        35
List of Tables
  1   This table provides basic summary statistics on the bonds in our sample. The
      top panel summarizes our historical bond data. The bottom panel documents
      our coverage across countries and years for the entire sample. . . . . . . . . .       39
  2   This table provides regressions of future 1 year GDP growth on credit spreads
      where we consider different normalizations of spreads. The first column uses
      raw spreads, the second normalizes spreads by dividing by the unconditional
      mean of the spread in each country, the third also divides by the mean but does
      so using only information until time t-1 so does not include any look ahead
      bias. We refer to this as the out of sample (OOS) normalization. The fourth
      and fifth columns compute a z-score of spreads and percentile of spreads by
      country. Each of these normalizations captures relative percentage movements
      in spreads in each country. Controls include two lags of GDP growth and both
      country and year fixed effects. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are
      in parentheses. The last two columns split the sample into high spread and
      low spread countries (based on the unconditional mean raw spread over all
      countries) and examine whether our normalization choice produces similar
      coefficients across these countries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
  3   This table provides summary statistics for peak to trough declines in GDP
      around the JST crisis episodes (Jordà et al. (2013)) as well as the 3 year
      growth rate in GDP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      41
  4   This table provides regressions of future cumulative GDP growth ∆lnyt+k,i on
      credit spreads at the 3 and 5 year horizon. We include interactions with crisis
      or recession dummies. Controls include two lags of GDP growth and both
      country and year fixed effects. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are
      in parentheses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    42
  5   Quantile Regressions. We run quantile regressions of future output growth
      over the next year on the change in credit spreads for different quantiles.
      Controls include two lags of GDP growth. Our main result is that increases
      in spreads are particularly informative for lower quantiles of GDP growth.
      Standard errors in parenthesis cluster by year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      43
  6   Which spread crises turn out badly? We run regressions where the left hand
      side is GDP growth at various horizons. In the top panel, the right hand side
      contains a variable HighCredit which counts the number of times that credit
      growth has been above median in each of the past 5 years. The lower panel
      instead directly interacts changes in credit spreads with credit growth over
      the previous 3 years. The table shows that an increase in spreads negatively
      forecast output on average. A given increase in spreads predicts more negative
      output growth if lagged credit growth has also been high. Controls include
      two lags of GDP growth. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in
      parentheses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44



                                            36
7    Are spreads before a crisis too low? We run regressions of our normalized
     spreads on a dummy which takes the value 1 in the 5 years before a financial
     crisis (labeled 1t−5,t−1 ) in order to assess whether spreads going into a crisis
     are low. Importantly, we control for a post crisis dummy as well which is equal
     to 1 in the 5 years after a crisis, the means the pre-crisis dummy should be
     judged relative to other “normal times” and is not mechanically low because
     spreads during crises are high. We show the univariate results, as well as
     the results controlling for time fixed effects. We then add changes in credit
     growth and GDP to control for fundamentals that could drive spreads. We
     then split this result by severe versus mild crises based on the median drop in
     GDP in a crisis. It thus asks whether spreads are especially low before crises
     which are particularly severe. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are
     in parentheses. Column 4 repeats the analysis instead for recessions. . . . .              45
8    Credit market froth and fragility. We explore whether low spreads and high credit
     growth can forecast crises. HighFroth measures if spreads have been abnormally
     low in the last 5 years. HighCredit measures if credit growth has been abnormally
     high in the last 5 years. See text for details. Panel A uses these variables to forecast
     a financial crisis (using JST dates). We run probit regressions on the cumulative
     crisis indicator at the five year horizon (e.g., we predict whether a crisis occurs
     in any of the next 5 years). We also interact HighFroth with HighCredit, as this
     captures episodes where credit is booming and spreads are falling. Panel B repeats
     this exercise for recessions. In Panel C, we test whether HighFroth/HighCredit
     periods negatively forecast future GDP growth. Standard errors double clustered
     by country and year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         46
9    Credit market froth and fragility: Logit. We explore whether low spreads
     and high credit growth can forecast GDP downturns and crises. HighFroth
     measures if spreads have been abnormally low in the last 5 years. HighCredit
     measures if credit growth has been abnormally high in the last 5 years. See
     text for further details. Panel A uses these variables to forecast a financial
     crisis (using JST dates). We run logit regressions on the cumulative crisis
     indicator at the five year horizon (e.g., we predict whether a crisis occurs in
     any of the next 5 years). We also interact HighFroth with HighCredit, as
     this captures episodes where credit is booming and spreads are falling. Panel
     B repeats this exercise for recessions. Standard errors double clustered by
     country and year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        47
10   Out-of-sample Results: Credit market froth and fragility. Our previous regres-
     sions use the full sample to determine cutoffs for high froth in credit spreads
     and high credit growth. We repeat our results where we use out of sample
     measures of froth and high credit growth episodes using only the information
     up to time t to construct each variable. Standard errors double clustered by
     country and year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          48




                                             37
11   Post-War Data: Spreads and GDP. This table provides regressions of future
     cumulative GDP growth ∆lnyt+k,i on credit spreads at the 3 year horizon. We
     include interactions with crisis or recession dummies. Controls include two
     lags of GDP growth and both country and year fixed effects. Driscoll-Kraay
     standard errors with 8 lags are in parentheses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      49
12   Post-War Data: Which spread crises turn out badly? We run regressions
     where the left hand side is GDP growth at various horizons. In the top
     panel, the right hand side contains a variable HighCredit which counts the
     number of times that credit growth has been above median in each of the past
     5 years. The lower panel instead directly interacts changes in credit spreads
     with credit growth over the previous 3 years. The table shows that an increase
     in spreads negatively forecast output on average. A given increase in spreads
     predicts more negative output growth if lagged credit growth has also been
     high. Controls include two lags of GDP growth. Driscoll-Kraay standard
     errors with 8 lags are in parentheses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
13   Predicting Output Out-of-sample. We use prewar data to fit our regressions,
     then compare the mean squared forecast errors out of sample using post-war
     data keeping the coefficients fixed from the earlier exercise. Numbers given
     in percent. There are 288 postwar observations across the countries in our
     sample. Baseline uses two lags of GDP growth, country fixed effects, and the
     change in interest rates. Spread uses only data from spreads in the regression,
     Credit uses only credit growth. Both uses spreads and credit individually, and
     Interaction uses the interaction term between credit and spreads. In panel A,
     credit is a dummy for being above its mean, while in panel B we take the
     growth in credit as a continuous measure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51
14   Crisis and Spread Interaction using Baron et al. (2019) (BVX) and Reinhart
     and Rogoff (2009) (RR) dates. The left-hand side variable is future 3 year
     GDP growth. Controls are the same as in Table 4. Driscoll-Kraay standard
     errors with 8 lags are in parentheses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52
15   Spreads too low using alternative crisis dates from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)
     and Baron et al. (2019). We include country and time fixed effects, along
     with GDP growth and lagged GDP growth as controls as discussed in Table
     7. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in parentheses. . . . . . . .      53
16   Crisis Predictions using alternative crisis dates from Reinhart and Rogoff
     (2009) (Panel A “RR”) and Baron et al. (2019) (Panel B “BVX”). Panel
     C again uses the BVX dates but drops dates which BVX date a crisis and no
     crisis is recorded according to Jordà et al. (2013) in a 5 year window around
     that date. Controls are the same as in Table 8. Standard errors double clus-
     tered by country and year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54




                                           38
Table 1: This table provides basic summary statistics on the bonds in our sample. The
top panel summarizes our historical bond data. The bottom panel documents our coverage
across countries and years for the entire sample.
                          Panel A: Bond Statistics for 1869-1929
    Observations      Unique bonds          % Gov’t        % Railroad     % Other
      194,854             4,464               23%              27%          50%
   Median Yield      Median Coupon Median Discount Avg Maturity Median Spread
        5.5%              4.2%                 6%            17 years       1.9%

                      Panel B: Full Sample Coverage by Country
     Country          First Year       Last Year       Total Years     JST Sample
    Australia            1869             2011             89              Y
     Belgium             1960             2001             42              N
     Canada              1869             2001            118              Y
    Denmark              1869             1929             51              Y
      France             1869             1929             60              Y
    Germany              1871             2014             91              Y
     Greece              2003             2012             10              N
   Hong Kong             1995             2014             20              N
       Italy             1869             1929             60              Y
      Japan              1870             2001             70              Y
      Korea              1995             2013             19              N
  Netherlands            1869             1929             60              Y
     Norway              1876             2003             97              Y
    Portugal             2007             2012              6              N
      Spain              1869             2012             72              Y
     Sweden              1869             2011             85              Y
   Switzerland           1899             1929             29              Y
 United Kingdom          1869             2014            117              Y
  United States          1869             2014            145              Y




                                         39
Table 2: This table provides regressions of future 1 year GDP growth on credit spreads
where we consider different normalizations of spreads. The first column uses raw spreads,
the second normalizes spreads by dividing by the unconditional mean of the spread in each
country, the third also divides by the mean but does so using only information until time
t-1 so does not include any look ahead bias. We refer to this as the out of sample (OOS)
normalization. The fourth and fifth columns compute a z-score of spreads and percentile of
spreads by country. Each of these normalizations captures relative percentage movements
in spreads in each country. Controls include two lags of GDP growth and both country
and year fixed effects. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in parentheses. The
last two columns split the sample into high spread and low spread countries (based on the
unconditional mean raw spread over all countries) and examine whether our normalization
choice produces similar coefficients across these countries.
                        (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)   (5)         (6)         (7)
                        Raw MeanNorm OOSMean Zscore Prctile High Spread Low Spread

 Spread                -0.08
                      (0.06)
 Lag Spread            0.07
                      (0.04)
 Spread/Mean                    -0.73                                    -0.78        -0.72
                               (0.18)                                   (0.39)       (0.22)
 Lag Spread/Mean                 0.52                                    0.25          0.49
                               (0.22)                                   (0.36)       (0.29)
 Spread/MeanOOS                             -0.18
                                           (0.08)
 Lag Spread/OOS                             0.01
                                           (0.05)
 Z-score Spread                                       -0.79
                                                     (0.25)
 Lag Z-score Spread                                   0.47
                                                     (0.18)
 Prctile Spread                                                -1.33
                                                              (0.83)
 Lag Prctile Spread                                             0.31
                                                              (0.65)

 Observations         900      900            882     900     900        545          355
 R-squared            0.35     0.36           0.36    0.36    0.35       0.62         0.30
 Country FE            Y        Y              Y       Y       Y          Y            Y
 Year FE               Y        Y              Y       Y       Y          Y            Y




                                         40
Table 3: This table provides summary statistics for peak to trough declines in GDP around
the JST crisis episodes (Jordà et al. (2013)) as well as the 3 year growth rate in GDP.

                   Distribution of declines   in GDP across JST episodes
                          Mean Median         Std Dev P 10th P 90th N
                Trough -6.8       -4.1        7.6      -14.2    -0.7     44
                3 year -2.6       -0.8        8.5      -12.9    5.5      39




                                              41
Table 4: This table provides regressions of future cumulative GDP growth ∆lnyt+k,i on
credit spreads at the 3 and 5 year horizon. We include interactions with crisis or recession
dummies. Controls include two lags of GDP growth and both country and year fixed effects.
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in parentheses.
                                       Panel A: 3 year GDP growth
  VARIABLES                      (1)      (2)       (3)    (4)    (5)             (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)
  sbi,t                        -1.06
                              (0.42)
  sbi,t−1                       0.97
                              (0.47)
  sbi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                   -0.30    -0.18       0.89      -1.48
                                         (0.44)   (0.43)     (0.52)     (0.67)
   si,t × 1crisisST,i,t
  ∆b                                      -7.46    -6.88      -6.26
                                         (1.46)   (1.19)     (0.64)
  ∆credi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                         -0.60      -0.67
                                                  (0.14)     (0.74)
  1crisisST,i,t                                               -4.72
                                                             (1.00)
  sbi,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5                                                       -0.49
                                                                                 (0.23)
   si,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5
  ∆b                                                                                       -0.52
                                                                                          (0.35)
  sbi,t × 1recess,i,t                                                                               -1.50    -1.58
                                                                                                   (0.80)   (0.58)
   si,t × 1recess,i,t
  ∆b                                                                                                          0.43
                                                                                                            (2.15)
  Observations                641        641       641     641    641            641      641      641        641
  R-squared                   0.54       0.55      0.55   0.55    0.55           0.55     0.54     0.54       0.55
                                     Panel B: 5   year GDP growth
  VARIABLES                      (1)     (2)        (3)    (4)    (5)             (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)
  sbi,t                        -0.93
                              (0.37)
  sbi,t−1                       1.74
                              (0.41)
  sbi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                 -0.06       1.14       1.14      -1.39
                                       (0.42)     (0.56)     (0.55)     (0.81)
   si,t × 1crisisST,i,t
  ∆b                                    -8.48      -7.52      -7.58
                                       (1.62)     (1.37)     (1.34)
  ∆credi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                         -0.61      -0.46
                                                  ( 0.16)    (0.57)
  1crisisST,i,t                                               -1.31
                                                             (4.25)
  sbi,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5                                                       -0.47
                                                                                 (0.28)
   si,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5
  ∆b                                                                                       -0.13
                                                                                          (0.40)
  sbi,t × 1recess,i,t                                                                               -1.94    -1.63
                                                                                                   (1.47)   (1.11)
   si,t × 1recess,i,t
  ∆b                                                                                                         -1.90
                                                                                                            (3.22)
  Observations                634         634      634           634    634      634      634      634        634
  R-squared                   0.53        0.54     0.55          0.55   0.52     0.52     0.52     0.52       0.55
                                                            42
Table 5: Quantile Regressions. We run quantile regressions of future output growth over the
next year on the change in credit spreads for different quantiles. Controls include two lags
of GDP growth. Our main result is that increases in spreads are particularly informative for
lower quantiles of GDP growth. Standard errors in parenthesis cluster by year.
              Quantile Regressions: GDP growth on lagged spread change
                               (1)      (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)
                             Q 90th Q 75th Q Median Q 25th Q 10th

              ∆b
               si,t            -0.53    -0.70        -0.71    -1.06     -1.32
                              (0.26)   (0.14)       (0.13)   (0.18)    (0.28)

              Observations     898      898         898       898      898
              Country FE        Y        Y           Y         Y        Y
              Controls          Y        Y           Y         Y        Y
              Pseudo R2        0.09     0.06        0.05      0.08     0.12




                                               43
Table 6: Which spread crises turn out badly? We run regressions where the left hand side is
GDP growth at various horizons. In the top panel, the right hand side contains a variable
HighCredit which counts the number of times that credit growth has been above median in
each of the past 5 years. The lower panel instead directly interacts changes in credit spreads
with credit growth over the previous 3 years. The table shows that an increase in spreads
negatively forecast output on average. A given increase in spreads predicts more negative
output growth if lagged credit growth has also been high. Controls include two lags of GDP
growth. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in parentheses.
         When is an increase in spreads particularly bad for GDP?
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
                                     1yr        2yr        3yr        4yr        5yr

        (HighCrediti,t ) × ∆b
                            si,t     -0.78     -1.67      -2.00      -2.24      -2.52
                                    (0.32)    (0.41)     (0.85)     (0.73)     (0.76)

        Observations                 667       664        661        658        651
        R-squared                    0.43      0.52       0.53       0.53       0.53
        Controls                       Y        Y           Y         Y           Y
                                      (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)
                                     1yr       2yr        3yr        4yr        5yr

        ∆Crediti,t × ∆b
                      si,t           -0.37     -0.61      -0.64      -0.35      -0.02
                                    (0.16)    (0.17)     (0.25)     (0.18)     (0.10)
        sbi,t                        -0.75     -1.17      -1.19      -1.17      -1.10
                                    (0.27)    (0.34)     (0.43)     (0.40)     (0.26)
        ∆Crediti,t                   -0.00     -0.16      -0.38      -0.44      -0.50
                                    (0.15)    (0.23)     (0.32)     (0.36)     (0.44)

        Observations                 667       664        661        658        651
        R-squared                    0.44      0.54       0.54       0.53       0.52
        Controls                      Y         Y          Y          Y          Y




                                             44
Table 7: Are spreads before a crisis too low? We run regressions of our normalized spreads
on a dummy which takes the value 1 in the 5 years before a financial crisis (labeled 1t−5,t−1 )
in order to assess whether spreads going into a crisis are low. Importantly, we control for
a post crisis dummy as well which is equal to 1 in the 5 years after a crisis, the means the
pre-crisis dummy should be judged relative to other “normal times” and is not mechanically
low because spreads during crises are high. We show the univariate results, as well as the
results controlling for time fixed effects. We then add changes in credit growth and GDP
to control for fundamentals that could drive spreads. We then split this result by severe
versus mild crises based on the median drop in GDP in a crisis. It thus asks whether spreads
are especially low before crises which are particularly severe. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors
with 8 lags are in parentheses. Column 4 repeats the analysis instead for recessions.
                              Spreads before a crisis              Recessions
                                            (1)     (2)     (3)        (4)

                 1t−5,t−1                 -0.34                       -0.13
                                         (0.15)                      (0.11)
                 1t−5,t−1 × Severe                  -0.45
                                                   (0.18)
                 1t−5,t−1 × Mild                    -0.27
                                                   (0.15)
                 1t−5,t−1 ×∆Creditt−1                      -1.42
                                                          (0.78)
                 ∆Creditt−1               0.98      0.92   1.18       0.20
                                         (0.58)    (0.52) (0.70)     (0.58)
                 ∆GDPt−1                  -0.16     -0.18 -0.22       -0.64
                                         (1.68)    (1.68) (1.54)     (1.98)

                 Observations             621      621      621       601
                 R-squared                0.40     0.40     0.40      0.50
                 Country FE                Y        Y        Y         Y
                 Year FE                   Y        Y        Y         Y




                                              45
Table 8: Credit market froth and fragility. We explore whether low spreads and high credit
growth can forecast crises. HighFroth measures if spreads have been abnormally low in the last
5 years. HighCredit measures if credit growth has been abnormally high in the last 5 years. See
text for details. Panel A uses these variables to forecast a financial crisis (using JST dates). We
run probit regressions on the cumulative crisis indicator at the five year horizon (e.g., we predict
whether a crisis occurs in any of the next 5 years). We also interact HighFroth with HighCredit, as
this captures episodes where credit is booming and spreads are falling. Panel B repeats this exercise
for recessions. In Panel C, we test whether HighFroth/HighCredit periods negatively forecast future
GDP growth. Standard errors double clustered by country and year.

                         Panel A: Probit Predictions of a Crisis
                                          (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)
            HighFroth                    1.76                      0.74
                                        (0.91)                   (1.20)
            HighCredit                            0.55            -0.77
                                                (0.46)           (0.40)
            (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                      1.95     2.00
                                                         (0.66) (0.40)
            Observations                  528     549      456     456
            Country FE                     Y       Y        Y       Y
            Year FE                        N       N        N       N
                        Panel B: Probit Predictions of a Recession
                                          (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)
            HighFroth                    -0.69                    -0.97
                                        (0.50)                   (1.36)
            HighCredit                           -0.45            -0.34
                                                (0.87)           (2.09)
            (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                      -0.39   0.66
                                                         (0.64) (2.28)
            Observations                  504     550      440     440
            Country FE                     Y       Y        Y       Y
            Year FE                        N       N        N       N
                      Panel C: Predicting GDP Growth by Horizon
                                          (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)             (5)
                                          1 yr    2 yr     3 yr    4 yr            5 yr
            (HighFroth)×(HighCredit) -0.89 -1.76 -3.02 -3.64                      -3.69
                                        (0.76) (1.30) (1.84) (2.16)              (2.46)
            Observations                  508     505      502     499             495
            R-squared                     0.40   0.53      0.55   0.57             0.56
            Country FE                     Y       Y        Y       Y               Y
            Year FE                        Y       Y        Y       Y               Y



                                                 46
Table 9: Credit market froth and fragility: Logit. We explore whether low spreads and high
credit growth can forecast GDP downturns and crises. HighFroth measures if spreads have
been abnormally low in the last 5 years. HighCredit measures if credit growth has been
abnormally high in the last 5 years. See text for further details. Panel A uses these variables
to forecast a financial crisis (using JST dates). We run logit regressions on the cumulative
crisis indicator at the five year horizon (e.g., we predict whether a crisis occurs in any of
the next 5 years). We also interact HighFroth with HighCredit, as this captures episodes
where credit is booming and spreads are falling. Panel B repeats this exercise for recessions.
Standard errors double clustered by country and year.

                         Panel A: Logit Predictions of a Crisis
                                            (1)      (2)     (3)        (4)
              HighFroth                    1.83                        0.84
                                          (0.88)                      (1.22)
              HighCredit                             0.23              -1.05
                                                   (0.42)             (0.50)
              (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                      1.74       2.00
                                                           (0.67)     (0.75)
              Observations                  528      549    456         456
              Country FE                     Y        Y       Y          Y
              Year FE                        N        N       N          N
                        Panel B: Logit Predictions of a Recession
                                            (1)      (2)     (3)         (4)
              HighFroth                    -0.40                        0.86
                                          (0.54)                      (0.84)
              HighCredit                            -0.75              -0.43
                                                   (0.56)             (0.72)
              (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                      0.00       -0.29
                                                           (0.51)     (0.95)
              Observations                  504      550    440         440
              Country FE                     Y        Y       Y           Y
              Year FE                        N        N       N           N




                                              47
Table 10: Out-of-sample Results: Credit market froth and fragility. Our previous regressions
use the full sample to determine cutoffs for high froth in credit spreads and high credit growth.
We repeat our results where we use out of sample measures of froth and high credit growth
episodes using only the information up to time t to construct each variable. Standard errors
double clustered by country and year.
                     Panel A: Probit Predictions of a Crisis (Real Time)
                                             (1)      (2)       (3)     (4)
             HighFroth                      1.07                       -0.26
                                           (0.69)                     (1.12)
             HighCredit                              1.11              -0.65
                                                    (0.81)            (2.60)
             (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                          1.04    1.67
                                                              (0.93) (3.37)

            Observations                    404      507     372      372
            Country FE                       Y        Y       Y        Y
            Year FE                          N        N       N        N

                 Panel B: Probit Predictions of a Recession (Real Time)
                                         (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)
            HighFroth                   -0.68                    -0.45
                                       (0.50)                   (1.11)
            HighCredit                           -0.48           -0.07
                                                (0.58)          (1.57)
            (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                     -0.68 -0.34
                                                        (0.48) (1.74)

            Observations               404    507     372    372
            Country FE                   Y      Y      Y       Y
            Year FE                      N      N      N       N
                Panel C: Predicting GDP Growth by Horizon (Real Time)
                                        (1)    (2)    (3)     (4)     (5)
                                       1 yr   2 yr   3 yr    4 yr    5 yr
            (HighFroth)×(HighCredit) 0.25     0.01   0.92    1.40   1.96
                                      (0.54) (0.93) (1.14) (1.32) (1.44)

            Observations                    455     452      449      446     442
            R-squared                       0.44    0.55     0.57     0.57    0.56
            Country FE                       Y       Y        Y        Y       Y
            Year FE                          N       N        N        N       N




                                               48
Table 11: Post-War Data: Spreads and GDP. This table provides regressions of future
cumulative GDP growth ∆lnyt+k,i on credit spreads at the 3 year horizon. We include
interactions with crisis or recession dummies. Controls include two lags of GDP growth
and both country and year fixed effects. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in
parentheses.
                                     Panel A: 3   year GDP growth
  VARIABLES                      (1)     (2)        (3)    (4)    (5)            (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)
  sbi,t                        -1.14
                              (0.35)
  sbi,t−1                       0.53
                              (0.58)
  sbi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                 -6.84      -5.05     -6.13      -5.44
                                       (0.59)     (1.07)    (1.03)     (1.06)
   si,t × 1crisisST,i,t
  ∆b                                    -9.64      -9.62     -8.30
                                       (2.41)     (1.57)    (1.74)
  ∆credi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                         -1.53     -5.45
                                                  (1.18)    (4.08)
  1crisisST,i,t                                              6.61
                                                            (6.24)
  sbi,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5                                                      -0.25
                                                                                (0.60)
   si,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5
  ∆b                                                                                      -0.53
                                                                                         (0.35)
  sbi,t × 1recess,i,t                                                                              -1.45    -0.62
                                                                                                  (0.50)   (0.92)
   si,t × 1recess,i,t
  ∆b                                                                                                        -2.48
                                                                                                           (1.89)

  Observations                288      288         288          288    288      285      285      288      288
  R-squared                   0.70     0.72        0.72         0.72   0.72     0.69     0.70     0.70     0.70

                                     Panel B: 5   year GDP growth
  VARIABLES                      (1)     (2)        (3)    (4)    (5)            (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)
  sbi,t                        -0.93
                              (0.41)
  sbi,t−1                       0.58
                              (0.85)
  sbi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                 -5.09      -0.71     -2.49      -3.52
                                       (0.95)     (1.14)    (1.89)     (1.39)
   si,t × 1crisisST,i,t
  ∆b                                   -10.80     -10.75     -8.57
                                       (3.85)     (1.86)    (2.08)
  ∆credi,t × 1crisisST,i,t                         -3.74    -10.23
                                                  (1.41)    (3.22)
  1crisisST,i,t                                             10.93
                                                            (5.54)
  sbi,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5                                                      0.31
                                                                                (0.99)
   si,t × 1nocrisis,i,t→t−5
  ∆b                                                                                      -0.56
                                                                                         (0.45)
  sbi,t × 1recess,i,t                                                                              -1.36    -0.04
                                                                                                  (0.75)   (1.16)
   si,t × 1recess,i,t
  ∆b                                                                                                        -3.96
                                                           49                                              (2.09)

  Observations                281      281         281          281    281      279      279      281      281
  R-squared                   0.72     0.73        0.73         0.73   0.73     0.73     0.73     0.72     0.73
Table 12: Post-War Data: Which spread crises turn out badly? We run regressions where
the left hand side is GDP growth at various horizons. In the top panel, the right hand side
contains a variable HighCredit which counts the number of times that credit growth has been
above median in each of the past 5 years. The lower panel instead directly interacts changes in
credit spreads with credit growth over the previous 3 years. The table shows that an increase
in spreads negatively forecast output on average. A given increase in spreads predicts more
negative output growth if lagged credit growth has also been high. Controls include two lags
of GDP growth. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in parentheses.
         When is an increase in spreads particularly bad for GDP?
                                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)
                                     1yr        2yr        3yr        4yr         5yr

        (HighCrediti,t ) × ∆b
                            si,t     -0.42      -1.47      -1.13      -1.13      -1.01
                                    (0.20)     (0.54)     (0.43)     (0.38)     (0.40)

        Observations                 276        273        270        267        263
        R-squared                    0.71       0.70       0.72       0.74       0.74
        Controls                       Y         Y           Y         Y           Y
                                      (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)
                                     1yr        2yr        3yr        4yr        5yr

        ∆Crediti,t × ∆b
                      si,t           -0.41      -2.04      -2.19      -2.19      -1.47
                                    (0.59)     (1.51)     (1.11)     (1.54)     (1.74)
        sbi,t                        -1.37      -1.22      -0.84      -0.77      -0.76
                                    (0.27)     (0.30)     (0.43)     (0.63)     (0.75)
        ∆Crediti,t                   -0.99      -3.62      -7.10      -8.68      -9.63
                                    (0.75)     (1.75)     (3.12)     (3.76)     (4.30)

        Observations                 294        291        288        285        281
        R-squared                    0.31       0.24       0.24       0.25       0.26
        Controls                      Y          Y          Y          Y          Y




                                              50
Table 13: Predicting Output Out-of-sample. We use prewar data to fit our regressions, then
compare the mean squared forecast errors out of sample using post-war data keeping the
coefficients fixed from the earlier exercise. Numbers given in percent. There are 288 postwar
observations across the countries in our sample. Baseline uses two lags of GDP growth,
country fixed effects, and the change in interest rates. Spread uses only data from spreads
in the regression, Credit uses only credit growth. Both uses spreads and credit individually,
and Interaction uses the interaction term between credit and spreads. In panel A, credit
is a dummy for being above its mean, while in panel B we take the growth in credit as a
continuous measure.

                              Panel A: High Credit Dummy
                       Baseline Spread Credit Both Interaction
                        5.91      4.66     5.20    4.64  4.26

                         Panel B: Continuous Change in Credit
                       Baseline Spread Credit Both Interaction
                        5.91      4.48    5.42  4.30      3.52




                                             51
Table 14: Crisis and Spread Interaction using Baron et al. (2019) (BVX) and Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009) (RR) dates. The left-hand side variable is future 3 year GDP growth. Controls
are the same as in Table 4. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 8 lags are in parentheses.
                                              (1)     (2)      (3)
                                             JST    BVX        RR

                       si,t × 1crisisST,i,t
                      ∆b                         -6.24
                                                (1.43)
                       si,t × 1crisisBV X,i,t
                      ∆b                                  -2.66
                                                         (0.51)
                       si,t × 1crisisRR,i,t
                      ∆b                                           -1.09
                                                                  (0.81)

                      Observations              641      853      853
                      R-squared                 0.55     0.49     0.48
                      Time FE                    Y        Y        Y




                                                52
Table 15: Spreads too low using alternative crisis dates from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)
and Baron et al. (2019). We include country and time fixed effects, along with GDP growth
and lagged GDP growth as controls as discussed in Table 7. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors
with 8 lags are in parentheses.
                                           (1)     (2)     (3)
                                          JST     BVX      RR

                         1t−5,t−1        -0.34    -0.32    -0.17
                                        (0.14)   (0.23)   (0.08)

                         Controls         Y       Y        Y
                         Time FE          Y       Y        Y
                         Observations    601     825      794
                         R-squared       0.52    0.46     0.47




                                           53
Table 16: Crisis Predictions using alternative crisis dates from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)
(Panel A “RR”) and Baron et al. (2019) (Panel B “BVX”). Panel C again uses the BVX
dates but drops dates which BVX date a crisis and no crisis is recorded according to Jordà
et al. (2013) in a 5 year window around that date. Controls are the same as in Table 8.
Standard errors double clustered by country and year.
                                       Panel A: RR
                                               (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)
                HighFroth                     0.21                     -1.66
                                             (0.90)                   (0.97)
                HighCredit                              0.72           -0.71
                                                       (0.67)         (0.91)
                (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                        0.63   2.60
                                                               (1.01) (1.53)

               Observations                  537     585     475      475

                                  Panel B: BVX
                                          (1)   (2)           (3)    (4)
               HighFroth                 0.20                       -0.53
                                        (1.00)                     (1.52)
               HighCredit                       0.36                 0.15
                                               (0.45)              (1.15)
               (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                      0.02   0.35
                                                            (0.86) (1.64)

               Observations                  591     615     493      493

                                Panel C: BVX ∩ JST
                                           (1)   (2)          (3)    (4)
               HighFroth                  1.68                      0.68
                                         (1.21)                    (1.84)
               HighCredit                        0.70               -0.36
                                                (0.52)             (0.42)
               (HighFroth)×(HighCredit)                      1.80   1.48
                                                            (0.97) (1.11)

               Observations                  536     552     458      458




                                            54
