                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               IS POLLUTION VALUE-MAXIMIZING? THE DUPONT CASE

                                         Roy Shapira
                                        Luigi Zingales

                                      Working Paper 23866
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23866


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




We thank Asher Schechter for research assistance, John Matsusaka, Cary Coglianese and Effi
Benmellech for very useful comments, and participants in conferences and seminars in University
of Chicago Booth School of Business, University of Chicago Law School, the American Law and
Economics Association, The Society of Environmental Law and Economics Scholars, European
Law and Economics Association, Israeli Law and Economics Association, IDC, Case Western
University, and Columbia University. Financial support from the Stigler Center at the University
of Chicago is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Roy Shapira and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Pollution Value-Maximizing? The DuPont Case
Roy Shapira and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 23866
September 2017
JEL No. K32,L21,Q52

                                         ABSTRACT

DuPont, one of the most respectable U.S. companies, caused environmental damage that ended
up costing the company around a billion dollars. By using internal company documents disclosed
in trials we rule out the possibilities that this bad outcome was due to ignorance, an unexpected
realization, or a problem of bad governance. The documents rather suggest that the polluting was
a rational decision: under reasonable probabilities of detection, polluting was ex-ante optimal
from the company’s perspective, even if the cost of preventing pollution was lower than the cost
of the health damages produced. We then examine why different mechanisms of control – legal
liability, regulation, and reputation – all failed to deter a behavior that was inefficient from a
social point of view. One common reason for the failures of deterrence mechanisms is that the
company controls most of the information and its release. We then sketch potential ways to
mitigate this problem.


Roy Shapira
IDC
Kanfei Nesharim
Herzliya, 4610101
Israel
rshapira@sjd.law.harvard.edu

Luigi Zingales
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
In February 2017 DuPont settled a multi-district litigation to the tune of $670M (DuPont 2017). The

litigation concerned DuPont’s emissions of a toxic chemical named C8, which DuPont used in the making

of Teflon® in its West Virginia plant. For these C8 emissions DuPont had already paid tens of millions in

previous litigations and some of the biggest regulatory fines ever imposed in such matters. In all, C8

pollution is bound to become one of the costliest environmental debacles, for DuPont, the nearby

communities, and the environment. The irony is that such a disaster was caused by one of the most

respected American companies. DuPont has “a track record of long-term investment and better-than-

typical treatment of constituencies other than stockholders,” as Justice Strine (2017) put it, and is a known

leader in toxicological and occupational safety research. How could the C8 debacle happen to such a good

company? Did DuPont simply not know the potential health consequences of C8? Was it an accident?

The consequence of a bad corporate governance system?

        We use a trove of internal company documents disclosed in trials to trace back DuPont’s decision

processes in handling C8 emissions. The internal documents help us rule out the possibility of lack of

awareness. In 1984 DuPont’s executives sat for a key meeting in the company’s headquarters in

Delaware, and the minutes show a careful cost-benefit analysis. By 1984 DuPont knew that C8 is toxic,

does not break down in the environment, accumulates in human blood, travels from pregnant mothers to

their babies, and seeps into local drinking water supplies. The executives acknowledged that the legal and

medical departments would recommend stopping the usage of C8 altogether. They also considered

investments in abatement measures. Yet the business side ultimately overruled these recommendations

and opted to continue (in fact, double) C8 emissions.

        We then examine the possibility that continuing production was an efficient decision from a

societal point of view. If the only choice was between continuing using C8 in the production of Teflon

and stopping its use altogether, the answer is ambiguous. But the 1984 minutes contain a third option,

namely, investing in incineration techniques that would have mitigated many of the damages caused to

the community and the sanctions later paid by DuPont. Since the incineration option was relatively cheap,



                                                                                                           2
the cost of preventing pollution was lower than the cost of the health damages produced. Thus, a simple

cost-benefit analysis suggests that continuing production without any abatement was socially inefficient.

        We also rule out the possibility that not investing in abatement was merely due to bad corporate

governance. We construct a counterfactual, in which DuPont executives in 1984 seek to maximize

shareholder returns, and have rational expectations, knowing just how costly the C8 debacle will end up

being. Would they have decided differently and invest in abatement? The surprising answer is no. By

comparing the present value of DuPont’s actual legal liabilities with the present value of the abatement

costs, we estimate that it was value-maximizing to pollute if the probability of getting caught was less

than 19%. While subjective probabilities can never be proven right or wrong, the extreme set of

coincidences that led to the current state of affairs suggests that it was very reasonable for DuPont’s

executives to take the risk. In other words, the decision to pollute was ex-ante optimal for DuPont’s

shareholders.

        If the decision to pollute is not a product of incompetence or myopic fly-by-night companies, but

rather a calculated, rational decision by a reputable company, perhaps socially harmful corporate behavior

is more endemic and less solvable than we acknowledge. Are the dynamics in the DuPont-C8 case merely

the exception, or can we identify some more fundamental, generalizable drivers of socially harmful

decisions that go beyond a single case?

        To help answer these questions we flesh out the ways in which the various mechanisms designed

to deter excessive pollution failed in this case. We start with legal liability. Internal memos show that the

possibility of paying large legal liabilities was considered in real time, at every key juncture. Yet, the

threat of legal liability did not act as a sufficient deterrent. This is not because the company executives

were expecting small fines (they were rather warned that C8 could turn into the company’s “biggest tort

issue”), but probably because they were counting on their ability to minimize the probability of having to

pay damages, or at least to delay the damages by decades.

        The threat of regulatory intervention was similarly discounted. DuPont had to know that the

statutory framework left regulators at the mercy of chemical companies, since they did not have the

                                                                                                                3
ability to monitor toxic emissions in real time. Even when regulators received alarming information, they

do not seem to react promptly. When the regulators eventually fined DuPont for suppressing information,

they touted a $16.5M settlement as the largest fine ever collected by them. Yet, the regulatory fine was

merely a fraction of what the regulators were authorized to impose. It did not penalize the company for

delaying the release of information. Nor was it sizable enough, given the societal costs or the company

benefits, to effect change.

        Finally, DuPont explicitly considered the prospect of losing reputation if news about how they

handled C8 broke. Even this fear failed to deter pollution. One reason is the gap between organizational-

and individual-level reputations: bad news about the company does not necessarily hurt individual

managers. We show that none of the company’s top decision-makers suffered reputational damages for

the company’s early handling of C8. In fact, some of them were hailed as environmental visionaries. Even

from a corporate reputation perspective, bad information does not automatically translate into reputational

sanctions. DuPont’s executives could count on their ability to limit the certification, attribution, and

diffusion of damning information, in ways that significantly reduced the reputational sanction suffered by

the company.

        The overarching theme across these failures of deterrence is the control of information. For

decades only DuPont and other chemical companies knew the adverse effects of C8 emissions. Yet,

DuPont had powerful incentives to hide that information, or selectively release parts of it to the outside

world. By controlling information, DuPont was able to co-opt regulators, delay enforcement, and limit the

ability of academics or journalists to chime in. Without breaking such information monopolies, it is

difficult to see how problems like the C8 one can be resolved. We speculate what changes in regulation

and in the information ecosystem would be necessary to make regulation more effective, and/or for

shareholders’ value maximization to coincide with social efficiency.

        Our paper connects several strands of literature. First, we offer a new critical perspective on the

theory of deterrence (Becker, 1968). We show that companies do not take expected sanctions as given,

but dilute them and delay them (see also Gleaser and Shleifer, 2003). Second, our analysis of the

                                                                                                              4
company’s efforts to suppress and distort information relates to a relatively nascent literature on academic

capture (Zingales, 2014), “bending science” and “manufacturing doubt” (McGarity & Wagner 2008;

Oreskas & Conway 2010; Nestle 2015).

        Finally, there exist various accounts of failures of the various deterrence mechanisms: tort law

(Dewees & Trebilcock 1992), regulation (Shwartz & Soo 1996; King & Sutinen 2010), and reputational

sanctions (Karpoff, 2012). Our account differs in at least two aspects. First, we focus on the joint failure

of all these deterrence mechanisms. Second, we are able to document the actual decision-making process,

as in the Ford-Pinto case several decades ago (Gioia 1992).

        Section 1 introduces the background: how DuPont started using C8, and the dilemma it faced

once it realized the potential risks that come with the chemical. Section 2 uses the internal documents

revealed during trial to rule out three potential explanations for DuPont’s behavior: ignorance, socially

optimal pollution, and bad governance. Section 2 concludes that the decision to continue emitting C8 was

rather a rational, shareholder-value-maximizing decision ex ante, albeit one with large negative

externalities. Section 3 examines why the external systems of control – legal liability, reputation, and

regulation – all failed to deter this socially harmful pollution. Section 4 fleshes out one overarching theme

in the failure of systems of control: the ability of companies to reduce sanctions by controlling the

information environment. Section 5 sketches some potential remedies to better align incentives. We then

conclude.



    1. Background: DuPont and the Use of C8

DuPont is one of the oldest American companies, continually operating since 1802 in Wilmington,

Delaware. The company was born when Thomas Jefferson called the attention of its to-be founders to the

young nation’s need for gunpowder (Chaplinsky & Marston 2014). To this day DuPont is referred as “one

of the most distinguished of any U.S. corporation” (George 2015), and scores highly on both

environmental and corporate governance metrics. Like any other chemical company, DuPont has faced



                                                                                                               5
multiple decision points under uncertainty, whereby a chemical that makes better products may also be

damaging to the environment and human health. The C8 story is one of them.

        In the 1930s a DuPont scientist accidentally created a substance that would later be known as

Teflon®, when experimenting with refrigerants (Lyons 1994). DuPont would go on to manufacture

Teflon with the help of a chemical known as PFOA, or C8, used to smooth out lumps in the Teflon

products. A combination of carbon and fluorine made C8 very stable to heat and repellent to water, and

thus great for industry. But it also made the chemical potentially very dangerous to the environment and

humans, as it is extremely persistent in the environment and accumulative in human blood.

        From 1951 to 2000 DuPont received C8 from a supplier (the Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing

Company, later renamed 3M). They handled the material in their Washington Works plant, which is

located in West Virginia near the Ohio border. By 2003 the Washington Works plant had released more

than 1.7 million pounds of C8 into the nearby environment (cf. Paustenbach et al. 2007 (detailing the

amounts of emissions); Vieira et al. 2013 (detailing the geography of emissions)). C8 emission came in

three forms: poured from the outflow pipes of the plant into the Ohio River, where it traveled down- and

upstream; transferred in trucks and buried in unmarked landfills, where it leached into drinking wells; and

pumped through the plant’s smokestacks into the air (Paustenbach et al. 2007).

        In the mid-1990s the Tennants – a family of farmers living near DuPont’s West Virginia plant –

started suspecting the plant’s emissions. Their cattle all died after drinking water from a creek that was

close to a DuPont landfill. The Tennants approached the company and then the local regulators, who

brushed the farmers off. The Tennants were told that their cattle were dying because they simply did not

take good care of them (Rich 2016a). The Tennants were not aware of C8 and its effects at the time; in

fact few outside the 3M and DuPont labs were. As long-time farmers they only knew that something was

wrong, and so they got a lawyer and sued. Little did they know that their individual lawsuit (hereinafter:

The Tennant Litigation) was about to spotlight a much bigger story. The discovery process in the Tennant

Litigation and subsequent trials unearthed a large amount of alarming information about C8’s effects on

health and the environment, which was known to DuPont but had been kept from public scrutiny. The

                                                                                                         6
discovery process also provided a unique glimpse into the inner workings of a large company like

DuPont.

        Importantly, the information revealed during the Tennant Litigation led to a separate class action

against DuPont, for contaminating the nearby area’s drinking water (hereinafter: the Class Action)

(Young 2016). As part of settling the Class Action, DuPont agreed in 2004 to facilitate a thorough

examination of C8’s health effects by an independent science panel. In 2012, the panel published its

results, finding that DuPont’s C8 emissions are linked to six types of diseases: (1) high cholesterol; (2)

ulcerative colitis; (3) thyroid diseases; (4) testicular cancer; (5) kidney cancer; and (6) pregnancy-induced

hypertension (C8 Probable Links Report 2012). Some 3,500 of the 70,000 individuals drinking the

contaminated water were diagnosed as suffering from the enumerated diseases. 1

        By 2013 DuPont had stopped using C8, replacing it with a new chemical from the same family.

The new chemical is supposed to be less persistent, but the jury is still out on its long-term health effects

(Lerner 2016a). 2

        Our focus is on decisions DuPont made, starting in the mid-1980s, to keep using C8 even in the

face of alarming information they got about the potential consequences of C8 emissions. Among the

papers emerging from trial discovery is a long memo about a meeting that took place at the company’s

headquarters in May 1984 (the concluding page is reported in Figure 1). The 1984 memo allows us to

deduce the several options that were on the table: stopping using C8 altogether; continuing using C8 but

investing in abating measures; reducing production; and continuing using C8 (in fact doubling the

production), while monitoring as before without investing in abatement measures. DuPont chose the latter

option: to continue production with no investment in abatement. The fundamental question is why. In

retrospect, we know that the option of abating C8 was relatively cheap, and could have prevented many of



    1
       Each of these individuals was set to litigate his or her own damages claim with DuPont (Young 2016). After
several bellwether cases were tried in 2015–2016, ordering DuPont to pay damages ranging from $1.6ml to $12.5ml,
the company settled all cases for $670ml in February 2017.
     2
       Lerner (2015 and 2016) is the main public source that reports the court documents, thus we quote her rather
than the court documents, but we checked the original sources.

                                                                                                                7
the damages to the community as well as the legal and reputational damages paid by DuPont. How come

the company chose the option that seems worse for society and for the company itself?

    2. Why DuPont Opted to Keep Emitting C8

We start with three potential explanations for DuPont’s behavior. First, ignorance: the possibility that

DuPont simply did not know that emitting C8 would end up damaging the community and greatly costing

DuPont. Second, social optimum: the possibility that the benefits from continuing using C8 and having

smooth non-stick pans exceeded the human health costs of pollution. Third, bad governance: the

possibility that the decision to continue using C8 was bad for the company but good for individual

decision-makers – the doing of myopic decision-makers. The internal documents revealed during trials

allow us to trace back the state of knowledge and conduct a cost-benefit analysis, thereby ruling out all

three potential explanations. DuPont’s decision, it seems, was a case of “rational wrongdoing”: a decision

that maximizes shareholder value ex ante, even though it is socially inefficient.

  2.1 Ignorance?

The internal documents revealed during trial allow us to rule out the possibility of ignorance. By 1984

DuPont had already accumulated a lot of alarming information about C8. By the early 1960s the company

became aware that C8 is toxic and should be “handled with extreme care” (sources appendix, item 1).

During the 1960s and 1970s they received indications that exposure to C8 causes adverse health effects in

animals (sources appendix, item 2). By the early 1980s they received indications that the substance is bio-

accumulative, meaning it accumulates in human blood, building up and remaining in the human body for

years; and bio-persistent, meaning it does not break down in the environment (sources appendix, item 5).

        In 1981 DuPont further learned that C8 may travel from pregnant mothers to their babies and

cause birth defects in humans. At first 3M notified DuPont of a study where rat fetuses whose mothers

were exposed to C8 developed eye defects (Figure 3).This memo, called Karrh Memo from the doctor

who wrote it, was addressed to Carl De Martino, “group vice president" and head of the business unit

producing Teflon.



                                                                                                            8
         DuPont sent scientists to review the 3M study, and concluded that it was valid (sources appendix,

item 3). The company immediately proceeded to monitor the babies of its female workers who worked

with C8 and were pregnant in the relevant time frame. They found detectable C8 levels in the umbilical

cord blood, indicating that C8 can indeed travel through the human placenta. Furthermore, 2 of the 7

monitored babies were born with birth defects in their eyes and nostrils (EPA 2005; see also Figure 4). 3

DuPont decided to transfer its female workers from the C8 unit, until the company could be sure that

there exists a level of exposure that does not pose such potential harm (sources appendix, item 4). The

company did not, however, alert the regulator or the nearby community to the new findings.

        The impetus for the 1984 meeting came when DuPont sent employees to quietly sample drinking

water in nearby communities: tap water in one employee’s home, public water fountains in a gas station,

and so forth. Several samples came back with detectable levels of C8 (EPA 2005; see also Figure 2).

Against this background the company called a top-level meeting at its headquarters in Wilmington,

Delaware, in May 1984, to discuss how to proceed with C8 (sources appendix, item 6; Figure 1). At that

point, then, the executives making the decision had evidence that the company emitted a potentially

dangerous substance into community drinking waters.

        Documents from after May 1984 complete the picture and help us further rule out ignorance.

Alarming information about C8 continued coming to DuPont executives’ attention. By 1986 at the latest

they became aware that the plant’s methods of handling C8 were inappropriate, as their provider (3M)

explicitly warned them that C8 should either be incinerated or dumped in a commercial landfill (sources

appendix, item 7). DuPont did neither. Then starting in 1988 DuPont learned that C8 is an animal

carcinogen and a potential human carcinogen (sources appendix, item 9). The company indeed initially

upgraded its internal classification of C8 accordingly. In the late 1980s and early 1990s DuPont set a

threshold for C8 presence in drinking water of 1 part per billion (ppb). It then detected C8 levels above




    3
      DuPont’s own guidelines for the monitoring of female workers suggested ex ante that a 20% rate would be
alarming. A 2-out-of-7 result should therefore have been treated as a red flag.

                                                                                                           9
this threshold in several samples (EPA 2005; sources appendix, items 10–11). Here too, they opted to

continue using C8, while not alerting the outside world.

        To be sure, the 1984 minutes and other documents we reviewed do not necessarily support a story

of a company making conscious decisions to harm individuals. There seems to be a lot of uncertainties

regarding the exact effects of C8, or what would be a safe-enough level of exposure. 4 Yet it should be

noted that in May 1984 DuPont already suspected that C8 is a substance that is accumulative and

persistent. As a result, DuPont had to suspect that even exposure to very low doses could end up creating

adverse health effects, since the substance does not break down in the environment and builds up in

human blood over time. 5 In other words, the documents support a story of a company opting to err on the

side of ignoring warning signs.

        Moreover, DuPont’s treatment of its own employees indicates just how much they were aware of

the risks involved. As mentioned, DuPont initially pulled all female employees of child-bearing age from

the C8 unit once they had suspicions, and throughout the years they continued monitoring employees

(Bartlett transcripts, Vol. 4, p. 162). The 1984 memo contains explicit discussion of acceptable exposure

levels (AEL) for employees, and an assurance that current levels were safe. Yet nowhere in the memo do

we find community exposure guidelines (CEG). Nor do we find any indication that the current community

exposure was at safe levels.

        Furthermore, while the internal documents provide little evidence of DuPont’s executives explicitly

acknowledging that C8 would harm nearby communities, they provide ample evidence of DuPont’s

executives being warned that the C8 decisions could come back to haunt the company itself with great

legal and reputational liabilities. The 1984 memo states very clearly that the “legal and medical

[departments] will most likely take a position of total elimination,” but this position is dismissed as “they

    4
      Similarly, it should be noted that even the plaintiff's expert did not fault DuPont for setting the CEG at 1 ppb.
The arguments against DuPont were rather directed at not alerting the outside world once they found C8 levels
above their own threshold (Bartlett transcripts, Vol. 4, pp. 40, 94).
    5
      Cf. EPA 2005, describing how the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published in 1978 clarifications
regarding the relevant reporting requirements, which put special emphasis on persistent and accumulative chemicals;
Swanson et al. 1997, voicing the scientific approach, according to which persistent and accumulative chemicals are
perennial red flags.

                                                                                                                    10
have no incentive to take any other position.” The memo further acknowledges that the “issue deciding

further action is one of corporate image and of corporate liability.” Post-1984 documents corroborate the

notion of the executives’ awareness. In 1986 an internal letter suggests that the “Wilmington

management” was very concerned with the potential liabilities arising from C8 (sources appendix, item

8). In 1992 another internal letter suggests that C8 may turn into DuPont's “biggest tort issue” (sources

appendix, item 12; Bartlett transcripts, Vol. 4, p. 90). In a private email from 2000, reported as Figure 5,

DuPont’s in-house lawyer admits that DuPont’s story of handling C8 is “not a good one” (Bartlett

transcripts, Vol. 4, p. 96).

  2.2 Socially Optimal?

The most benign explanation for continuing to use C8 would be that production of C8 was socially
           6
optimal.       Pollution comes with costs – but the optimal level of pollution is not zero. One should also

consider, among other things, the benefits from using the chemical, such as a better cooking experience.

To estimate whether this was the case at the time, we derive the costs and benefits as of 1984.

    2.2.1       The Societal Benefits of Using C8

DuPont’s executives estimated that replacing or stopping using C8 altogether would have jeopardized

between $100M and $200M annually in profits. The production continued up to 2013, so – assuming

perfect foresight – we have a stream of profits for 28 years. To discount it as of 1984 we use the T-bill

rate at the time (9.8%), and add a risk premium of 8% (thus assuming a beta of 1), for a discount rate of

17.1%. We assume that the profits will grow at the expected rate of inflation (at the time 4.2%). With

these assumptions, the present value of profits is between $760 and $1500 million.

        This number represents only the producer’s surplus. Yet, Teflon was a trademarked product sold

not directly to the public, but to retailers. Thus, we can assume that a shrewd producer like DuPont was

able to extract a large part of the consumer surplus. 7 While it is unlikely that consumer surplus is zero,


    6
      The DuPont-C8 case is unlike cases such as cigarette smokers versus big tobacco. With cigarettes, one line of
argument was that the smokers made an informed tradeoff: they knew that smoking is bad for them, but engaged in
it anyhow. In the C8 case, the harmed individuals living nearby DuPont’s plant did not know or make an informed
decision to drink C8 from their tap water.

                                                                                                                11
conservatively we are going to set the societal benefit of C8 use at the level of DuPont’s profits from the

product – around $1.1bl. As we will discuss shortly, this underestimation does not affect our main

conclusion.

    2.2.2     The Societal Costs of Using C8

We narrow our measure of societal costs to human health costs, ignoring damages to the environment. We

further narrow our scope to the six water districts near the West Virginia plant. This gives us a group of

70,000 people, who lived in an area with relative high exposure to C8 emissions. When quantifying the

human health costs for these 70,000 people, we consider only costs associated with the specific six

diseases enumerated in the science panel report. For these diseases, we focus only on the delta – the

uptick in incidence and prevalence rates that can be expected in areas with high levels of exposure to C8,

versus areas without C8 emissions. To get this number, we rely on calculations done in connection with

the C8 medical monitoring program, which followed the unprecedented human health study that preceded

the science panel report (C-8 Medical Monitoring Program 2012). 8

        Appendix A describes in detail the calculations for each of the six diseases. The rough numbers

are as follows: for every year of exposure to high levels of C8, a 70,000-people community will suffer

1.05 extra cases of testicular cancer, 21 additional cases of kidney cancer, 0.7 additional cases of

ulcerative colitis, and 140 cases of thyroid disease (C-8 Medical Monitoring Program 2012).

        We assume that such an uptick in incidences of diseases continues for the entire period C8 is used

and stops with the end of C8 use – the above-mentioned 1984–2013 period.

        To go from the incidence numbers to a societal cost number we need to put a value on the loss of

life, and on the reduction in the quality of life. As expected, this turns to be a fuzzy, challenging endeavor

(see generally Dolan 2000; Rowen & Brazier 2011). For cancer cases, we subsume the reduction in the




    7
      Kotler & Pfoertsch (2010, 159) use Teflon as the paradigmatic example of powerful “ingredient branding,”
suggesting that DuPont had power to extract much of the surplus.
    8
      For incidence and prevalence rates of the enumerated diseases, see also Kappelman et al. 2013; National
Center for Health Statistics 2015; Vanderpump 2011; National Cancer Institute 2016.

                                                                                                             12
quality of human life into the value of a lost life. 9 The estimates of the value of statistical life (VSL) vary

greatly. The EPA set VSL in 2009 at $9.1M (Appelbaum 2011). An earlier meta-analysis of the VSL

literature in the U.S. generates a median of around $7M (Viscusi & Aldi 2003). To be conservative we

use the latter.

         In 1984 terms, the present value of societal costs generated by the continuing use of C8 is around

$350M (see Appendix A and Table 1).



2.2.3 Costs of Reducing C8 Pollution

The 1984 meeting included a discussion of the possibility of continuing using C8, while limiting the costs

imposed on society by adopting precautionary measures that reduce emissions. The memo specifically

reports the estimates of the cost of incinerating C8. Incineration would imply an up-front cost of $1M and

an operating cost of roughly $1M a year (exhibit 1). In 1984 present-value terms – investment in

incineration would be equal to $18.8M (see Appendix A).




    9
     For studies measuring the costs of the enumerated diseases see, e.g., Cohen et al. (2010); Pourat et al. (2013);
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (2014).

                                                                                                                  13
    DuPont decided against incineration. In a 2017 trial – the last trial before settlement – DuPont raised

a new claim, namely, that the decision not to incinerate was actually meant to reduce risks to the

environment and the community. According to DuPont’s argument, incineration runs the risk of releasing

a different toxic chemical into the air. The claim did not prove successful in court, however, as company

documents showed that in real time cost saving was mentioned as a reason for rejecting incineration.

Internal documents also included detailed plans to design the incineration facility in ways that prevent the

alleged release of new toxic chemicals. Finally, testimonies of DuPont’s own executives suggest that

incineration would have been the best option to limit the societal costs of C8 pollution (Bartlett

transcripts, Vol. 7, pp. 163–173; Vigneron transcripts).

    2.2.3   Cost Benefit Analysis

If the choice is between producing and not producing, producing seems to dominate from an aggregate

welfare perspective, since the present value of the benefit is $1.1bl, while the present value of the cost is

only $350 million. This conclusion depends on several assumptions: 1) that the costs to the environment –

besides the human health costs – are zero; 2) that the only health costs of C8 are the ones identified by the

science panel; 3) that we attribute zero value to human suffering from deadly diseases such as cancer; 4)

that DuPont could not have made profits from Teflon with an alternative, non-C8 surfactant; and 5) that

the producer surplus approximates well the total surplus. The first four assumptions tend to underestimate

the costs (see, e.g., Grandjean et al. 2016 (documenting how C8 is linked with additional problems, such

as impaired immune function); Blissmer et al. 2006 (discussing emotional and social aspects of diseases

that should also go into calculations)). The last assumption underestimates the benefits. There are wide

standard errors around each number, but given the differences in scale, one can crudely assume that

producing is the optimal choice.

        Yet, such debate becomes irrelevant once the option to contain pollution is considered. Here it is

very clear that the abatement option vastly dominates the other two. Assuming that the incineration

program eliminates much of the pollution (Bartlett transcripts, Vol. 7, pp. 163–173), the societal cost of

abatement (less than $19 million) is greatly inferior to the human health costs of pollution (at least $350

                                                                                                             14
million). Since the abatement costs are also greatly inferior to the benefits of production, from a societal

perspective the efficient course of action is to keep producing C8, with the prescribed abatement process.

  2.3 Bad Governance?

Assume that a shareholder-wealth-maximizing manager with rational expectations is faced with the 1984

decision. 10 Would she opt to stop using C8, continue using without abating, or continue using while

investing in incineration techniques? To model the 1984 decision from a shareholders’ perspective, we

use the classical economic theory of deterrence (Becker 1968; Bentham 1823). We compare the expected

benefit accruing to shareholders from using C8 with the expected sanction. The expected sanction, in turn,

is a function of the probability of getting caught and the magnitude of sanction imposed once you are

caught.

                                            B > π [ L + R]

          Let B denote the benefits accruing to DuPont. π denotes the probability that DuPont’s

mishandling of C8 will be detected. L denotes the legal damages DuPont will have to pay if detected. R

denotes the reputational damages DuPont will suffer if detected, as in diminished future business

opportunities because its stakeholders will think less highly of it. The idea is that a shareholder-wealth

maximizer will continue using C8 only if the benefits exceed the expected sanctions as she perceives

them.

          We already computed the benefits of producing Teflon at $1.1B, and the benefits of avoiding

investment in abatement at $19M. All these benefits accrue directly to the shareholders. We now move to

calculate the legal liability in case of detection. Since DuPont was detected, we use the actual costs

incurred (on the use of lagged actual sanctions for polluting as a proxy for perceptions of expected

sanctions see Gray & Shimshack 2011).

    10
        From DuPont’s 1984 proxy filing we learn that all board members, except those belonging to the
Compensation Committee, were beneficiaries of an incentive plan. The maximum amount available for the awards
under the plan was a function of the company’s earnings. In addition, executives were granted options under a stock
option plan. Collectively, executive officers owned about 1.5 million options at an average strike price of $40.85.
Many of the non-executive directors were former executives, who probably owned shares, and representatives of
large shareholders. Thus, it is plausible to assume that DuPont 1984 board members had an incentive in maximizing
shareholders’ value.

                                                                                                                15
     2.3.1   Legal Liability

To quantify the sanctions imposed on DuPont we simply count the various publicized regulatory fines and

damages paid along the timeline, and then discount them to their 1984 values.

     The first sanction came in 1997, when the West Virginia regulator slapped DuPont on the wrist for

damaging the Tennants’ land and animals, to the tune of $200k (EPA letter 2001, 10). DuPont then settled

the Tennant case in 2001, for an undisclosed amount. In 2005 DuPont settled the drinking-water class

action, for a reported $107M (Janofsky 2005), while agreeing to finance an epidemiological study and

medical monitoring valued at around $350M (Young 2016). In 2005 the company settled the enforcement

action the U.S. regulator brought against it for failing to disclose alarming information, for $16.5M (EPA

2005).

     The biggest sanction came in 2017, when DuPont announced that it had reached a settlement with the

3,500 private lawsuits emanating from the Class Action, for $670M. DuPont reached the settlement after

losing the first bellwether cases: the court ordered DuPont to pay $1.6M for a breast cancer case (Bartlett

v. DuPont 2015); $5.6M for a testicular-cancer (Freeman v. DuPont 2016); and $12.5M for another

testicular-cancer case (Vigneron v. DuPont 2016).

         Assuming that the magnitude of legal sanctions are not correlated with the economy, we can

discount them at the 1984 risk-free rate (9.8%). This puts the 1984 value of future legal fees at around

$100M. 11

     2.3.2   Break-Even Probability

Let us temporarily set the reputational costs to zero. Then, we can easily infer what probability of

detection makes a DuPont shareholder indifferent between producing and abstaining. Given the numbers

computed in the previous sections, if the only choice is between producing and not producing,

shareholders will find it optimal to produce and pollute. In fact, if they produce and pollute they expect to


11
   Jurors who assign punitive damages focus on the defendants’ ability to pay (Vigneron transcripts, vol. 25), thus
the magnitude of legal sanctions is likely to be positively correlated with the state of the economy. If we considered
this correlation, the discount rate would be even higher and the present value of the sanction smaller, strengthening
our conclusions.

                                                                                                                   16
receive $1.1B in profits and if caught they will have to pay fines that (at present value) are only $100M.

So, even if eventually they are caught, they are happy to do it, as long as this event is sufficiently distant

in the future. Remember that the first detection was in 1997 and as of early 2017 the bulk of money has

still not been paid. Thus, DuPont’s shareholders greatly benefitted from the ability of the company to

delay damages payments.

        A similar calculation can be made for the probability of detection that makes a DuPont

shareholder indifferent between abating the C8 through incineration and not doing so. Given the numbers

computed in the previous sections, shareholders will find it optimal not to spend the money to incinerate

C8 if the probability of detection is less than 19%.

        The next sub-section provides several clues to suggest that a shareholder-wealth-maximizing

manager in 1984 had all the reasons in the world to perceive the probability of detection as way below

19%.

    2.3.3   The Ex-Ante Probability of Detection

It took a rare combination of low-probability events for DuPont to be forced to pay legal liability the way

it did. While it is impossible for us to come up with a precise probability for each of these events, each of

them is fairly unlikely. Since several of them are mostly independent, the compounding of these

probabilities easily leads to an ex-ante probability of detection below 19%. After all, the joint probability

of four equally likely events is 6.25% and the compound probability of three events with a probability of

40% each is 6.4%.

        The first low-probability event we wish to highlight is the fact that plaintiffs were represented by

a defendant-side lawyer, named Robert Bilott. Typical plaintiff lawyers tend to have a high discount rate.

They are relatively less well funded, and prefer to spread their risks over several cases rather than heavily

invest in one case, if only because they do not bill by the hour. As a result, typical plaintiff lawyers prefer

to settle quickly, rather than draw out a long battle, like Bilott did in the DuPont-C8 case. Most cases of

this ilk would have been over after the first settlement in the Tennant litigation, back in 2001. The only

reason the Tennants were able to land a top environmental lawyer like Robert Bilott, who worked for a

                                                                                                              17
big law firm (Taft, Stettinius, & Hollister LLP) representing the industry, was a family connection. As a

kid Robert Bilott used to spend the summers at his grandmother’s, who lived close to and had mutual

friends with the Tennants. Bilott initially accepted the job just out of deference to this old friendship (Rich

2016a; Blake 2015). Bilott’s unique background and makeup also made him able to identify a needle in a

haystack: a reference (out of thousands of documents) to a then-opaque C8 chemical.

        Bilott’s ability, however, would not have been so useful if there had not been some mistakes on

the part of the defendants. Even though DuPont’s lawyers held workshops inside the company on how to

avoid creating a paper trail regarding C8 effects (Lerner 2015a), the discovery process yielded numerous

internal memos documenting the extent of the problem caused by C8 as well as emails documenting the

systematic suppression of information. The first batch of documents was probably revealed because the

DuPont legal department had not yet centralized the collection and storage of documents, and so the

plant’s lawyer did not fully appreciate the importance of the documents. These were the documents that

attracted Bilott’s attention and allowed him to pursue the case. A second batch of emails were probably

transmitted because in the early days of laptops and hand-held devices, legal counselors did not

understand that even personal emails sent from their blackberries or company laptops would be stored on

the company’s server and become discoverable (cf. Lerner 2015b).

        The third low-probability event (albeit some may attribute it to Bilott’s talent) is that the class

action was filed in West Virginia, one of the few states where courts accept a medical monitoring claim.

The medical monitoring doctrine allows plaintiffs to continue with a class action simply by showing that

a group was exposed to a chemical that puts the group at risk, without proving actual physical harm. To

understand just how much the doctrine contributed to the way the DuPont-C8 case unfolded, one can

simply look at the equivalent 3M-C8 case. 3M were DuPont’s providers, and one could claim they were

in as much trouble as DuPont in terms of how they handled C8. Yet 3M’s lawsuit was handled in

Minnesota, whose courts do not accept medical monitoring claims. As a result, the 3M lawsuit did not

make it to full trial. Unlike DuPont, 3M was not forced to pay damages in courts, nor was it exposed so

extensively in the media (Lerner 2016b).

                                                                                                              18
         The fourth event (although here as well Bilott’s talent may have played a role) came after a

settlement was reached in the class action. In our case DuPont agreed to a settlement whereby it accepted

the conclusions of an appointed science panel regarding linkage between C8 emissions and diseases.

Presumably, DuPont agreed to give away some of its ability to question findings, because it was well

aware that there was no preexisting hard evidence the scientists could rely upon, as epidemiological

studies of such scale are extremely hard to execute properly. 12 Yet in our case the plaintiffs’ lawyers

employed another innovative strategy: instead of using the $70M that was put aside in the settlement for

health monitoring to cut small checks to the group members, they invested the money in incentivizing

70,000 affected people to participate in the study (drawing blood, interviewing, and so forth), by offering

$400 to each participant (Blake 2015; Lerner 2015b). This unique strategy led to an unprecedented large-

scale human study. The study was then analyzed by the independent science panel, which established the

links between DuPont’s C8 emissions and the six above-mentioned diseases. 13

         The combined probability of all four above-mentioned events alone is likely below 19%. In fact,

the likelihood of the first event – landing an experienced defendant lawyer to try your case – is in itself an

event with a probability of less than 19%.

         Another indication that the probability of detection must have been low ex ante comes from

actual data. When in 1991 the EPA announced a limited “amnesty period” whereby chemical companies

could report retroactively on risks without incurring full sanctions, 11,000 reports came from the industry.

It was four times more than all the reports submitted in the 15 years prior to the amnesty period combined

(Coglianese et al. 2004, 310; McGarity & Wagner 2008, 119). So, we can safely say that there had been

chronic under-reporting (and under-detection and enforcement) at the time the decision was taken.

Indeed, the U.S. Government Accountability Office and the Office of Management and Budget have both


    12
       To be sure, the company could claim that such decision shows their (misguided) confidence that they did
nothing wrong.
    13
       Such legal innovations were not lost on legal scholars, who now recommend adopting them in other cases as
well (e.g., Wagner 2010, 1327-1328; Young 2016). With an independent science panel, the idea is to level the
playing field, whereas normally the determination of health effects of opaque chemicals is left to judges or jurors,
who lack the needed expertise and information.

                                                                                                                 19
assessed the EPA’s ability to monitor chemicals as limited (Wagner 1997; Gray & Shimshack 2011).

DuPont’s executives must have anticipated that most alarming information goes unreported, without

meaningful repercussions.

        In all, a monetary calculation of costs and benefits suggests that even a shareholder-value-minded

manager would have chosen to pollute from an ex-ante perspective. We cannot attribute the decision to

bad governance.

        All indications therefore point to another possibility: producing while not investing in abatement

was the rational action to take from the company’s perspective, albeit inefficient from a social

perspective. The next step is to understand why the external systems of control – legal liability,

regulation, and reputational concerns – did not kick in to deter such behavior.



    3. Why Liability, Regulation, and Reputation Did not Stop DuPont from Emitting C8

  3.1 Liability

    3.1.1   Time Lag

At first sight, DuPont’s C8 case appears the poster child for the working of the tort system. A private

plaintiff uncovered the problem, holding DuPont accountable to the tune of hundreds of millions of

dollars. In fact, we show that even the sizable ex-post fines imposed in this case are insufficient to deter

pollution ex ante. The reason is the time lag and the time-value of money. DuPont paid the bulk of its

liability in 2017, more than thirty years after the facts. Remember: DuPont’s documents from the 1980s

and 1990s contain warnings that C8 emissions may eventually end up costing the company sizable tort

damages. DuPont’s executives were apparently counting on the “eventually” to come several decades

later – and they were right.

        One could argue that if a low probability of detection makes the fine ineffective, we could simply

raise the magnitude of the sanction. While proposals to raise the severity of sanctions should be taken

seriously, they are hardly a panacea. The corporate deterrence literature has already discussed at length

several limitations of such proposals (e.g., Polinsky & Shavell 1979). Furthermore, as the DuPont case

                                                                                                               20
illustrates, the jurors who assign punitive damages focus on the defendants’ ability to pay, not the amount

that would have generated deterrence (Vigneron transcripts, vol. 25). More importantly, the optimal

sanction is a function of the probability of detection and of enforcement, but these probabilities are

affected by the magnitude of the sanction: raising the sanction may end up incentivizing avoidance and

distortive efforts on the part of the companies even more (Glaeser & Shleifer 2003). Thus, it is important

to study how in equilibrium these probabilities are influenced by corporate decisions.

    3.1.2    Path Dependency

When DuPont made the 1984 decision, the company had already released large quantities of C8 into the

environment in the preceding decades. On paper, the liability for past damages is sunk and therefore

should not affect the decision to continue production after 1984. Indeed, the 1984 memo explicitly defines

liability as “the incremental liability from this point on if we do nothing.” In reality, past liability could

affect future decisions by removing the benefit of secrecy. A major initiative to contain the environmental

damages of C8 could alert the public to the potential dangers of C8, increasing DuPont’s chances of being

punished for past pollution (cf. Graham 1991 (discussing the possibility that design improvements may be

used against the company as admission of past wrongdoing)).

        The existing liability regime may therefore help some victims ex post, but as currently designed it

creates bad incentives ex ante. Companies face incentives to suppress potentially damaging information,

so as to keep the plaintiff lawyers away. As legal scholars have noted elsewhere, companies that report

early suspicions get very little reward and a lot of risk (McGarity & Wagner 2008).

  3.2 Regulation

    3.2.1    Regulatory Framework: : Difficulties in Extracting Information

Some of the delay in detecting C8 issues is due to the regulatory framework that was in place. The Toxic

Substances Control Act (TSCA) was enacted in 1976, when C8 was already in use. As a result, C8 was

grandfathered by TSCA along with tens of thousands of other chemicals. Grandfathered chemicals were

presumed safe until proven otherwise, and TSCA limited the regulator’s ability to probe into these



                                                                                                                 21
chemicals. In effect, for a chemical to be proven other than safe adverse information would have to come

from the chemical producers themselves (U.S. Government Accountability Office Report 2000).14

         Chemical producers face strong incentives to err on the side of under-reporting, and the

regulatory framework – designed in part by the industry itself – did not help. For example, Section 8(e) of

TSCA required manufacturers to report new information only if it led them to believe that a substance

posed a substantial risk to health or the environment. Given that it takes decades until enough hard

evidence builds and the case for substantial risk is clear-cut, chemical producers had an easy way out.

Another legal mechanism to prevent/delay detection was to meet the TSCA reporting requirements only

nominally, as in reporting about substantial risk but using a trade-secret claim to disguise basic details

such as the name of the chemical itself (McGarity & Wagner 2008).

    3.2.2    Bad Enforcement: Soft Capture

Even when alarming information is detected and reaches regulators, companies can still fight back and

erode the enforcement actions. In the 1990s, when the Tennants started voicing concern, the local West

Virginia regulators were slow to hold DuPont accountable (Lerner 2015b). We later learned that the West

Virginia environmental agency director, who signed the initial consent agreement with DuPont, joined the

consulting company that got paid by DuPont to implement the agreement (Lerner 2015c). And three

attorneys handling C8 issues for DuPont became regulators of C8 in the West Virginia environmental

protection agency (Lyons 2007). Then in the 2000s, after the Tennant lawsuit flushed out the C8 debacle

and got the federal regulator involved, DuPont assembled a team to handle communications with the

federal regulator, and recruited Michael McCabe, who was up until 2001 the U.S. EPA’s deputy

administrator, and then his EPA successor – Linda Fisher.

         To emphasize: companies can erode regulatory enforcement even without suitcases with

unmarked dollar bills exchanging hands. The U.S. EPA failed to stop C8 pollution in time not necessarily

because of explicit or implicit bribes, but rather because of fuzzier notions such as conflict avoidance


    14
       Unless a material is considered unsafe to begin with and is regulated, the regulator cannot conduct
independent tests and regulate it.

                                                                                                             22
(Joskow 1974), information overload (Wagner 2010), and asymmetric monitoring (Levear 2009).

Notably, federal regulators were spurred to intervene only by episodes of national media coverage (as

happened, for example, around 2015 when the Flint, Michigan debacle turned public attention to the inept

regulation of pollution).

         There is a broader point here. Regulators face high levels of uncertainty and complexity when

asked to regulate opaque chemicals. As a result, they tend to err on the side of doing nothing or on the

side of the industry. Doing nothing makes sense when mistakes against the industry are more likely to be

spotlighted than mistakes against the public (cf. Leaver 2009). The DuPont case therefore pokes holes in

the conventional wisdom in political science, according to which environmental regulation is an area that

is relatively less susceptible for capture by industry (Wilson 1976). 15

  3.3 Reputation

    3.3.1    Individual Reputational Concerns

Managers are supposedly disciplined by the threat of damage to their labor-market reputation. In Fama

(1980), for example, market participants take a bad news about a company as a signal that the quality of

the company’s managers is low and they revised downward the managers expected contributions and,

thus, their wages. The DuPont case fleshes out one condition under which Fama’s settling-up process is

less likely to work: a big time lag between the moment a decision is made and the moment information

about the decision becomes public. To illustrate, consider DuPont’s executives back in 1984.

         Several executives signed the memos and minutes from the 1984 meeting. To identify possible

reputational costs we looked for articles on the Lexis News and Proquest databases during the 1984–2015

period mentioning the names of these executives along with terms associated with the C8 debacle, such as

“PFOA,” “C8,” “carcinogenic,” “Washington Works,” and “Teflon.” We did not find indications of their

names getting dragged through the mud (see Table 2). 16 That should not surprise us, as almost two


    15
       The reason they cite is increased public saliency and more policy entrepreneurs, which in turn balance the
inherent advantages of special interest groups (compare Wilson 1976 with Olson 1965). What the conventional
wisdom misses is problems with information flows.
    16
       There was one exception: one of the DuPont's executives signing some of the above-cited memos was Bruce

                                                                                                              23
decades have passed between the decision (1984) and the time that mainline media started seriously

scrutinizing the C8 debacle (2003). By that time, the DuPont executives who were mentioned and reached

out to for response were those who had replaced the 1980s decision-makers.

        We went beyond the named executives and also examined all DuPont’s 1984 directors. The

corporate governance literature usually focuses on directors as the target for reputational sanctions. After

all, the board is more exposed than lower-level executives, and directors have incentives to monitor

corporate behavior so as to prevent bad news about the company from being attributed to them. From

DuPont’s 1984 proxy statement we learn that DuPont’s board back then was composed of 29 members. In

Table 2 we compile a list of all directors and their post-DuPont careers. The table shows that by the time

serious media attention was directed at the C8 debacle (2003), 19 of the 29 directors had already died or

retired not only from DuPont’s board, but also from any other professional activity. When bad news

broke, labor-market reputation had therefore already stopped being a concern of most of the directors.

        Even for the 10 directors still engaged in some professional activity in 2003, labor-market

reputation was not likely to be a large concern. This is because the media had not associated and

attributed the C8 debacle to them. 17 We ran the same media search on directors, and here too found no

indications of directors’ names getting dragged through the mud. To the contrary, we found some articles

celebrating these executives as environmental visionaries. For example, Ricard Heckert – CEO between

1986 and 1989 – was remembered in a Wall Street Journal obituary as the one who “shut down the

chemical giant’s production of chemicals suspected of destroying the ozone layer, and ended its work on

nuclear weapons.” (Miller 2010)




Karrh, who was the chief medical officer, and was later deposed in trial. Karrh's name was mentioned several times
in media coverage. Remember, though, that the decision we examine is one in which the business executives
overruled the scientific and legal departments' considerations. Those business-units managers, whose names appear
on the meeting notes and memos, were not mentioned by the press.
     17
        The name of Richard Heckert, former director and then CEO of DuPont, was mentioned in an online article of
Alternet.org on PFOA in January 2016, after his death. His name was mentioned indirectly, however, in the context
of telling the reader how TSCA rules were designed by the industry lobby itself in the 1970s under Heckert’s
leadership.

                                                                                                               24
         The upshot is that managers at DuPont interested only in their monetary payoff would have

rationally chosen to pollute even if they had perfect foresight about future events. For these managers,

dropping C8 or investing in abatement would have come with some immediate, clear costs in terms of

reduced income. In theory, the managers could have weighed the benefits from maintaining a good

reputation against these costs. In reality, given the time lag and difficulty to attribute problems to specific

individuals, the need to maintain good reputation probably did not feature prominently in decision-

makers’ considerations. 18

    3.3.2    Corporate Reputational Concerns

The economic literature assumes a straightforward process whereby the need to maintain a good

reputation disciplines corporate behavior. Whenever bad news breaks, the argument goes, company

stakeholders downgrade their willingness to do business with the company, and as a result the company’s

bottom line suffers. But in order to understand why the threat of reputational sanctions did not work in

DuPont’s case, we need to introduce some nuance. Bad information does not automatically translate to

reputational damages. The information has to go through a process of certification, attribution, and

diffusion. It has to be certified as credible in order for stakeholders to update their beliefs based on it. It

has to be attributed to deep-seated flaws that are likely to reoccur in the future in order for stakeholders to

act on it. And it has to be widely diffused to a critical mass of stakeholders in order for the company to

truly feel it.19 In cases such as ours, however, large companies can minimize diffusion, certification, and

attribution – thereby effectively reducing the expected reputational sanction.


    18
        Thus far our analysis has focused on DuPont’s 1984 decision-makers. The dynamics change when
considering decision-makers in the 2000s, when news about C8 started to break. May 2000 in particular is a
watershed, because DuPont’s C8 provider – 3M – publically announced then that they would stop produce the
material, citing concerns. DuPont responded by doubling down on C8, building a plant to manufacture C8 on their
own. DuPont’s then-current decision makers, and in particular its CEO – Chad Holliday – were frequently
mentioned and reached out to for response in media coverage during that time. Holliday had a strong preexisting
reputation of being a “green” CEO (e.g., Holliday 2001), and he stood firmly behind DuPont’s C8 decisions.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that Holliday’s strong CSR reputation did not suffer from his involvement with the C8
issue: after stepping down from his position at DuPont in 2009, Holliday kept receiving environmental accolades,
and was appointed chairman of the board at Bank of America and Shell, specifically citing his commitment to green
conscience (BBC 2014).
     19
        Cf. Hoffman & Ocasio 2001 (the chemical industry increases its responsiveness as a function of media
coverage).

                                                                                                                  25
        Consider diffusion first. When dealing with large firms, diffusion of information can happen only

through intermediaries such as mass media (cf. Mahon 2002). Yet in our case, both local and national

media were very slow to hold DuPont accountable for C8.

        On the one hand, local journalists are closer to information sources and have stronger incentives

to rectify wrongdoing that hurts the community they are a part of. On the other hand, local infomediaries

are usually more dependent on corporate insiders for sourcing and advertising revenues, simply due to the

size and concentration of the relevant market. Indeed, for local Parkersburg, West Virginia media, DuPont

was basically the only game in town in terms of advertisement and financial support. Furthermore,

scrutinizing the biggest employer in town ran the risk of upsetting their Parkersburg readers. It is no

wonder that the few victims who came forward reported that when they tried to enlist the help of local

journalists they were turned down because no journalist wanted to touch the issue (Lerner 2015a). Even

after the bad news broke nationally, the Parkersburg-area media seemed to shy away from holding

DuPont accountable (Rich 2016a; Rich 2016b). The few reporters who did go after the C8 debacle

aggressively were either not part of an established media outlet, or reputable reporters from outside the

Parkersburg area.

        National media, by contrast, are less dependent on a single company for information and

advertising revenues (Dyck et al.; 2013). At the same time, national media deem local problems less

newsworthy. In other words, they are less likely to be captured but also less likely to be interested in

reporting the facts. In the DuPont case, periods of national media attention to C8 were few and far

between: a surge around 2003, and another one starting in late 2015. Why then? It seems that two

conditions have to materialize before we get wide diffusion of information: someone needs to feed

national media reporters with credible information, and someone needs to convince national reporters that

the information is newsworthy. In 2003 and 2015 alike, existing litigation provided reporters with

information subsidies – feeding them with credible, readymade, shielded-from-liability quotes and

documents. And in both points there existed strong NGO activity, convincing the media that the C8 story

had national implications (cf. Wagner et al. 2011 (providing systematic evidence of the link between

                                                                                                            26
public interest groups’ activity and media attention to environmental issues)). National media is good at

spotlighting an already existing smoking gun; but it cannot be counted on to reveal the smoking gun, or to

stick with a story over the long run.

           Next consider certification. Since the 1970s there were data on C8 that warranted further

research. Nevertheless, relatively few academic studies about C8 were published until 2008 (Grandjean &

Clapp 2015). One reason for this delay is straightforward. In-house scientists, who have access to data on

chemicals that their companies produce, have little interest in producing research that might jeopardize

the commercial viability of those products. Outside experts, who can be more independent, do not have

access to the data about opaque chemicals.

            Other reasons for the delay are of a fuzzier nature, such as potential pressures on those who try to

publish research that can hurt industry interests. In 2004, Dr. James Dahlgren and a group of coauthors

attempted to publish a paper on the adverse effects of C8. 20 It was one of the first studies to examine the

effects on community members rather than on employees. The authors claimed to have found that

exposure to C8 increases risks of various types of cancer. Dahlgren’s paper was accepted for publication

by the Archives of Environmental Health, going through the peer-review process and several back-and-

forth implementations of reviewers’ comments. But then the already accepted paper was yanked.

Dahlgren received notice that the presiding editor of the journal who accepted his paper had been fired,

and then that the new editor had decided to retract Dahlgren’s paper. Dahlgren maintains that when he

presented a draft of his findings in a SETAC conference in Prague, a DuPont representative reached out to

him, telling him that he was surprised that Dahlgren’s presentation was not excluded from SETAC.

           We were not able to corroborate an alleged link between DuPont’s pressures and the retraction

decision, as the editor who was fired had since died, while the editor who replaced him was adamant that

the retraction had nothing to do with DuPont. When we talked with other contributing editors of the

journal at the time, all they could relay was that the editor who accepted the paper was known to be open

to critical papers that challenged industry interests. The effects of retracting an already accepted paper,

    20
         It should be noted that Dahlgren was retained by the class action plaintiffs.

                                                                                                              27
however, are clear: DuPont has consistently emphasized, both inside and outside the courtroom, the fact

that Dahlgren’s paper ended up not being published, presumably to reduce the credibility of the findings

(Bartlett transcripts, vol. 5, p. 125; cf. McGarity & Wagner 2008, 140).

        Another DuPont-related story comes from Eileen Murphy, who headed New Jersey’s Water

Quality Institute, and was conducting research on safety standards for C8 in drinking water. Murphy

reports that when she wanted to publish her team’s findings she received a call from her overseer, asking

her to halt the publication. Murphy relays that when she went ahead and published the study anyhow, she

was subsequently reassigned and effectively shown the door (Lerner, 2015c).

        To be sure, it seems unlikely that companies can capture the whole academic process. Our claim

is a more modest one: experts face incentives to stay away from research that goes against strong

economic interests. The upshot is fewer chances to get credible damning information on corporate

behavior.

        A third factor in diluting reputational sanctions comes from large companies’ ability to affect

attribution – that is, to disassociate the company from the wrongdoing. In July 2015, just as legal

sanctions were about to come down, DuPont was pressured by an activist investor to spin off its

Performance Chemicals unit that dealt with C8 to a new company named Chemours. DuPont spun off not

just its chemical assets but also its chemical liabilities. The spinoff raised questions regarding the ability

of 3,500 plaintiffs to collect damages from the new company, which had shallower pockets than DuPont

(Mordock 2016b). Yet, it was unlikely that DuPont could avoid legal sanctions by spinning off liabilities.

Indeed, Judge Sargus, who presided over the litigation, ordered DuPont to clarify who would pay what

(News & Sentinel 2016). An understudied question, which remains open even after the conclusion of

litigation, is how the spinoff affects DuPont’s reputational liability. A cursory look at DuPont’s media

strategy since the spinoff suggests that the company tries to disassociate itself from the C8 debacle.

DuPont is constantly referring any media inquiry on the issue to Chemours, refusing to comment further,

while pointing out that it is not DuPont’s business any longer.



                                                                                                             28
         Shortly after the spinoff, DuPont announced its intentions to merge with Dow Chemicals and

break up the merged company into smaller divisions. As a first step, DuPont would lose its distinctive

name. As a second intended step, the merged company is to be broken into three separate and rebranded

entities. Changing names and passing responsibility to a separate company may serve to distance DuPont

from the C8 debacle. A nascent literature suggests that it is possible, even plausible, that such changes

will allow DuPont eventually to reduce the associations that stakeholders make between DuPont’s

offspring and the C8 debacle (cf. Lei et al. 2008, 121).

         Yet another way for companies to manage attributions is by investing in projecting a good image.

Stakeholders are less likely to attribute bad intentions to a perceivably nice or high-status company,

chalking up the bad news to a one-off past mistake rather than a deep-seated flaw (cf. Greve et al 2010,

87). 21 DuPont has traditionally invested heavily in its corporate social responsibility (CSR) image, and

apparently further ramped up its efforts since the C8 bad news broke. In 2008, just three years after it paid

the EPA $16.5M for the alleged failures to report on C8, DuPont opened a PR campaign titled “Open

Science” (Young & Dhanda 2013, 330). An open question for future research is whether investing in CSR

is a better insurance mechanism against reputational damage than actually investing in abatement

measures.


    4. What Is Wrong With the Standard Theory of Deterrence

         The ability to draw generalizable lessons from a single case study is usually limited. Yet our

analysis here is based on what the qualitative methodology literature calls “crucial, least likely case,”

whereby the researcher can use the case to expose holes in existing theories (Given 2008). DuPont is

hailed as one of the companies that takes its reputation very seriously and takes extremely good care of it

(Alsop 2004). DuPont was also the first company to have a full-blown, internal, scientific lab (Bartlett

transcripts, Vol. 4, p. 167). It has traditionally been known as “the scientists’ company,” employing


    21
        Enron, for example, was considered the poster child for CSR before its collapse. Several scholars and
activists suggested that the accolades showered upon Enron for its CSR image contributed to the slow detection and
reaction to Enron’s misbehavior (Shapira 2012, 1939).

                                                                                                               29
10,000 scientists. Indeed, a critical mass of honest research and well-documented studies of C8 were

generated in-house. These scientists seemingly tried to instill in DuPont a corporate culture of the highest

standards in that regard, as is evident from the words of Bruch Karrh, DuPont’s medical director and vice

president in the relevant time frame (since 1983):

        “to maintain credibility and good relations with our customers, employees and the public,
        DuPont management feels that it is not only a matter of the duty or corporate ethics to
        report pertinent health information, but it is also good, sound business practice. To do
        less would be both morally irresponsible and in many cases economically irresponsible…
        A company cannot risk the possibility of being placed in the compromising position of
        withholding information, making a false judgement about who should know and what. It
        is the duty of every company’s management to discover and reveal the unvarnished facts
        about health hazards” (Bartlett transcripts, Vol 4, pp. 133-134)
Thus, ex ante DuPont was the least likely company one would expect to suppress information. That is

exactly what makes the DuPont-C8 case a good case to identify holes in existing deterrence theories,

which treat the probability of detection as largely exogenous.

        The DuPont case illustrates how chemical companies can use their informational advantage to

delay liability, fend off regulators, and cast doubts in ways that limit a reputational sanctioning process.

  4.1 Hiding Information

To understand our claim, it may be useful to go back to Becker’s (1968) model. In the traditional model,

both the probability of enforcement and the size of the legal liability are exogenous. We slightly extend

the model to reflect the fact that a company can work very effectively to reduce the probability         π of
detection and minimize the penalty. Thus, according to this framework a company would pollute if

                                  B > min e {π (e)[ L(e) + R(e)] + C(e)} ,

where e is the effort exerted to avoid sanctioning and C(e) the cost of this effort in dollar terms. One of

the simplest ways for a large company to minimize the right-hand side is to prevent damning information

from coming out. With chemical products in particular, the producers have the advantage of creating

these chemicals and enjoying much more information than any outside party about the nature and risks of


                                                                                                               30
the products. They can even (and often do) use confidentiality claims through trade-secrets law to limit

the ability of outsiders to gather information (McGarity & Wagner 2008).

        DuPont’s C8 case provides plenty of examples of information that existed in house being

suppressed. For one, the general counsel was holding workshops on what not to document and share in

regards to C8 (Lerner 2015b). And when a white paper about C8 was prepared and sent to top officials in

1994, the copies were numbered and the recipients returned them for shredding afterwards (Lerner

2015a). A former senior employee who worked in government affairs told journalists about a detailed

internal report on all the different waste sites and their contents. Yet, when the journalists inquired the

report was nowhere to be found (Lerner 2016c). One employee told a reporter: “I wasn’t about to go

against the paycheck that supported my family. So I shut my mouth” (Blake 2015).

        Equally importantly, the production of damning information in-house was designed to avoid red

flags to begin with, such as when the company rejected scientists’ recommendations to further investigate

problematic aspects of C8. The minutes of a 1991 meeting cite an interesting reason for refusing

scientists’ requests to examine how C8 exposure affected workers: “Do the study after we are sued”

(Lerner 2015a). In other words, the executives did not want to generate damning information that would

later be used against them in the courtroom or the court of public opinion.

        On the other side, the victims, who have all the incentives to identify misbehavior, have very little

way to do so. They are often at a loss to understand what caused their harm (like the Tennant family).

Without knowledge of the risky substance, it is like searching for a needle in a haystack.

        Another important yet underappreciated factor is the social pressures that are often exerted on

victims not to produce damning information. Virtually every victim that tried to fight DuPont had to face

not just legal costs, but also heavy social costs such as ostracism by their neighbors. The farmers who

filed the Tennant litigation suffered social exclusion: they had to change their church more than once, and

people would walk out of a restaurant when they entered (Rich 2016a; Blake 2015). Similarly, the gym

teacher who was behind the subsequent drinking-water class action testified that “a guy called my wife

and asked, ‘if I lose my job are you going to pay for my wife and kids?’” (Mordock 2016a; Blake 2015).

                                                                                                              31
As the Washington Post observed, “Tension between the broader populace and those who say their health

has been compromised by C8 is palpable in bingo halls, diners and beauty parlors throughout the valley”

(Williams 2015). There was apparently a code of silence to protect the biggest employer in town.

Everyone who broke it faced consequences.

  4.2 Not All Corporate Misbehavior Is Created Equal

It is always useful to go beyond the “on average” claims and look at the cross-sectional variation. While

liability, regulation, and reputation were not enough in the DuPont-C8 case, they do work in other cases.

And companies’ ability to control the information environment and reduce the expected sanctions is

limited to certain sets of circumstances.

        Take airplane crashes, for example. Studies show that the day after a crash, the media already

knows with great precision what happened and how it happened, and responsibility gets attributed quickly

(Mitchell & Maloney 1989). The damage is immediate enough, and the victims visible enough, to make

airplane crashes salient. As a result, stock prices of the airline company drop significantly, as a function

of the company’s responsibility for the crash. Post-facto regulatory enforcement, legal liability, and

market reaction (reputational sanctions) tend to be swift and total with airplane crashes. The health

consequences of opaque chemicals, by contrast, are much less immediate, discernible, or attributable.

        Even in a single company such as DuPont, you find variation. In some instances DuPont was

leading environmental company. In 1988, for example, DuPont voluntarily abandoned the production of

chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which were used as propellants in aerosol cans and were suspected of

destroying Earth’s ozone layer. The following year DuPont withdrew from the Savannah River site,

where it had produced plutonium and tritium for nuclear weapons. Thus, the same managers who decided

to continue emitting toxic C8 instead of investing a few million in incinerating costs were very

environmentally friendly in other contexts. How come?

        We suspect that the answer lies in the different levels of public awareness of each issue. The

ozone layer and nuclear waste problems had gained international attention. When DuPont’s CEO chose to

embrace the ban on production he gained worldwide acclaims for himself and the company (Miller 2010).

                                                                                                           32
By contrast, even the existence of C8 was unknown to most, let alone its toxicity. Thus, there was no

public opinion pressure to contain C8 pollution at the time, and no environmental credit to be gained. The

upshot is that public visibility of a problem makes a huge difference. Yet, public visibility is easier when

the problem affects everyone (like the ozone) or is already very salient (like the nuclear waste).

  4.3 The Interactions between Systems of Control

What is particularly notable about the DuPont case is how systems of deterrence move together (cf.

Komesar 2001). We already know that each mechanism in isolation can fail: noncompliance in regulation

(e.g., Shwartz & Soo 1996; King & Sutinen 2010); under-deterrence in environmental tort law (Dewees &

Trebilcock 1992); and lack of reputational sanctions for environmental pollution (e.g., Karpoff 2012).

Yet, for effective deterrence is sufficient that at least one of these mechanisms work in every situation.

Unfortunately, in the DuPont case all deterrence mechanisms failed simultaneously. Is this joint failure

just the result of bad luck?

        In the DuPont case we can attribute this joint failure to a common cause: DuPont’s ability to

companies have on the diffusion of information. The clearest example comes from the way DuPont was

able to stave off for years the threat of legal or reputational sanctions.

        By capturing the regulators companies are able not only to slow down or prevent enforcement,

but also to use the regulator as a shield against allegations in the courtroom and in the court of public

opinion. They fight allegations of misbehavior by arguing that the regulator’s decision not to intervene is

tantamount to evidence that nothing is wrong. Even a cursory review of DuPont’s communications

reveals frequent mentions of how C8 is under the watchful eyes of the regulator, and so the public has

nothing to worry about (Lerner 2015a, 2015b, 2015c).

        A related tactic is to use the regulator as a validator: having the company’s version bear the

letterhead of a public official assures that it will be better received by stakeholders. At one point DuPont’s

VP told his colleagues, “In our opinion, the only voice that can cut through the negative stories, is the

voice of EPA. We need EPA … to quickly (like first thing tomorrow) say the following: Consumer

products sold under the Teflon brand are safe” (Lerner 2015c). The company acted on this strategy:

                                                                                                             33
before DuPont entered the consent agreement with the EPA over phasing out C8, it asked the regulator to

issue a reassuring press release. And indeed, when the EPA announced the phasing off agreement it

included with it the following statement: “To date EPA is not aware of any studies specifically relating

current levels of PFOA exposure to human health effects.” DuPont followed up on the same day with its

own press release simply containing the regulator’s words (Lerner 2015c; Bartlett transcripts, Vol. 4, pp.

79–80).

          DuPont was not just reiterating what the regulator said; it told the regulator what to say. The

process of drafting quotes to be attributed to regulators was customary. Indeed, when one affected water

district sent information to the citizens about the presence of C8 in their drinking water, DuPont got to

review and amend the document (Lerner 2015b). The broader phenomenon of companies drafting press

releases for regulators was spotlighted in a 2014 Pulitzer-winning investigative reporting piece (Lipton

2014).

    5. Lessons

There are two clear findings in this case. The first one is that polluting pays off, even when a company

anticipates all the legal consequences of its behavior. While the specifics are very case-contingent, the

reasons why pollution was optimal does not appear to be.

          The second finding is that the main way corporations succeed in reducing their expected liability

is by suppressing and distorting information. Once again, while the specific ways in which this takes

place are very case-contingent, the idea applies broadly.

          What can be done, then, to realign private incentives with social incentives? While we do not

purport to offer a detailed plan, below we sketch a few ways to approach the problem. Instead of focusing

on the oft-analyzed option of further raising the severity of sanctions, we focus on the more understudied

solutions, namely, to attack problems having to do with the information environment.




                                                                                                            34
  5.1 Promote Whistleblowing

        One proven way to promote the revelation of hidden information is to offer monetary rewards to

whistleblowers. Such a system was introduced in 1986 for fraud against the government, extended in the

early 2000s to major tax evasion cases, and extended again in 2010 to corporate fraud. In all these cases it

has proven effective (e.g., Dyck et al. 2010). Extending such reward systems to environmental liability

issues would have arguably made it difficult for DuPont to keep the information about health effects of

C8 secret for long, given that its employees could have gained tens of millions of dollars by disclosing it.

Thus, creating a version of the False Claims Act for toxic emissions would be a potential mechanism for

avoiding a repeat of the DuPont case.

  5.2 Penalize Gag Settlements

        The main investigation of the health effects of C8 was made possible by the Tennants’ initial

litigation and the documents discovered during subsequent litigations. Importantly, many of the

documents that were produced in these trials were not sealed, thus making possible subsequent litigation,

media coverage, and even enforcement actions in other countries.

        Settlements are generally regarded as an efficient way to end litigation. Yet, what is efficient for

the parties involved is not necessarily efficient for society. If the underlying documents are kept

confidential, the costs – not warning the public – are externalized. In fact, the bigger the informational

externality, the more the defendant will be willing to pay the plaintiff to insure that documents remain

sealed (Shavell 1997). A fundamental principle in public finance is that any divergence between private

and social incentives can be alleviated through a tax or a subsidy. This is no exception. A differential

taxation of sealed cases is a way to induce the parties involved in a litigation to internalize – at least in

part – the information externality.

  5.3 Penalize Delays

        One unexpected effect emerging from the calculations of the costs and benefits of pollution

regards the size of the effect of time delay. Given the long delay between the damage and the penalty,

even sizeable penalties pale in comparison to the benefits of pollution (recall how an expected sanction of

                                                                                                                35
close to $1B turned, in present value terms, into $100M). Understanding this effect, defense lawyers will

try any tactic to delay as long as possible the moment of payment, making pollution more attractive. One

simple way to mitigate this problem could be to increase the rate of interest at which damages awards are

capitalized.

  5.4 Allocate Responsibility

    One of the interesting aspects of the DuPont-C8 case is the “faceless crime” element. Even though the

company suffered negative media coverage, none of its top managers were dragged through the mud. The

lack of personal accountability seems to be a feature of emissions of opaque chemicals, given, among

other factors, the lack of a specific action attributed to specific individuals, and the length of time that

passes until the outside world realizes the consequences. A potential way to mitigate faceless crime

dynamics is to designate specific managers to vouch – under the credible threat of sanctions – for their

companies’ policies and state of knowledge over time.

        Such a certification requirement already exists in other contexts. Following a string of corporate

debacles in the early 2000s, section 302 of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) requires CEOs and

CFOs of publicly traded companies to certify the appropriateness of their companies’ reports. Closer to

our context, the federal Clean Air Act requires the person in charge of submitting information to the

regulator to certify the information, and subjects the certifier to possible jail time if the information turns

out to be false. Such certification requirements can help mitigate the existing incentives to create plausible

deniability by erecting Chinese walls inside organizations. One policy that might raise the personal stake

of the corporate executives is to require a C-suite executive to sign the TSCA report.



    6. Conclusion

C8 has been phased off. But the misalignment between companies’ and societal goals lives on. This paper

is not about a specific chemical or a specific company. Nor is it a paper about extremely unusual and

immoral decisions. It is rather a paper about why even the best companies pollute the environment. C8

emissions and the suppression of information about it were not an evil plan or an accident. They were the

                                                                                                               36
natural course of action of a profit-maximizing company, which fully utilized the tools available under

then-current laws. As we show, the result was socially inefficient: not just ex post, but also ex ante.

        The regulatory framework (TSCA) has since been modified (Berzon & Harder 2016), but there is

no evidence that the problems highlighted in this study have been fixed. There is even a question of

whether they can possibly be fixed if we maintain a rigid profit-maximization framework. As Hart and

Zingales (2017) show, when a prosocial activity (avoiding pollution) and a profit-maximizing activity

(producing) are not separable, shareholders’ wealth maximization does not even lead to shareholders’

welfare maximization, let alone to maximization of social welfare. In other words, the problems cited

here are not just with governance procedures, but also governance objectives. The solution that Hart and

Zingales propose, however, is not easily implementable in this particular case, since the primary problem

here is the informational gap that affects not only outside regulators, but also the company’s own

shareholders.

        Thus, an effective system to prevent inefficient pollution needs to rethink the interactions

between corporate governance, environmental regulation, litigation, and the information environment.




                                                                                                          37
                                            REFERENCES

Ronald J. Alsop, The 18 Immutable Laws of Corporate Reputation (2004).

BBC, Royal Dutch Shell Appoints Charles Holliday as Chairman, Oct. 30, 2014,
      http://www.bbc.com/news/business-29829332.

Binyamin Appelbaum, As U.S. Agencies Put More Value on a Life, Businesses Fret, N.Y. Times, Feb. 16,
      2011.

Gary S. Becker, Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach, 76 Journal of Political Economy 169
        (1968).

Jeremy Bentham, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1823).

Alexandra Berzon & Amy Harder, House Passes Sweeping Chemical Safety Bill, Wall St. Journal, May
       24, 2016, wsj.com/articles/house-passes-sweeping-chemical-safety-bill-1464125287.

Mariah Blake, Welcome to Beautiful Parkersburg, West Virginia: Home to One of the Most Brazen,
       Deadly Corporate Gambits in U.S. History, Huffington Post (2015),
       http://highline.huffingtonpost.com/articles/en/welcome-to-beautiful-parkersburg/.

Bryan Blissmer et al., Health-related Quality of Life Following a Clinical Weight Loss Iintervention
       among Overweight and Obese Adults: Intervention and 24-Month Follow-up Effects, 4 Health
       and Quality of Life Outcomes 43 (2006).

C8 Medical Monitoring Program Report, http://www.c-
8medicalmonitoringprogram.com/docs/med_panel_education_doc.pdf.

C8 Probable Links Report, Oct. 2012, http://www.c8sciencepanel.org/prob_link.html.

Susan Chaplinsky & Felicia Marston, DuPont Corporation: Sale of Performance Coatings, University of
       Virginia Darden School Case Study (2014).

R. D. Cohen et al., Systematic Review: The Costs of Ulcerative Colitis in Western Countries, 31
       Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics 693 (2010).

Cary Coglianese et al., Seeking Truth for Power: Informational Strategy and Regulatory Policymaking,
       89 Minnesota Law Review 277 (2004).

Don Dewees & Michael Trebilcock, The Efficacy of the Tort System and Its Alternatives: A Review of
      Empirical Evidence, 30 Osgoode Hall Law Journal 57 (1992).

Paul Dolan, The Measurement of Health-Related Quality of Life for Use in Resource Allocation Decisions
       in Health Care, in: Handbook of Health Economics (2000).

DuPont Website, DuPont Reaches Global Settlement of Multi-District PFOA Litigation, Feb. 13, 2017,
       http://investors.dupont.com/investor-relations/investor-news/investor-news-details/2017/DuPont-
       Reaches-Global-Settlement-of-Multi-District-PFOA-Litigation/default.aspx.



                                                                                                       38
Alexander Dyck, Adair Morse, Luigi Zingales, Who Blows the Whistle on Corporate Fraud?, 65 Journal
of Finance 2213 (2010).

Alexander Dyck, David Moss, Luigi Zingales, “Media vs. Special Interests,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 2013, 56(3), 521-553.

Eugene F. Fama, Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm, 88 Journal of Political Economy 288
(1980).

Given, ed., The Sage Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research (2008).

Bill George, The DuPont Proxy Battle is a Battle for the Soul of American Capitalism, Nov. 5, 2015,

Huffington Post, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/bill-george/the-dupont-proxy-contest_b_7256490.html.

Edward L. Glaeser & Andrei Shleifer, The Rise of the Regulatory State, 41 Journal of Economic
       Literature 401 (2003).

Graham, J. D., Product Liability and Motor Vehicle Safety, in: The Liability Maze (Huber & Litan, eds.,
      1991)

Philippe Grandjean et al., Serum Vaccine Antibody Concentrations in Adolescents Exposed to
        Perfluorinated Compounds, Environmental Health Perspective (Advance Publication, 2016).

Wayne B. Gray & Jay P. Shimshack, The Effectiveness of Environmental Monitoring and Enforcement: A
      Review of the Empirical Literature, 5 Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3 (2011).

Henrich R. Greve et al., Organizations Gone Wild: The Causes, Processes, and Consequences of
       Organizational Misconduct, 4 Academy of Management Annals 53 (2010).

Andrew J. Hoffman & William Ocasio, Not all Events are Attended Equally: Toward a Middle-Range
      Theory of Industry Attention to External Events, 12 Organization Science 414 (2001).

Chad Holliday, Sustainable Growth, the DuPont Way, 79 Harvard Business Review 129 (2001).

Michael Janofsky, DuPont to Pay $16.5 Million for Unreported Risk, Dec. 15, 2005, N.Y. Times,
       http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/15/politics/dupont-to-pay-165-million-for-unreported-
       risks.html?_r=1.

Paul L. Joskow, Inflation and Environmental Concern: Structural Change in the Process of Public Utility
        Price Regulation, 17 Journal of Law and Economics 291 (1974).

Michael D. Kappelman, Recent Trends in the Prevalence of Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis in a
       Commercially Insured US Population, 58 Digestive Diseases and Sciences 519 (2013).

Tiffany Kary & Denise Trowbridge, DuPont Shares Rise as Jury Awards Limited Punitive Damages, Jul.
        8, 2016, Bloomberg, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-07-08/dupont-must-pay-
        500-000-in-punitive-damages-for-man-s-cancer.

Dennis M. King & Jon G. Sutinen, Rational Noncompliance and the Liquidation of Northeast Groundfish
       Resources, 34 Marine Policy 7 (2010).

                                                                                                      39
Neil K. Komesar, Law’s Limits (2001).

Philip Kotler & Waldemar Pfoertsch, Ingredient Branding: Making the Invisible Visible (2010).

Jonathan M. Karpoff, Does Reputation Work to Discipline Corporate Misconduct?, in The Oxford
       Handbook of Corporate Reputation (Timothy G. Pollock & Michael L. Barnett, eds., 2012).

Clare Leaver, Bureaucratic Minimal Squawk Behavior: Theory and Evidence from Regulatory Agencies,
        99 American Economic Review 572 (2009).

Jing Lei et al., Negative Spillover in Brand Portfolios: Exploring the Antecedents of Asymmetric Effects,
        72 Journal of Marketing 111 (2008).

Sharon Lerner, The Teflon Toxin: DuPont and the Chemistry of Deception, The Intercept, Aug. 11, 2015,
       https://theintercept.com/2015/08/11/dupont-chemistry-deception/.

Sharon Lerner, The Teflon Toxin: The Case Against DuPont, The Intercept, Aug. 17, 2015,
       https://theintercept.com/2015/08/17/teflon-toxin-case-against-dupont/.

Sharon Lerner, The Teflon Toxin: How DuPont Slipped Past the EPA, The Intercept, Aug. 20, 2015,
       https://theintercept.com/2015/08/20/teflon-toxin-dupont-slipped-past-epa/ .

Sharon Lerner, New Teflon Toxin Causes Cancer in Lab Animals, The Intercept, Mar 3, 2016,
       https://theintercept.com/2016/03/03/new-teflon-toxin-causes-cancer-in-lab-animals/.

Sharon Lerner, Lawsuits Charge that 3M Knew about the Dangers of Its Chemicals, The Intercept, Apr.
       11, 2016, https://theintercept.com/2016/04/11/lawsuits-charge-that-3m-knew-about-the-dangers-
       of-pfcs/.

Sharon Lerner, DuPont May Dodge Toxic Lawsuits by Pulling a Disappearing Act, The Intercept, Jun.
       15, 2016, https://theintercept.com/2016/06/15/dupont-may-dodge-toxic-lawsuits-by-pulling-a-
       disappearing-act/.

Eric Lipton, Energy Firms in Secretive Alliance with Attorneys General, N.Y. Times, Dec. 6, 2014,
        http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/us/politics/energy-firms-in-secretive-alliance-with-
        attorneys-general.html?_r=1.

Richard D. Lyons, Roy J. Plunkett is Dead at 83; Created Teflon While at DuPont, May 15, 1994, N.Y.
       Times, http://www.nytimes.com/1994/05/15/obituaries/roy-j-plunkett-is-dead-at-83-created-
       teflon-while-at-du-pont.html.

Callie Lyons, Stain-Resistant, Nonstick, Waterproof, and Lethal (2007).

John F. Mahon, Corporate Reputation: A Research Agenda Using Strategy and Stakeholder Literature,
        41 Business & Society 415 (2002).

Arvin Maskin et al., Medical Monitoring: A Viable Remedy for Deserving Plaintiffs or Tort Law’s Most
       Expensive Consolation Prize, 27 William Mitchell Law Review 521 (2000).

Stephen Miller, Former Du Pont CEO Aided Safety Efforts, Wall St. J., Jan 21, 2010.

                                                                                                        40
Jeff Mordock, Taking on DuPont: Illness, Deaths, Blamed on Pollution from W. Va. Plant, Delaware
Online, Apr. 1, 2016, http://www.delawareonline.com/story/news/2016/04/01/dupont-illnesses-deaths-
c8/81151346/.

Jeff Mordock, DuPont or Chemours: Who Will Pay the Costs of C8 Lawsuits?, Delaware Online, Apr. 3,
2016, http://www.delawareonline.com/story/news/2016/04/03/dupont-chemours-who-pay-costs-c8-
lawsuits/81746064/.

National Cancer Institute, SEER Cancer Statistic Review (1975-2013),
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2013/.

The Value of Statistical Life: A Meta-Analysis (OECD study, 2010), available at
http://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=ENV/EPOC/WPNEP(2010)9/F
INAL&doclanguage=en.

Opensecrets.org, Toxic Substances Control Act page (last visited Sep. 2016),
http://www.opensecrets.org/news/issues/chemical/.

Dennis J. Paustenbach et al., A Methodology for Estimating Human Exposure to Perfluorooctanoic Acid
(PFOA): A Retrospective Exposure Assessment of a Community (1951–2003), 70 Journal of Toxicology
and Environmental Health 28 (2007).

Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell, The Optimal Tradeoff between the Probability and Magnitude of
Fines, 69 American Economic Review 880 (1979).

Nathaniel Rich, The Lawyer who Became DuPont’s Worst Nightmare, N.Y. Times, Jan. 6, 2016,
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/10/magazine/the-lawyer-who-became-duponts-worst-nightmare.html.

Nathaniel Rich, The Story Behind the E.P.A.’s Contaminated Water Revelation, N.Y. Times, May 27,
2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/27/magazine/the-story-behind-the-epas-contaminated-water-
revelation.html?_r=4.

Donna Rowen & John Brazier, Health Utility Measurement, in: The Oxford Handbook of Health
Economics (Glied & Smith, eds., 2011).

Kenneth B. Schwartz & Billy S. Soo, Evidence of Regulatory Noncompliance with SEC Disclosure Rules
on Auditor Changes, 71 The Accounting Review 555 (1996).

Roy Shapira, Corporate Philanthropy as Signaling and Co-optation, 80 Fordham Law Review 1889
(2012).

Steven Shavell, The Fundamental Divergence between the Private and the Social Motive to Use the Legal
System, 26 J. Legal Stud. 575 (1997).

Suraj Srinivasan, Consequences of Financial Reporting Failure for Outside Directors: Evidence from
Accounting Restatements and Audit Committee Members, 43 Journal of Accounting Research 291 (2005).

Leo E. Strine, Jr., Corporate Power Is Corporate Purpose I: Evidence from My Home Town, Oxford
Review of Economic Policy (forthcoming, 2017).


                                                                                                     41
Mary B. Swanson et al., A Screening Method for Ranking and Scoring Chemicals by Potential Human
Health and Environmental Impacts, 16 Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 372 (1997).

Mark P. J. Vanderpump, The Epidemiology of Thyroid Disease, 99 British Medical Bulletin 39 (2011).
Veronica M. Vieira et al., Perfluorooctanoic Acid Exposure and Cancer Outcomes in a Contaminated
Community: A Geographic Analysis, 121 Environmental Health Perspectives 318 (2013).

W. Kip Viscusi & Joseph E. Aldy, The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates
Throughout the World, 27 The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5 (2003).
Wendy E. Wagner, Choosing Ignorance in the Manufacture of Toxic Products, 82 Cornell Law Review
773 (1997).

Wendy E. Wagner, Administrative Law, Filter Failure, and Information Capture, 59 Duke Law Journal
1321 (2010).

Wendy Wagner et al., Rulemaking in the Shade: An Empirical Study of EPA’s Air Toxic Emission
Standards, 63 Administrative Law Review 99 (2011).

Elizabeth V. Young, Outsourcing the Jury: Bartlett v. DuPont and the Role of Alternative Adjudication in
Preserving Jury “Fairness” in Complex Scientific Litigation, 77 Ohio State Law Journal 15 (2016).

Luigi Zingales, “Preventing Economists’ Capture,” in Preventing Regulatory Capture, D. Carpenter and
D. A. Moss (eds.), New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014.




                                                                                                     42
                                Appendix A – Social Cost of Pollution

A.1 Incidence and Prevalence of Diseases Linked to C8 Pollution

We base our calculations on the findings of the C8 medical monitoring program screening tests, as

published                  on                their                website                  (http://www.c-

8medicalmonitoringprogram.com/docs/med_panel_education_doc.pdf), henceforth “the panel.” The

panel estimates the increase in new cases of the six linked diseases for a community of a given size, for a

given level of increased exposure to C8.

        The panel reports ranges of incidence of various diseases associated to high exposure of C8. For

example, high exposure to C8 yields 5 to 20 new cases of disease X per year. Since not all the 70,000

people are exposed to a high level of C8 and we do not have a detailed map of population-weighted

exposure, we always choose the lower bound of the scientists’ forecasts.

        Testicular Cancer: The largest exposure to C8 increases the risk of males to develop testicular

cancer by 3 to 6 times. This led the panel to estimate that in a community of 200,000 people, C8 exposure

would cause from 6 to 15 additional cases each year. Thus, in a sample of 70,000 people, we assume 1.05

extra cases of testicular cancer a year.

        Kidney Cancer: The panel estimates that the highest exposure to C8 doubles the risk of

developing kidney cancer. Since the baseline rate of incidence of this type of cancer is 3 per 10,000

people, in the affected community the panel estimates 21 additional cases per year.

         Thyroid Disease: The panel found that exposure to a high level of C8 yields between 20 and 40

new cases of thyroid disease per 10,000 people each year. Thus, taking the lower limit this estimate

implies 140 new cases per year in our sample.

        Ulcerative Colitis: About 200 people in a city of 100,000 people have ulcerative colitis (UC) and

1 to 20 new cases develop each year. The Science Panel found that greater exposure to C8 was related to

higher rates of UC. The Science Panel estimated that with the highest exposure to C8 the risk of


                                                                                                        43
developing UC doubles. This finding means that if the entire sample at risk were exposed to the

maximum C8 level, the number of new UC cases would be between 0.7 and 14 cases per year. Thus, we

assume the value of 0.7.

        High Cholesterol: For high cholesterol the Science Panel provides data only on prevalence, not

incidence. The Panel’s research shows that – when exposed to the highest level of C8 – about 2,100 out of

10,000 people would have high cholesterol vs. an average of 1500 out of 10,000 in communities with

regulator exposure. Therefore, high exposure to C8 would result in 600 additional adults with high

cholesterol per 10,000 or 4,200 in our sample.

        Pregnancy-Induced Hypertension: The medical monitoring panel estimated that high exposure to

C8 increases the risk of getting high blood pressure and preeclampsia. According to the Panel, the risk is

20% to 30% higher in women with the highest exposure to C8. Thus, 750 pregnant women rather than

600 women per 10,000 would experience high blood pressure as a result of exposure to a high level of

C8. The number of cases of preeclampsia out of 10,000 pregnancies would be about 500 women rather

than 400 women. Since at any time 4% of the women are pregnant, high exposure to C8 can account for

35 additional cases.

A.2 Loss estimates

For each disease we consider both the medical cost of treating it and the probability of dying. For the cost

of treating it, we use estimates provided by the web site http://www.costhelper.com/, which we then

translate to 1984 dollars using the CPI price index. For the cost in terms of life loss, we take the

probabilities of survival from the American Cancer Association. We take an average between the best and

the worst survival rate for the disease. We then multiply this probability by the value of statistical life

expressed in 1984 dollars. Because we use 2010s' survival rates, our estimates likely underestimate the

number of lives lost.



A.3 Discount Rate



                                                                                                         44
Since we have all the figures in 1984 dollars, we are going to use a real discount rate. The 10-year T-bond

in May 22, 1984 (when the meeting took place) was 13.5%. At the same the University of Michigan

Inflation Expectation was 4.2%.




                                                                                                        45
Figure 1: Memo of the 1984 DuPont Meeting on C8




                                                  46
Figure 2: Sampling Results of the Water




                                          47
Figure 3: Karrh Memo




                       48
Figure 5: Bowman Memo




                        49
                                              Table 1: Social Cost of Pollution

In '000
Total                              346,497       Source

Discount Rate                          5.63      real rate = T-bill - inflation expectation
Value of Life                        3,333       OECD 3 Million in 1984 dollars

2014 dollars deflated by 1984         0.43
Period                                  28
Annuity factor                       13.93

Total cost per year                 24,875




Testicular
Incidence per year                     2.1       6 additional cases per 200,000         2.1
medical cost per unit                 1.09             21.8 Million    Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (2014)
           total medical costs        2.28            8,700 new cases https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/testis.html
Prob of dying                         0.14       http://www.cancer.org/cancer/testicularcancer/detailedguide/testicular-cancer-surviva
Expected Life loss                  980.01
                 Total per year     982.30

Thyroid
Incidence per year                     140       20 per 10,000
medical cost per unit                 0.49                9 bn total ex Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (2014)
                Total per year       68.30               20 million     only             0.4 cured     http://www.thyroid.org/media-m



Kydney
Incidence per year                       21      3 per thousand people
medical cost per unit first year      19.95              46 : https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/103/2/117/25
next 4 years                           7.92          6.255 for every continuing year       : https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/103
           total medical costs       585.25
Prob of dying                          0.27      http://www.cancer.net/cancer-types/kidney-cancer/statistics
Expected Life loss                  18,900
                 Total per year     19,486

Ulceritative colitis
Incidence per year                     0.7       1 per 100,000
medical cost per unit                 2.82       Cohen et al (2010)               6
                  total per year      1.97

Pregnancy-indued hypertension
High blood pressure                     21       extra 150 case per 10,000 pregnant women. 4% of 35,000 pregnant women
Preeclampsia                            14       extra 100 case per 10,000 pregnant women. 4% of 35,000 pregnant women
Total incidence per year                35
medical cost per unit                   70       Pourat et al (2013).
                total per year        2450


Prevalence

High cholesterol                      4200       600 per 10,0000
medical cost per unit                  0.45      Total exp 36.25 bn     Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (2014)
                 total per year      1,886       35 million             https://www.cdc.gov/cholesterol/cholesterol_education_month.
                                                  1.035714 in 2014
                                                  0.449151 in 1984




                                                                                                                                         50
                                    Table 2: DuPont’s Directors – History

    (The following table lists all DuPont’s directors in 1984. Aside from their names and roles, we detail
    whether the director was an insider or not; the length of his/her tenure; when did s/he stepped down from
    DuPont’s board; approximately when did s/he “stepped down” from the labor market more generally
    (e.g., retired/died); and whether his/her name was mentioned in articles regarding C8 once the bad news
    broke. Remember: the first time serious media attention was directed to the C8 debacle was in 2003. Our
    purpose is to show the 1984 directors’ status at the time the bad news breaks.)

Insider?      Name              Role              Committee         Director Stepped        Stepped down             Media
                                                                     since    down           from Labor             mentions
                                                                               from             market
                                                                              board


1          Edward        Chief executive      Executive            1973        1992        Pre-2003           -
           G.            officer and          committee,                                   (Around 2002.
           Jefferson     chairman of the      finance                                      Stepped down
                         board                committee                                    as CEO in 1986,
                                                                                           when reaching
                                                                                           retiring age. Died
                                                                                           2006)




1          Ralph E.      Vice chairman of     Executive            1981        1987        post-2003            -
           Bailey        the board            committee,
                                              finance
                                              committee

1          Richard    Vice chairman of        Executive            1973        1994        Pre-2003 (in         (only in
           E. Heckert the board               committee,                       (retired)   1994)                relation to
                                              finance
                                                                                                                helping
                                              committee
                                                                                                                design
                                                                                                                TSCA)


1          David K.      Executive vice       Executive            1981        1988        Died 1990            -
           Barnes        president            committee

0          Andrew F. President of             Audit Committee 1974             1998        Remained a           -
           Brimmer   Brimmer &                                                             consultant post-
                     Company                                                               2003. Died 2012
                     (economic and
                     financial
                     consulting)



                                                                                                           51
0   Charles  Deputy chairman Finance              1981     Before     Post 2003          -
    R.       of the board at committee                     2003
    Bronfman Seagram


0   Edgar M. Chief executive      Compensation    1981     Before     Post-2003          -
    Bronfman officer and          committee                2003
    (Sr.)    chairman of the
             board at
             Seagram

0   Charles L. Chief executive    Finance         1976     1992       Died 2003          -
    Brown      officer and        committee,
               chairman of the    compensation
               board at           committee
               American
               Telephone and
               Telegraph
               (AT&T)

0   Norman      (part of DuPont                   1972     1984       Pre-2003           -
    A.          family)
    Copeland



R   Joseph A. -                   -               1968     1987       Retired pre-2003 -
    Dallas

0   Louisa C.   -                 Audit Committee 1982     2006                          -
    Duemling                                               (part of
                                                           the
                                                           DuPont
                                                           Family)

0   Edward B. -                   Audit Committee 1977 (   2005       Post-2003          -
    duPont                                                 (part of
                                                           DuPont
                                                           family)


0   Irénée      -                 Finance         1959     1988       Pre-2003           -
    DuPont,                       committee
    Jr.

0   George P. Director,      Finance              1966     1987       Pre-2003           -
    Edmonds Wilmington Trust committee,
              Company        compensation
                             committee




                                                                                    52
0   Harold       Consultant at    Audit Committee 1982    1985   Died 1995        -
    Fieldsteel   Seagram


1   Robert C.    Executive vice   Executive       1979    1989   Pre-2003         -
    Forney       president,       committee
                 DuPont

0   Crawford     -                Finance         1942    1988   Died 1993        -
    H.                            committee
    Greene-
    walt

1   Howard       MIT/ Honorary    Compensation    1972    1994   Pre-2003         -
    W.           chairman of      committee,
    Johnson      DuPont           finance
                                  committee


R   Gilbert E.   -                Audit Committee 1977    1987   Pre-2003         -
    Jones

R   Edward R. -                   -               1969    1989   Pre-2003         -
    Kane


0   Margaret     Vice president of Audit Committee 1979   1995   Pre-2003         -
    P.           corporate affairs
    Mackimm      at Dart&Kraft Inc.


R   Charles                       Finance         1961    1987   Died 1995        -
    B. McCoy                      committee


0   Dean R.      Consultant at    Audit Committee 1981    1992   Died 2005        -
    McKay        IBM
1   Constanti Executive vice      Executive       1983    1995   Died 1999        -
    ne S.     president, Du       committee
    Nicandros Pont



1   Wilfred P.   Executive vice   Executive       1983    1987   Pre-2003         -
    Schmoe       president,       committee
                 DuPont


R   Edward                        -               1981    1987   Pre-2003         -
    Shapiro



                                                                             53
R   Irving S.   Partner at         Finance        1970   1988       Died 2001             -
    Shapiro     Skadden, Arps,     committee,
                Slate,             compensation
                Meagher&Flom       committee
                law firm




1   H.          Manager at         -              1981   2006       2006
    Rodney      computer                                 (Part of
    Sharp III   systems section,                         DuPont
                finance                                  Family)
                department of
                DuPont

1   William G. Executive vice      Executive      1977   1987       Pre-2003              -
    Simeral    president,          committee                        (Retired 1987;
               DuPont                                               died 2009)

1   Edgar S.    Executive vice     Executive      1982   2000       Pre-2003              -
    Woolard     president, Du      committee             (was       (Retired 2000)
    Jr.         Pont                                     CEO till
                                                         1995)




                                                                                     54
