                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE EFFECT OF HOUSE PRICES ON HOUSEHOLD BORROWING:
                              A NEW APPROACH

                                         James Cloyne
                                         Kilian Huber
                                         Ethan Ilzetzki
                                         Henrik Kleven

                                       Working Paper 23861
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23861


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017


We thank Orazio Attanasio, Richard Blundell, Christopher Carroll, Eric French, Adam Guren,
Amir Kermani, Erzo Luttmer, Atif Mian, Magne Mogstad, Emi Nakamura, Ricardo Reis, David
Romer, Sebastian Siegloch, David Sraer, Jón Steinsson, Amir Sufi, Joseph Vavra, Garry Young,
and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and discussions. This research was
carried out as part of the Bank of England’s One Bank Research Agenda. It uses Financial
Conduct Authority (FCA) Product Sales Data that have been provided to the Bank of England
under a data-sharing agreement. The FCA Product Sales Data include regulated mortgage
contracts only, and therefore exclude other regulated home finance products such as home
purchase plans and home reversions, and unregulated products such as second charge lending and
buy-to-let mortgages. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Bank of England, the Monetary Policy Committee, the Financial Policy
Committee or the Prudential Regulatory Authority. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23861.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by James Cloyne, Kilian Huber, Ethan Ilzetzki, and Henrik Kleven. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of House Prices on Household Borrowing: A New Approach
James Cloyne, Kilian Huber, Ethan Ilzetzki, and Henrik Kleven
NBER Working Paper No. 23861
September 2017
JEL No. D14,E21,E32,E43,E51,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate the effect of house prices on household borrowing using administrative mortgage
data from the UK and a new empirical approach. The data contain household-level information
on house prices and borrowing in a panel of homeowners, who refinance at regular and quasi-
exogenous intervals. The data and setting allow us to develop an empirical approach that exploits
house price variation coming from idiosyncratic and exogenous timing of refinance events around
the Great Recession. We present two main results. First, there is a clear and robust effect of house
prices on borrowing, but the responsiveness is smaller than recent US estimates. Second, the
effect of house prices on borrowing can be explained largely by collateral effects. We study the
collateral channel in two ways: through a multivariate and non-parametric heterogeneity analysis
of proxies for collateral and wealth effects, and through a test that exploits interest rate notches
that depend on housing collateral.

James Cloyne                                     Ethan Ilzetzki
Department of Economics                          London School of Economics
University of California, Davis                  Houghton Street
One Shields Avenue                               London WC2A 2AE
Davis, CA 95616                                  e.ilzetzki@LSE.ac.uk
and NBER
jcloyne@ucdavis.edu                              Henrik Kleven
                                                 Department of Economics and
Kilian Huber                                     Woodrow Wilson School
CEP, LSE                                         Princeton University
Houghton Street                                  238 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
London WC2A 2AE                                  Princeton, NJ 08540
United Kingdom                                   kleven@princeton.edu
k.huber@lse.ac.uk
1    Introduction

It is a well-known fact that house prices are strongly correlated with household borrowing and
consumption over the business cycle. These comovements have existed for a long time and were
especially strong around the Great Recession. We illustrate this in Figure A.I, which shows the
evolution of house price growth, consumption growth, and mortgage debt growth in the US and
UK over the last four decades. Motivated by such macro patterns, a leading narrative about the
Great Recession argues that house price swings drive borrowing and consumption (e.g. Mian &
Sufi 2011, 2014; Mian et al. 2013; Kaplan et al. 2015). In this paper we revisit this question using
a new approach, providing evidence both on the effect of house prices on borrowing and on the
underlying mechanisms driving the effect.
    This is an area where causal identification is particularly difficult, because house price variation
is endogenous and compelling quasi-experiments are difficult to find. The time series evidence in
Figure A.I does not have a causal interpretation, a point emphasized by Campbell & Cocco (2007)
and Attanasio et al. (2009, 2011). Much of the recent literature instead uses variation in house price
growth across geographical areas, which raises concerns about confounding regional shocks (such
as shocks to local income expectations) that drive both house prices and the outcome of interest.
This requires the use of an instrument for regional house price growth, but fully conclusive instru-
ments are difficult to find.1
    Motivated by these challenges, we consider a different setting and a different approach to study
the effect of house prices on borrowing. We examine the borrowing decisions of home refinancers
using administrative data on the universe of mortgage contracts in the UK from 2005-2015. Our
data and setting offer three main advantages. First, the dataset has information on individual house
prices from mortgage appraisals by lenders. We present evidence showing that, in the UK, mort-
gage appraisals provide unbiased measures of actual house prices. Second, the data has a panel
dimension as many homeowners refinance several times during the 10-year window we consider.
This results from the fact that refinancing is a frequent phenomenon in the UK, because long-term
fixed interest mortgages are not available (see Best et al. 2015). The panel dimension of the data
   1
     Much recent work instruments regional house price growth using a topography-based measure of housing supply
elasticities, namely proximity to mountains and oceans that restrict supply (as constructed by Saiz 2010). The idea is
that regional housing markets are exposed differently to demand shocks because of their topography. A debate about
this instrument highlights potential issues with the exclusion restriction and defiers (see e.g., Davidoff 2013, 2016).


                                                          1
allows us to control for a rich set of fixed effects that deal with the standard confounders discussed
in the literature. For example, confounding regional shocks will not be a threat to identification
here as we control for county-by-time fixed effects.
    Third and finally, the institutional setting helps with identification. Most mortgage products in
the UK come with a relatively low interest rate for a short time period, typically 2-5 years, followed
by a much higher reset rate. This creates a strong incentive to refinance around the onset of the
reset rate, and we show that most homeowners do in fact refinance around this time. This implies
that the timing of refinance is determined by past contract choices, namely the duration of the
initial low interest rate in the last contract.2 These mortgage institutions combined with the large
house price swings over the period we consider create a potential quasi-experiment. Refinancers
face very different house price shocks depending on whether they refinance before, during, or after
the housing crisis, and this timing is determined largely by a mortgage contract choice made in the
past. Loosely worded, we use the Great Recession interacted with pre-determined, idiosyncratic
contract choices as a quasi-experiment for house prices.
    We present three main sets of results. The first set of results concerns the impact of house
prices on homeowner borrowing. While such borrowing effects are interesting in their own right
(e.g. Mian & Sufi 2011), they are also indicative of the potential consumption effects of house prices
and they relate to the same underlying mechanisms as consumption. We find clear evidence that
house price appreciation induces homeowners to increase borrowing by extracting equity from
their home, but the magnitude of the response is smaller than suggested by recent US estimates.
The elasticity of borrowing with respect to house prices lies between 0.2-0.3 and is robust across
a range of specifications.3 In our preferred specification, the elasticity is identified from within-
individual variation in house price growth. This variation comes from homeowners who refinance
at least twice and experience different house price shocks due to how their (quasi-exogenous)
refinance timing interacts with the housing cycle. Unlike previous studies, our results are based
on non-parametric, graphical analyses in which we do not impose any a priori assumptions on
functional form. A finding from this approach is that the borrowing elasticity is constant across
the distribution of house price changes.4
   2
     This quasi-exogeneity of refinancing stands in contrast to the US setting where the decision to refinance is endoge-
nous to factors such as income shocks, liquidity needs, and the market interest rate (see Hurst & Stafford 2004).
   3
     These elasticity estimates are roughly half the size of the US estimates provided by Mian & Sufi (2011).
   4
     The finding of an isoelastic relationship motivates our focus on log-log specifications through most of the paper,
because the log-log coefficient is a direct estimate of the elasticity (in robustness checks, we also report estimates of
the marginal propensity to borrow). Reporting the elasticity also eases comparisons to the part of the literature that
estimates the elasticity of total borrowing, as opposed to only mortgage borrowing, because there is no mechanical


                                                           2
    The second set of results concerns patterns of heterogeneity and mechanisms. The two main
reasons why house prices may affect borrowing are wealth effects and collateral effects (see e.g.,
Sinai & Souleles 2005; Berger et al. 2015).5 All else equal, the wealth effect should be larger for older
homeowners who have short horizons and are therefore in a position to cash in on their housing
wealth, while the collateral effect should be larger for more leveraged homeowners. The existing
literature has tried to distinguish between different mechanisms by studying such patterns of het-
erogeneity (Campbell & Cocco 2007; Attanasio et al. 2009, 2011). A challenge for such exercises,
however, is that different dimensions of heterogeneity are highly correlated. For example, older
homeowners have shorter horizons and more asset risk, but are also less levered, and so it is not
clear if the age profile is picking up wealth or collateral effects. We resolve this issue through
a multivariate and non-parametric analysis of heterogeneity in the elasticity of borrowing with
respect to house prices. We consider four dimensions simultaneously: loan-to-value (LTV), age,
income, and income growth. Our approach shows how the borrowing elasticity varies across bins
of a given dimension, while simultaneously allowing for differences in the elasticity across bins of
the other three dimensions. The striking finding from this analysis is that there is essentially no
heterogeneity in any dimension except one — loan-to-value — but this dimension is strong. More
levered households are more responsive to house prices, with borrowing elasticities around 0.7
at loan-to-value ratios above 85%. By contrast, the age profile is completely flat after controlling
non-parametrically for the other dimensions.
    The strong relationship between borrowing elasticities and LTV is consistent with evidence on
subprime borrowing in the US (Mian & Sufi, 2009, 2011), and it is strongly suggestive of collateral
effects. The UK mortgage market offers an interesting way to investigate the collateral channel
more deeply, arising from the presence of observable credit constraints that depend on collateral.
Specifically, as described and analyzed by Best et al. (2015), the mortgage interest rate features
discrete jumps (notches) at critical LTV thresholds. These notches can be interpreted as soft credit
constraints, around which increases in LTV (reductions in collateral) sharply increase the cost of
borrowing.6 In such a setting it is natural that house price growth leads to larger borrowing by
reason why these elasticities should differ. A possible economic reason for the elasticities to differ is that mortgage debt
is generally cheaper than other forms of consumer debt, in which case households may shift debt onto their mortgage
following a house price increase. Such shifting would lead our elasticity of mortgage borrowing to overestimate the
elasticity of total borrowing.
    5
      A third possible reason is the presence of substitution effects on housing consumption, but this channel is shut
down here as we consider refinancers who stay in their existing houses.
    6
      Conceptually, a hard credit constraint (often assumed in models) can be interpreted as the special case of a pro-
hibitively large interest rate notch at a collateral threshold.



                                                             3
moving homeowners to lower notches and reducing their interest rate, a form of collateral effect.
   This brings us to the third set of results, which shows that the borrowing elasticity depends
critically on whether the underlying price variation relaxes credit constraints (by pulling home-
owners down to lower notches), reinforces credit constraints (by pushing homeowners up to
higher notches), or leaves credit constraints unchanged. This analysis shows that the elasticity
is much higher (around 0.5) among homeowners whose collateral constraint is relaxed by house
price growth, and that the elasticity is zero among those whose collateral constraint is reinforced.
Furthermore, we present an analysis of the dynamic interaction between house price growth and
bunching responses to interest notches, which is consistent with the collateral channel. We show
that, when house price growth pulls homeowners below interest notches and relaxes their credit
constraint, they respond by extracting equity until their LTV hits an interest notch. These findings
provide direct evidence on the important role of collateral-based credit constraints in a large and
representative population of homeowners.
   Seminal contributions by Mian & Sufi (2011) and Mian et al. (2013) have shaped the debate
about the effect of house prices on household debt and consumption. Their important findings
suggest that house price booms and busts were key determinants of US economic growth before
and during the Great Recession. To identify the causal effects of house prices, Mian & Sufi (2011)
and Mian et al. (2013) rely on relatively strong assumptions about the correlation between the deter-
minants of household debt and the topography of US regions. Stroebel & Vavra (2014) and Kaplan
et al. (2015) use similar assumptions to study the mechanisms through which house prices affect
real outcomes. Influential papers by Muellbauer & Murphy (1990), Carroll et al. (2011), and Case
et al. (2013) rely on time-series or cross-state variation in house prices, which makes causal inter-
pretation difficult. The identification challenges are exemplified by Hurst & Stafford (2004), who
show that the timing of refinancing is endogenous to household liquidity shocks, and by Attana-
sio et al. (2011), who argue that macroeconomic shocks and expectations explain the correlation
between house prices and household borrowing.
   Our contribution takes the literature beyond these concerns about confounders and the validity
of topography-based instruments for house prices. We identify the causal effects of house prices
using a new quasi-experimental approach that allow us to control non-parametrically for the key
confounders discussed in the literature. Making no a priori assumptions about the functional form
between house prices and borrowing, we show that the relationship is roughly isoelastic. Exploit-
ing that our data spans the period before and after the Great Recession, we provide some of the first


                                                 4
evidence on how the borrowing elasticity varies over the economic business cycle.7 Furthermore,
our non-parametric and multivariate heterogeneity analysis is new to the literature and informs
an unresolved debate. Previous studies have found a negative age profile of wealth effects, which
is inconsistent with standard life-cycle models (Attanasio & Weber 1994; Attanasio et al. 2009, 2011;
Mian & Sufi 2011; Berger et al. 2015; Bhutta & Keys 2016). We show that the negative age profile
reflects the confounding effects of collateral and that the true age profile is flat.
      An additional contribution of our paper is to shed new light on the role of collateral constraints
in driving the effect of house prices on borrowing. The closest study to this aspect of our paper is
by DeFusco (2016). He uses a compelling natural experiment in Montgomery County, Maryland
to show that relaxations of collateral constraints increased borrowing. Our paper uses a larger and
representative sample (the full population of UK homeowners), studies the effects of both relaxing
and tightening collateral constraints, introduces the bunching methodology as a test of collateral
constraints, and examines not only the effects of a collateral shock, but generally how households
respond to a house price shock, including tests for the wealth channel. Two recent papers find that
LTV-dependent borrowing constraints affect households in response to other shocks, such as debt
reductions (Ganong & Noel 2017) and interest rate changes (Di Maggio et al. 2017).
      Given that much of the recent literature focuses on the US, it is natural to ask if our results
are transportable to the US setting. Two points are worth highlighting. First of all, our empirical
design — relying on within-individual variation — identifies micro elasticities rather than macro
elasticities. This implies that the various reasons why macro elasticities can vary across economies
(such as the underlying source of the house price shock as highlighted by Kaplan et al. 2015) are
not relevant for assessing external validity in this case. Second, while micro elasticities may clearly
vary across different markets (say because of differences in the strength of credit constraints), we
present one piece of evidence in support of external validity: When we use an empirical specifi-
cation without fixed effects (similar to previous work) and consider the pre-recession period, we
obtain borrowing elasticities of a similar magnitude to those found by Mian & Sufi (2011) for the
US between 2002-06.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional setting and data, section
3 analyzes the sources of house price variation used for identification, section 4 presents results
on the effect of house prices on borrowing, section 5 presents results on heterogeneity and mecha-
nisms, and section 6 concludes.
  7
      See also Guren et al. (2017) for an analysis of time variation in housing wealth effects.



                                                               5
2        Institutional Setting and Data

2.1       UK Mortgage Market

The UK mortgage market has several institutional features that make it an excellent laboratory for
investigating the relationship between house prices and homeowner borrowing. In contrast to the
US mortgage market, long-term fixed-rate mortgages are unavailable in the UK. Almost all mort-
gage products feature a relatively low interest rate for an initial period followed by a penalizing
reset rate.8 The initial rate typically has a duration of 2-5 years and this rate may be either fixed
or floating. The reset rate lasts for the remainder of the mortgage’s duration and is always float-
ing. The reset rate is penalizing in the sense that the same bank almost always offers an identical
mortgage product with a much lower rate. For example, at current rates a refinancer could lower
her interest payments by more than 200 basis points (without altering the amortization schedule
or other features of the mortgage) by refinancing to avoid the penalizing rate.
        In addition to the penalizing reset after the end of the initial low-interest period, most mortgage
contracts feature large early repayment charges, typically 5 or 10 percent of the outstanding loan.
These charges make it very costly to refinance or adjust borrowing before the end of the initial
period.
        The combination of penalizing reset rates and heavy early repayment charges implies that
households have strong incentives to refinance right around the end of the initial duration. To
confirm that households act on these incentives, Figure 1 shows the distribution of time between
mortgages among refinancers in our data. The distribution features large spikes in refinancing ac-
tivity around 2, 3, and 5 years after the previous mortgage, consistent with the fact that these are
the most common durations on offer. The lightly shaded bars indicate the fraction of households
in each month that refinance around the end date of their initial low-interest duration (within a
window of 2 months before and 6 months after the end date). The figure demonstrates that the
vast majority of households refinance around the time that the initial duration ends.9
        This institutional setting has the following key advantages for our empirical approach. First,
the fact that refinancing occurs around predetermined dates makes the time of refinance poten-
    8
     More than 90% of mortgage products feature such reset rate structures (see e.g., MoneyFacts.co.uk).
    9
     How do borrowers choose their mortgage’s initial duration? The main determinants in this choice are interest
rates and expectations thereof. For example, a two-year initial duration will offer a lower interest rate than a five-year
initial duration, but the five-year product hedges against interest rate increases in the remaining three years. The choice
between the two will be determined by, among other things, risk preferences. Our empirical approach will be able to
deal with unobserved heterogeneity in preferences for low-interest durations.



                                                            6
tially orthogonal to individual circumstances. This contrasts with the US setting where the deci-
sion to refinance or take out home equity loans is likely to be correlated with unusual consumption
and borrowing needs (see Hurst & Stafford 2004). Second, the fact that refinance events are fre-
quent allows us to observe the same homeowner refinancing several times, facilitating the use of
panel data methods. Third, the frequency of refinancing also implies that the market for home eq-
uity loans is minimal in the UK. As households are only a few years away from refinancing at any
given time, home-equity based borrowing is done almost exclusively through equity extraction at
the time of refinancing. Finally, it is worth highlighting that mortgage debt comprises nearly 90%
of all household debt in the UK. Thus studying borrowing responses in the mortgage market gives
a nearly complete view of household borrowing behavior.
       When households refinance, the lender appraises the house value and this appraisal deter-
mines home equity. The household’s decision about equity extraction then determines the new
debt level, the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, and the interest rate. The interest rate charged on UK
mortgages follows a step function with discrete jumps (notches) at certain LTV thresholds. The
most common interest rate notches occur at LTVs of 60%, 70%, 75%, 80%, and 85%. Figure A.II
in the appendix shows the average interest rate schedule as a function of LTV across all mortgage
products (see Best et al. 2015 for details).10 The overall level of the interest rate schedule depends
on a number of mortgage contract characteristics (including the duration of the initial interest rate),
but all contracts feature notches at critical LTV thresholds. These interest notches introduce a form
of ‘soft’ credit constraints that depend on collateral values: borrowing costs jump sharply as the
LTV ratio exceeds — and the collateral therefore falls below — the critical thresholds.11 House
price growth reduces a homeowners’s LTV ratio, allowing her to borrow at a lower interest rate if
it pulls her across interest notches. We will utilize this institutional feature to devise a test for the
collateral channel.


2.2     House Price Measurement

We measure house prices based on lenders’ house value appraisals. There are a number of useful
reasons for this. First, these appraisals provide us with house price information at the individual
level. Second, appraisals take place at every refinance event, providing us with several obser-
vations of house prices for each house-homeowner pair. Third, the appraisal provides the exact
  10
    Best et al. (2015) provide a bunching analysis of borrowing responses to these interest rate notches.
  11
    Alongside these notches, there is also a hard collateral constraint as only a handful of mortgage products are cur-
rently available at LTVs exceeding 90%.


                                                          7
house price measure used by the lender to determine collateral, the LTV ratio and the interest rate.
Hence, for capturing the collateral effect of house prices, there is no measurement error in the price
measure we use.
   Nevertheless, a potential concern with our house price measure is the presence of appraisal
bias. A literature has shown that mortgage appraisals feature systematic upward bias in the US
(e.g. Ben-David 2011; Agarwal et al. 2015, 2016), which may reduce the suitability of appraisals
for capturing the true wealth effect of house prices in that setting. However, such appraisal bias
does not seem to be a problem in the UK, as we demonstrate in two ways. First, while we do not
observe actual market prices for refinanced properties, we do observe market prices (along with
appraisals) when properties are purchased and the first mortgage is originated. Hence, Figure 2
shows a histogram of the difference between the purchase price and the appraisal for transacted
properties. The difference is zero for the vast majority of transactions, showing that appraisals line
up with the actual price for newly purchased homes.
   However, appraisal bias may be more acute for refinances than for first mortgages, as there
is no purchase price to anchor the appraisal for refinances. This motivates our second test in
which we compare actual purchase prices (for transacted properties) with appraised prices (for
refinanced properties) over time. The results are shown in Figure 3. Panel A plots the raw time
series of actual and appraised prices. Taken at face value, this panel suggests that there is bias:
appraised prices are slightly higher than purchase prices on average, and the appraised prices are
too smooth during the financial crisis. But such a comparison does not account for the fact that
the composition of properties in the two series is different, and that the composition of each series
changes over time. To be able to accurately compare the two series and their changes over time,
Panel B presents regression-adjusted price series in which we control non-parametrically for two
observables: the age of the homeowner and the postcode of the property. Specifically, we run the
following regression separately for the price and the appraisal series:


          Pi =   ∑ βt · I [quarteri ∈ t] + ∑ γk · I [agei ∈ k ] + ∑ λp · I [postcodei ∈ p] + νi ,   (1)
                  t                         k                     p


where the first term includes a full set of quarter dummies, the second term includes dummies for
twenty quantiles of the age distribution, and the third term includes dummies for twenty quan-
tiles of the postcode-level distribution of house prices. Specifically, the last term is based on the
average house price of each 6-digit postcode, and it includes dummies for the postcode’s quantile



                                                     8
position in the distribution of postcode-level prices. This term controls for the fact that the quality
of neighborhoods that feature high or low activity differs across the two series and changes over
time.
      The plotted values in Panel B are the coefficients on the quarter dummies from equation (1),
adding a constant equal to the effect of the average age and the average postcode (in each series
separately). We see that, with non-parametric controls only for age and neighborhood, the two
series track each other closely throughout the period and the recession is now clearly visible in
the appraisal series. In other words, the differences in Panel A were due to differences in sample
composition rather than real appraisal bias. We therefore conclude that appraisals are a good
reflection of true property prices in the UK market.12


2.3     Data

The data come from a novel and comprehensive regulatory dataset containing the universe of
mortgage product sales. These data are collected by the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)
and available to restricted members of staff at the FCA and the Bank of England. This Product
Sales Database (PSD) has information on all completed household mortgage product originations
from April 2005, but does not include commercial or buy-to-let mortgages.13
      Regulated lenders are required to submit quarterly information on all mortgage originations.
The data include a range of information about the mortgage such as the loan size, the date the
mortgage became active, the house price appraisal, the interest rate charged during the introduc-
tory period, whether the interest rate is fixed or variable, the end date of the initial duration (the
time at which the higher reset rate starts applying), whether mortgage payments include amor-
tization, and the mortgage term over which the full loan will be repaid. The data also include a
number of borrower characteristics such as age, gross income, and whether the income is solely or
jointly earned.14
      Another useful feature of the PSD is that it contains information on whether the household is a
refinancer. Using information about the characteristics of the property and the borrower, refinanc-
  12
     Further evidence against consequential appraisal bias is that the equity extraction elasticity remains stable when
controlling for fixed effects for month, household, and county x year, as well as a number of time-varying household
characteristics (results in Section 4.2). Typical sources of appraisal bias are that certain households or banks tend to
demand biased appraisals or that region- or household-specific income shocks lead to biased appraisals. The control
variables account for all these possibilities.
  13
     See https://www.fca.org.uk/firms/product-sales-data for officially published high level data.
  14
     Full details of the dataset can be found on the FCA’s PSD website.




                                                           9
ing households can be matched over time to construct a panel. As noted above, since refinancing
is a regular occurrence in the UK mortgage market, this provides us with multiple observations
for the same household over the 11 years of the sample. Using our new panel, we can compute
a range of useful household-level statistics including house price growth, mortgage debt growth,
amortization, and equity extraction/injection.
    Overall, the PSD contains around 14 million mortgage observations. Around half of these
observations are mortgages for new house purchases, while the other half are refinancing events.
Since we need to calculate the house price change and equity extracted for our analysis, we can
only use refinancing observations where we observe a previous mortgage event (either the house
purchase or a previous refinancing event) by the same household for the same property. Our
sample is therefore a subset of the refinancers in the PSD.
    Table 1 summarizes the data. Panel A compares descriptive statistics for home buyers (column
1), all refinancers (column 2), and refinancers in our estimation sample (column 3). There are no
significant differences between the three groups in the share of couples, income, income growth,
interest rate, and house price. Some differences between buyers and refinancers are to be expected.
For example, buyers tend to be younger and have higher LTV ratios.
    Panel B of Table 1 reports statistics for the 1.38 million observations in our estimation sample,
split into three subsamples. As discussed above, practically all mortgages in the UK have an initial
duration with a favorable interest rate, after which a higher reset rate kicks in. This gives a strong
incentive for refinancing around the onset of the reset rate. The subsample in column 1 of panel B
includes the 0.48 million observations where we know refinancing took place “on-time” (defined
as between 2 months before and 6 months after the reset rate onset), while column 2 includes the
0.28 million observations where we know refinancing took place “off-time”. For a large part of the
sample, 0.61 million observations, we do not observe when the reset rate kicks in, because lenders
were not always required to report this statistic to the Financial Conduct Authority. We summarize
these observations in column 3. There are no significant differences across the three groups in any
of the observables.



3   House Price Variation

There is large house price variation in the data. Figure 4 shows the distribution of house price
growth between refinance events for homeowners in our estimation sample. To measure individ-


                                                 10
ual house price growth, the sample conditions on observing homeowners at least twice. The first
price observation for each homeowner may come either from the first mortgage in the house or
a refinance, while subsequent price observations always come from refinances. The distribution
shows that house price growth lies between -30% and +60% across refinance events, giving us lots
of variation to work with. We note that there is some round-number bunching at zero price growth,
suggesting that some lenders set the new house price equal to the old house price whenever the
two are very close (see Kleven 2016 for a discussion of round-number bunching).
   While there is large house price variation in the data, the challenge is that much of it may
be endogenous to demand factors that impact our outcome of interest. Our approach starts by
controlling for obvious confounders by absorbing a rich set of fixed effects. Individual fixed ef-
fects control for time-invariant individual preferences for borrowing, month fixed effects control
for time-varying macro factors that affect borrowing, while county-by-year fixed effects control
for local, time-varying shocks to borrowing demand. Specifically, ‘counties’ are defined as local
planning authorities (or councils), of which there are more than 400 in the UK and 32 in London
alone.
   Figure 5 shows the distribution of residual house price growth, after absorbing the fixed effects
described above. Allowing for individual fixed effects on house price growth gives an R-squared
of one among households with just two mortgage observations (one price growth observation),
so the figure considers the sample of homeowners observed at least three times. Panel A shows
the raw distribution of house price growth in this subsample as a benchmark (it looks similar to
the raw distribution in the previous figure), while Panel B shows the residualized distribution.
Importantly, there is large remaining house price variation even after controlling for fixed effects,
between -20% and +20% across refinance events.
   What drives this residual variation? In general there can be two sources of remaining varia-
tion. The first is that different properties experience different price growth within counties, so that
county-by-year fixed effects do not fully absorb the housing cycle. This arises because of varia-
tion across neighborhoods within counties, variation across property types within neighborhoods,
or completely idiosyncratic variation driven by features of the specific house. On the latter, note
that the value of a specific house may increase due to home improvements undertaken by the
owner, which would not be real house price appreciation. However, the data include an indicator
for home improvement activity, which allow us to deal with this potential issue. Moreover, as
described below, we consider IV-specifications that are unlikely to be affected by home improve-


                                                  11
ments.
   The second source of variation is idiosyncratic variation in the timing of refinance events rel-
ative to the price cycle. As described above, homeowners have a strong incentive to refinance
around the onset of the reset rate, typically after 2, 3 or 5 years, as these are the most common
products in the market. Hence, the timing of refinance is determined to a large extent by a dura-
tion choice made several years in advance, creating arguably quasi-exogenous variation. Figure 6
illustrates conceptually how this works. It compares two homeowners who start out at the same
time (time 0), live in houses with the same price cycle (the solid blue line), but have different pref-
erences over low-interest rate durations. One homeowner prefers 2-year fixed interest rate loans,
while the other prefers 3-year fixed interest loans. Of course, this difference in duration prefer-
ences will be related to, for example, risk preferences that may themselves impact on borrowing
behavior, but such time-invariant preference heterogeneity is absorbed by the individual fixed ef-
fect. What creates variation here is the interaction of idiosyncratic duration preferences with the
housing cycle: The 2-year person refinances three times over a 6-year period, facing either positive
or negative price shocks at each event, whereas the 3-year person refinances only two times facing
a zero price shock each time. Our empirical strategy exploits this kind of within-person variation
in price growth.
   In Figure 7 we illustrate this point using the actual data. The figure plots average house price
growth for homeowners who refinance at different times (in January of different years) by bins of
the duration of their last mortgage. The two panels show the same graphs, but highlight two differ-
ent homeowners who experience very different within-person price patterns due to past duration
choices. The homeowner in Panel A refinances in January 2010 coming out of a 2-year mortgage
chosen in 2008, and refinances again in January 2013 coming out of a 3-year mortgage chosen
in 2010. This homeowner experiences a substantial negative shock the first time around, and a
substantial positive shock the second time around. The homeowner in Panel B also refinances in
January 2010 and January 2013, with the only difference being that in 2010 she was coming out of
a 5-year mortgage chosen in 2005. As a result, this homeowner faces similar positive price growth
in both refinance events. The empirical approach we propose uses this kind of within-person vari-
ation for identification: i.e., we use the change over time for Person A (who goes from negative to
positive price growth) relative to the change over time for Person B (who goes from positive to pos-
itive price growth). This is a form of triple-differences strategy as we are comparing within-person
changes in price growth.


                                                  12
   The exogeneity of this duration-driven variation in house price growth requires that homeown-
ers are not choosing durations in anticipation of future house price growth and future borrowing
needs. For example, if homeowners were choosing 2-year mortgages (rather than 3-year mort-
gages) in late 2005 — anticipating that this would put them at the peak of the boom (rather than
at the bottom of the bust) — to be able to extract more equity for consumption goods in late 2007,
then our estimates would not be causally identified. A sufficient condition for ruling out such
hyper-rational and forward-looking behavior is that homeowners are not able to forecast house
prices with much precision. This assumption seems particularly persuasive around the time of
the Great Recession, and it is consistent with a growing consensus that homeowners tend to have
biased beliefs about future house prices (e.g., Case & Shiller 1989; Shiller 2007; Case et al. 2012;
Kaplan et al. 2015). However, we do not necessarily need bias or irrationality for our strategy to
work; a sufficient amount of house price uncertainty will do.
   Another way of gauging the exogeneity of duration-driven house price growth is to check if
duration choices, besides predicting future house price appreciation, predict other things of rele-
vance to borrowing. Hence, Figure A.III in the appendix shows how much of the residual price
variation (Panel A) and residual income variation (Panel B) can be explained by past duration
choices, having absorbed all the other fixed effects. The figure shows that, while duration choices
are strong predictors of future price growth, they do not predict future income. This lends further
support to our strategy.
   We present results from two types of strategies. We first consider OLS fixed effects regressions,
which use all of the residual variation for identification. This includes idiosyncratic variation in
price growth across properties within counties, and it includes idiosyncratic variation in the timing
of refinance events. As discussed earlier, a concern with the first source of variation is that it may
be partly driven by home improvements. Hence, we also consider IV-regressions in which we
construct instruments based on past duration choices (which determine refinance timing). These
results should not be affected by home improvements. Reassuringly, our OLS fixed effects and IV
results turn out to be quite similar.




                                                 13
4        Do House Prices Affect Borrowing?

4.1        Baseline Specification

To establish a baseline, we start from a specification that is similar in spirit to specifications used
in existing work. Specifically, we consider the following specification


                                    ∆ log Dit =    ∑ βj · I [∆ log Pit ∈ j ] + νit ,                                  (2)
                                                    j


where Dit and Pit denote mortgage debt and house prices, respectively, for individual i at time t.
While we primarily consider log-specifications, we will also explore level-specifications and show
that those yield the same qualitative results.15 We allow for different bins of house price growth
to have different effects on borrowing, as we do not (yet) want to commit to a specific functional
form.
         Equation (2) corresponds to the specification used by Mian & Sufi (2011), except for three dif-
ferences: (i) we rely on individual rather than regional house price variation, (ii) we allow for a
non-parametric specification without a priori functional form restrictions, and (iii) we do not in-
strument house prices using topography-based housing supply elasticities.16
         Panel A of Figure 8 shows the results from this specification. It plots the log-change in mortgage
debt against bins of the log-change in house prices. Three insights are worth highlighting. First,
overall there is a clear positive relationship between house price growth and debt growth. Debt
growth changes from 0% to 15% as house price growth changes from -10% to + 40%. Second,
there is a strong asymmetry between negative and positive price shocks: Homeowners increase
debt when their house becomes more valuable, but they do not reduce debt when their house
becomes less valuable. A possible explanation for this phenomenon is the presence of liquidity
constraints that prevent homeowners from injecting equity when negative house price shocks push
up their LTV ratios. Third, the average elasticity of borrowing across the full range of house price
growth — obtained from a log-linear specification — equals 0.3. However, this elasticity masks the
    15
     The coefficient obtained from a log-specification represents a borrowing elasticity, whereas the coefficient obtained
from a level-specification represents a marginal propensity to borrow (which can be translated into an average borrow-
ing elasticity in the population in order to compare with the log-specification).
  16
     Hilber & Vermeulen (2016) constructs a topography-based housing supply elasticity index for England (a la Saiz
2010), but not for the rest of the UK (Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales). However, besides the potential issues with
the exclusion restriction of such instruments (as discussed in the introduction), Hilber & Vermeulen (2016) show that the
instrument does not have a strong first stage in the English setting: Topography does not predict house price variation
in this country.




                                                           14
heterogeneity between the negative and positive ranges, with an elasticity of 0 in negative ranges
and an elasticity of 0.4 in positive ranges.
      Panel B of Figure 8 investigates cyclical variation in the elasticity of borrowing. Again, we con-
sider the elasticity obtained from a log-linear specification, splitting the sample into different years.
The graph shows that the borrowing elasticity is strongly pro-cyclical, with the largest elasticities
in the run-up to the recession and the smallest elasticities in the middle of the recession. This elas-
ticity cycle is consistent with the asymmetry between negative and positive shocks shown in Panel
A, but this is far from the whole story: When we condition the sample on positive price growth, or
add a fixed effect for negative price growth in the full sample, the cyclicality largely survives. In
general, there can be two possible explanations for the elasticity cycle. The first possibility is that
the true elasticity is cyclical, because the underlying mechanisms driving the effect change over
the business cycle. The second possibility is that the true elasticity is not cyclical, but rather that a
cyclical omitted variable (e.g. expectations) is creating a spurious cyclical estimate. As we move to
better identified specifications below, we will be able to distinguish between these two hypotheses.
      The outcome considered above equals total debt growth between the current and the last refi-
nance event, i.e. ∆ log Dit = log Dit − log Dit−1 . This outcome captures both the equity extraction
decision made by the homeowner at time t and the amortization between times t − 1 and t. Because
the amortization schedule was chosen as part of the last mortgage contract, it cannot respond to
house price appreciation between t − 1 and t. If there is any spurious correlation between amorti-
zation schedules and house price variation, this will lead to bias. Fortunately, we have sufficiently
detailed information about mortgage contracts to precisely assess amortization for each home-
owner. Hence, we now turn to an improved outcome variable that captures only the active equity
                                                                       P , where D P denotes the
extraction decision made at time t. This outcome equals log Dit − log Dit         it

pre-determined debt at time t based on past debt choices and amortization.17
      The results for this outcome are shown in Figure 9, which is constructed exactly as is the previ-
ous figure. The results are qualitatively similar: there is a clear positive relationship between house
price growth and borrowing overall, there is a strong asymmetry between positive and negative
house price growth, and the borrowing elasticity is cyclical. The average elasticity of borrowing
is a bit smaller here (0.23), but this reflects that the slope is now negative (as opposed to zero be-
fore) in the range of falling house prices. Within the range of increasing house prices, the elasticity
is about 0.4, corresponding to the finding in the previous figure. In the analysis that follows we
 17                     P
      That is, we have Dit = Dit−1 + amortization between t − 1 and t.



                                                          15
consider equity extraction as our outcome.


4.2     Fixed Effects Specification

Taking advantage of the fact that we observe multiple refinance events for each individual, we
augment the baseline specification with fixed effects. That is, we specify

                                      P
                      log Dict − log Dict =     ∑ βj · I [∆ log Pict ∈ j ] + αi + γt + δct + νict ,      (3)
                                                j


where the index c denotes county (local planning authority as described above), αi is an individual
fixed effect, γt is a time fixed effect (at the monthly level), and δct is a county-by-time fixed effect
(at the yearly level).18 The county-by-time fixed effect absorbs regional, time-varying factors (such
as local shocks to income expectations), thus dealing directly with the main confounder discussed
in the previous literature. By allowing for individual fixed effects in a first-differenced equation,
this has the form of a triple-differences specification relying on within-individual variation in price
growth.
      The results are shown in Figure 10, distinguishing between a specification with individual and
time fixed effects only (Panel A) and a specification that adds county-by-time fixed effects (Panel
B). The following insights emerge. First, the two different fixed-effects specifications yield almost
identical results. Once we have controlled for individual and time fixed effects, adding county-
time fixed effects have no noticeable effect. Second, the relationship between equity extraction and
house price growth is now monotonically increasing and almost perfectly linear in logs. There is
no longer any asymmetry between negative and positive shocks. Third, the borrowing elasticity is
now smaller, about 0.2.
      The results in Figure 10 could be biased by individual, time-varying effects that are correlated
with house price growth and impact on borrowing behavior. To investigate this threat to identifi-
cation, we can exploit that the data include information on a number of individual, time-varying
variables that are relevant for debt demand. Hence we consider a specification with such individ-
ual controls:

                                  P
                  log Dict − log Dict =    ∑ βj · I [∆ log Pict ∈ j ] + αi + γt + δct + Xit θ + νict ,   (4)
                                            j

 18
      There is some abuse of notation here as we use t to describe time in both months and years.




                                                           16
where Xit includes the income level, the income growth, the last mortgage interest rate, the age
of the borrower, a dummy for couples, and dummies for a range of self-reported reasons for the
current and the last refinance (including home improvement as one possible reason).
    The results are shown in Figure 11. Panel A of the figure shows that the results are completely
stable when moving to this richer specification: the average elasticity is the same and in fact the
entire functional form is the same. Panel B of the figure returns to the question of cyclicality in the
elasticity. The elasticities reported in this figure are based on a log-linear version of equation (4),
interacting the house price growth variable by year dummies. We see that the richer specification
has eliminated some, but not all of the elasticity cycle shown earlier. Hence we conclude that the
strong cycle observed for the baseline specification was partly a result of bias and partly a real
phenomenon.
    As discussed in sections 2 and 3, our empirical strategy is based on the idea that the timing
of refinance is quasi-exogenous in the UK. The argument was that homeowners tend to refinance
around the onset of the reset rate, the timing of which is determined by a duration choice made
in the last refinance event. We showed in section 2.1 that a majority of homeowners do indeed
refinance around the onset of the reset rate, but we also saw that some homeowners refinance
at other times, typically ‘too late’. There are a variety of reasons why some homeowners might
refinance late — including inattention and financial distress — but whatever the reason, it raises
the concern that such homeowners endogenously tailor the timing of refinance to house price
movements. If this is so, our estimates based on the full sample of refinancers — including both
on-time and off-time refinancers — may be subject to selection bias.
    To investigate this selection issue, Table 2 presents estimates of borrowing elasticities across
samples that vary by refinance timing: the full sample in Panel A (summarizing the results al-
ready presented), the sample of on-time refinancers in Panel B, the sample of off-time refinancers
in Panel C, and the sample of refinancers with missing duration information in Panel D. As men-
tioned earlier, even though almost all mortgage contracts in the UK (including variable-rate loans)
come with a penalizing reset rate after a certain duration, we do not observe this duration for all
homeowners as it was not always mandatory for lenders to provide it.19 Overall, the table shows
that elasticity estimates are very robust: across all four samples and fixed-effects specifications
  19
     To be clear, we always observe the actual time between refinance events, it is only the duration of the low-interest
rate period defined in the mortgage contract that we do not always observe. In the sample of homeowners with missing
duration information, the actual time between refinance events features strong bunching at 2, 3 and 5 years, showing
that these households do in fact have a fixed low-interest duration.




                                                           17
(columns 2-4), the elasticity varies between 0.17 and 0.27. It is interesting, however, that the elas-
ticity is consistently higher in the off-time sample, consistent with a small selection bias. Hence
our preferred estimates are those based on the on-time sample, featuring borrowing elasticities
that are slightly smaller that those reported above.
    Finally, we present two additional robustness checks on the fixed effects specification. The first
check investigates the issue of home improvements. While working with individual house price
information has several advantages, they do introduce a problem not present in regional-level
data: the house price variation may be driven partly by idiosyncratic home improvements, which
are endogenous and may not represent true increases in household net worth.20 As a first check we
use self-reported information on the reason for refinancing, including home improvements as one
of the reasons, that is available for part of the sample. Hence, for homeowners who reported home
improvement in their last refinance, we know that house price growth in the current refinance
is likely to be driven partly by home improvements. Hence, Table A.I shows elasticity estimates
in three subsamples: homeowners whose last refinance was for home improvements (Panel A),
homeowners whose last refinance was not for home improvements (Panel B), and homeowners
for whom the reason for the last refinance is unknown. The table shows that, for all the fixed
effects specifications, the estimated elasticity is quite stable across samples. Specifically, among
those who report no home improvement, we find elasticities that are similar to the elasticities for
the full sample discussed above. This alleviates any major concerns about home improvements,
but we acknowledge that our measure of home improvements is imperfect. Hence, the next section
goes further by presenting IV-estimates that cannot be plausibly affected by home improvements.
    The second check investigates alternative specifications. Starting from equation (3), Figure
A.IV shows how the results are affected by moving from a log-specification to a level-specification
(Panel A) and by moving from house prices to housing net worth as the explanatory variable
(Panel B). In each panel we continue to allow for different bins of the explanatory variable to have
different effects on borrowing. While the results are qualitatively unaffected by these changes, the
alternative specifications are useful for obtaining different types of parameters. Panel A yields an
estimate of the marginal propensity to borrow (equal to 0.11) as opposed to the elasticity parameter
discussed so far. Panel B yields an estimate of the elasticity with respect to housing net worth —
defined as house price minus baseline mortgage debt — as opposed to the elasticity with respect
 20
    In particular, home improvements do not increase household net worth unless they increase the house price by
more than the amount invested in the house.




                                                      18
to house prices.21 The fact that the elasticity with respect to housing net worth is considerably
smaller is a mechanical rather than substantive result: because housing net worth is only a fraction
of the house price, any given log-change in house prices translates into a much larger log-change
in housing net worth. This makes the elasticity with respect to housing net worth mechanically
smaller.


4.3      IV Specification

Our fixed effects specification relies on two sources of residual variation: (i) idiosyncratic variation
in price growth across houses within counties, (ii) idiosyncratic variation in the timing of refinance
events across homeowners. The first source of variation could be endogenous due to for example
home improvements (as discussed above) or endogenous selection into neighborhoods. Hence,
in this section we consider an IV-strategy that relies solely on variation in the (pre-determined)
timing of refinance events.
       We do not want to rely on cross-sectional variation in duration choices, because these are insur-
ance choices that reflect risk preferences and therefore may affect borrowing directly. As discussed
above (see Figure 7), the most compelling source of variation is the interaction between the dura-
tion choice in the last mortgage (say 2-year vs 3-year fixed interest rate) and the time of the current
refinance event (say 2010 vs 2011). Hence we construct instruments based on the interaction be-
tween dummies for past duration choices and dummies for the time of refinance, within different
regions. The first stage of the IV is specified as follows


              ∆ log Pict = ρ · last durationit ⊗ yeart ⊗ regioni + αi + γt + δct + Xit η + µict ,                  (5)


where ⊗ denotes the outer product, so that the instrumental variables (last durationit ⊗ yeart ⊗
regioni ) include every possible interaction between last duration dummies, year of refinance dum-
mies, and regional dummies. It is for computational reasons that the instruments are based on
year dummies (rather than month dummies) and region dummies (rather than the more disaggre-
gated county dummies). We include fixed effects for household, month and county-by-year, and
we also allow for individual, time-varying controls Xit including duration dummies on their own.
This specification implies we are identifying off of the interaction between last duration and time,
  21
     We specify housing net worth as the house price minus baseline debt (as opposed to current debt) in order to avoid
a clear endogeneity problem. This implies that the variation in housing net worth comes from the variation in house
prices, and so the two elasticities are identified from the same source of variation.



                                                          19
taking out the average effects of duration and time separately.
    The second stage of the IV is similar to the fixed effect specifications considered earlier, i.e.

                                    P
                    log Dict − log Dict = β · ∆ log
                                                 dPict + αi + γt + δct + Xit θ + νict ,                 (6)


where ∆ log
         dPict is the predicted house price growth from the first-stage specification (5).

    The results are shown in Table 3. The table shows the estimated elasticities of equity extraction
with respect to house price across five IV specifications. The richest specification in column (5)
corresponds to the specification shown in equations (5)-(6). There is a non-trivial difference in the
estimates between the basic specifications without household and month fixed effects (columns
(1)-(2)) and the richer specification with those fixed effects (columns (3)-(5)). But across the richer
specifications, the IV elasticity estimates are very stable (around 0.28-0.29) and slightly higher than
the OLS estimates shown earlier. The fact that the IV estimates are higher is consistent with a
(small) bias from home improvements in the OLS estimates: house price appreciation due to home
improvements does not represent real appreciation and would therefore tend to attenuate the OLS
estimates. These differences notwithstanding, the IV table confirms the overall qualitative results
presented so far: There is a clear positive effect of house prices on borrowing, but the effects are
smaller than recent estimates have suggested.



5    Why Do House Prices Affect Borrowing?

Having established a causal relationship between house prices and household borrowing, we now
investigate the reasons for this relationship. Berger et al. (2015) provide a theoretical foundation
for the various mechanisms that may be at play. Here we focus on the two main mechanisms
discussed in the literature.
    First, higher house prices increase homeowners’ nominal housing wealth, so that borrowing
responses may reflect the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth (Campbell & Cocco 2007;
Case et al. 2013). However, it is not obvious that such changes in nominal wealth translate into
real wealth, as highlighted by Sinai & Souleles (2005). They argue that homeownership provides
a hedge against future housing expenditures for households with long expected tenures in their
existing homes. This implies that house prices have negligible effects on lifetime net worth and
should not affect borrowing. If wealth effects are operational they must therefore rely on expected
changes in real housing consumption over the lifecycle. For example, old homeowners may expect

                                                    20
to downsize or exit the housing market in the near future, in which case house price growth tends
to increase net wealth. Young homeowners, on the other hand, have constant or increasing hous-
ing needs over the foreseeable future, so that the nominal wealth effect of house price growth will
be offset by increases in future housing expenditures. This suggests larger wealth effects for old
homeowners than for young homeowners. Hence, a number of existing papers assess the impor-
tance of wealth effects by studying heterogeneity with respect to age, but with conflicting results
(Attanasio & Weber 1994; Campbell & Cocco 2007; Attanasio et al. 2009; Mian & Sufi 2011).
       Second, housing wealth is the largest form of household collateral. An increase in nominal
housing wealth may therefore relax borrowing constraints, which tend to be proportional to col-
lateral values. The collateral channel has been studied theoretically in the macro housing litera-
ture (e.g., Aoki et al. 2004; Iacoviello 2005), and it has been argued to be empirically important for
household borrowing in a number of studies (e.g., Lustig & Nieuwerburgh 2005; Mian & Sufi 2011;
DeFusco 2016).22 The collateral channel implies heterogeneity across leverage ratios: Households
with higher leverage are more collateral constrained, and house price appreciation is therefore
more likely to relax collateral constraints for such households.
       In the next section, we take a first step towards disentangling wealth and collateral effects
based on a heterogeneity analysis that uses the power and granularity of our administrative data.
We analyze heterogeneity in the borrowing elasticity along the main dimensions predicted to de-
termine household borrowing responses, including age and leverage. This analysis suggests that
the collateral channel plays a crucial role. We then explore the collateral channel more closely in
the following section, proposing a new method to assess its empirical importance.


5.1      Heterogeneity Analysis

We investigate how borrowing elasticities vary along four dimensions of heterogeneity: loan-to-
value (LTV), age, income level, and income growth. We consider two types of specifications. Uni-
variate specifications investigate heterogeneity in each dimension separately, while multivariate
specifications allow for heterogeneity in all four dimensions simultaneously. Many dimensions
of heterogeneity are highly correlated, making it difficult to interpret results from univariate het-
erogeneity analyses. Our multivariate specifications allow us to disentangle which dimensions
truly drive heterogeneity in responsiveness, and which dimensions only appear to do so by being
  22
    The collateral channel has also been shown to be important for business investments and employment (Chaney et al.
2012; Adelino et al. 2015).



                                                         21
correlated with other relevant dimensions. We estimate specifications of the type

                                              h         i                         h         i
                           P
            log Dit − log Dit =     ∑∑ j
                                      β k
                                          · I   X k
                                                 it ∈ j   · ∆ log Pit + ∑∑ j
                                                                          λ k
                                                                              · I   X k
                                                                                     it ∈ j   + νit ,                  (7)
                                     k   j                                    k   j


where I Xitk ∈ j is a dummy equal to one when variable k (LTV, age, income, or income growth)
               

falls in bin j. By allowing for a large set of bin dummies in each dimension (7 LTV bins, 9 age bins,
7 income bins, and 7 income growth bins), and by allowing for these dummies to affect both the
slope and the intercept, our analysis is very non-parametric. Hence, the heterogeneity patterns we
uncover will not be driven by overly restrictive functional form assumptions. We do assume that
the effect of prices on borrowing within dimension k and bin j is log-linear, but this assumption is
a good approximation as we show below. To increase precision, specification (7) does not include
the household and time fixed effects considered in the previous section. It is possible to consider
such an extension and the heterogeneity results turn out to be very similar, but standard errors
increase substantially in fixed effects specifications with heterogeneity.
    In Figure 12 we investigate heterogeneity with respect to age and LTV, which are the two main
proxies for wealth and collateral effects as discussed above. The top panels show heterogeneity by
pre-determined LTV, defined as the LTV ratio absent any equity extraction/injection and absent
any house price growth between the current and last refinance event. This LTV is determined by
the last choice of mortgage debt and amortization along with the last house price. The graphs
show a strong monotonic relationship between the borrowing elasticity and LTV. This holds both
when studying this dimension of heterogeneity on its own (Panel A) and when controlling for the
other dimensions of heterogeneity (Panel B). In fact, going from the univariate to the multivari-
ate specification hardly affects the relationship, although it increases standard errors somewhat.
Hence, homeowners with low levels of collateral borrow much more against house price increases
than do those with high levels of collateral. The strong degree of LTV heterogeneity is not driven
by the log-linearity assumption made in equation (7), which we show in a fully non-parametric
specification in appendix Figure A.V.23
   23
      Figure A.V presents non-parametric estimates allowing for a large set of bin dummies for house price growth (as in
the previous section) within three separate LTV categories. The three samples correspond to low-leverage homeowners
(LTV below 60%), intermediate-leverage homeowners (LTV between 60-80%), and high-leverage homeowners (LTV
above 80%). Two insights are worth highlighting. First, the level of equity extraction decreases with leverage as one
might expect: highly leveraged households have a larger stock of existing debt, are more constrained in their borrowing
capacity, and should be on an amortization path over their lifecycle. Second, the slope of equity extraction increases with
leverage, consistent with our previous findings on elasticity heterogeneity. That is, homeowners with high leverage
(low collateral) extract less equity, but are more inclined to increase equity extraction when house prices go up.




                                                            22
   The bottom panels of Figure 12 investigate the effect of age. These panels show heterogeneity
in the borrowing elasticity across 5-year bins between the ages of 20 and 60. Panel C presents
results without controls for the other dimensions of heterogeneity. The figure shows the opposite
pattern of wealth effects than what is suggested by standard lifecycle theory: young households
are more responsive to house prices than old households. A similar pattern of heterogeneity was
found by Attanasio et al. (2009) using UK survey data and structural methods. They suggest that
this puzzling pattern might arise because the young tend to be more leveraged than the old, so
that collateral effects confound wealth effects (see Berger et al. 2015 for a similar argument). Panel
D investigates and confirms this hypothesis. It shows that, once we control for LTV (as well as
income and income growth), the age profile of borrowing elasticities is completely flat.
   For completeness, Figure 13 displays heterogeneity across income levels (top panels) and in-
come growth (bottom panels). Income is measured at the time of the last refinancing event, while
income growth is measured as the log-change since the last refinancing event. We use dummies
representing seven quantiles of the distribution of each of these variables. Once again, we consider
the univariate specification on the left and the multivariate specification on the right. These graphs
do not show any noticeable patterns of heterogeneity: they are quite flat across both income levels
and income growth in both the univariate and multivariate cases.
   How should we interpret these heterogeneity patterns? The fact that leverage is such a strong
predictor of borrowing elasticities, even after controlling non-parametrically for other correlated
factors, while at the same time the other factors have no predictive power clearly points to the col-
lateral channel as being central. A few qualifications to this interpretation are worth mentioning.
First, wealth effects may not be the only force driving heterogeneity across age (even conditional
on the other controls), and so the flat age profile does not rule out wealth effects. Second, wealth
effects may themselves lead to heterogeneity across LTV ratios, even absent a collateral channel.
This issue is particularly pronounced in the log-log specification (7). A one percent increase in the
house price represents a five percent increase in housing net worth for a homeowner at 80% LTV,
but only a two percent increase for a homeowner at 50% LTV. Mechanically, there are heteroge-
neous wealth changes depending on LTV. As a robustness check, we have therefore tried a level
specification as well, finding very similar qualitative results. This strengthens the conclusion that
the collateral channel is crucial. Third and finally, leverage may be correlated with unobserved
individual characteristics that affect borrowing behavior. A candidate would be self-control prob-
lems. As Mian & Sufi (2011) note, it is likely that households with greater self-control problems will


                                                 23
be observed as credit constrained. However, when augmenting equation (7) with individual fixed
effects (which should pick up self-control problems), we find that our heterogeneity results are
qualitatively unchanged (albeit with larger standard errors). Controlling for fixed effects ensures
that the variation in leverage isn’t confounded with individual characteristics, such as self-control.
       To conclude, the heterogeneity results are strongly suggestive of the collateral channel, but
perhaps not fully conclusive to a sceptic. In the next section, we propose a more sophisticated
test — one that exploits discrete changes in the tightness of collateral constraints around interest
notches — providing our final piece of evidence in favor of the collateral channel.


5.2      Collateral Channel: A Test Using Interest Notches

The UK setting offers a novel way of investigating the collateral channel arising from the presence
of observable credit constraints that depend on collateral. As described in section 2.1, the mort-
gage interest rate schedule features discrete jumps (notches) at critical LTV thresholds. There are
notches at LTV ratios of 50%, 60%, 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, and 90%.24 These notches introduce ‘soft’
credit constraints: as the LTV ratio surpasses (and housing collateral therefore falls below) one of
the critical thresholds, the cost of borrowing increases sharply.25 The direct incentive created by
these interest notches is for homeowners to choose LTV ratios below one of the thresholds, thus
creating bunching in the LTV distribution. Such bunching represents borrowing responses to the
interest rate — rather than responses to the house price — and was studied in detail by Best et al.
(2015). Here we consider whether house price movements interact with bunching responses to
interest notches in a way that is consistent with the collateral channel. The basic idea is that house
price growth, by increasing collateral, moves homeowners below interest notches and induces
borrowing responses due to reduced costs of borrowing.
       We start by presenting a simple test of heterogeneity, similar in spirit to the preceding analyses,
before turning to a more sophisticated and conclusive analysis. Specifically, Figure 14 investigates
if the equity extraction elasticity depends on whether the underlying price variation moves home-
owners across notches and in which direction. We define the collateral constraint as being relaxed
(reinforced) when house price variation moves the homeowner at least one notch down (up) and
  24
    Figure A.II illustrates most of these notches.
  25
    The difference between such soft borrowing constraints and the hard borrowing constraints often assumed in the-
oretical models can be interpreted in terms of the size of the notch: a hard borrowing constraint is one where the
borrowing cost jumps prohibitively at a threshold. In fact, the 90% LTV notch serves as a hard borrowing constraint
for most homeowners in our data, because very few lenders have offered mortgage products above this level since the
global financial crisis.



                                                        24
thus reduces (increases) the mortgage interest rate. Otherwise, the collateral constraint is defined
as “unchanged.”26 Panel A of the figure considers a baseline specification without any other con-
trols. This is a specification like (7) in which house price growth is interacted with dummies for
the three notch scenarios (relaxed/reinforced/unchanged), but without simultaneously control-
ling for other dimensions of heterogeneity. This analysis shows that the elasticity is the highest
(close to 0.5) when the collateral constraint is relaxed, and that the elasticity is the lowest (close to
zero) when the collateral constraint is reinforced.27 The fact that the elasticity is essentially zero
when the collateral constraint is reinforced may be due to collateral constraints interacting with
liquidity constraints, making it hard for homeowners to inject cash when house price growth in-
creases their cost of borrowing. As a robustness check, Panel B introduces household and month
fixed effects in the specification. This graph confirms the qualitative relationship between the bor-
rowing elasticity and changes in collateral constraints, although the effect is smaller than in the
baseline specification without fixed effects. The asymmetric response to relaxing and tightening
borrowing constraints is suggestive of the importance of the collateral channel.
    To provide more conclusive evidence of the collateral channel, Figure 15 analyzes the dynamic
interaction between house price growth and bunching responses to interest rate notches. This
figure focuses on the sample of households who are pulled down to a lower notch by house price
growth, i.e. households whose collateral constraint is relaxed. For this analysis, it is useful to
                                                                                         P /P
formally define three different LTV concepts. First, we define the pre-determined LTV = Dit   it−1

as the homeowner’s LTV at time t given past mortgage choices (the debt level and amortization
                                                                                             P /P
schedule chosen at time t − 1) and the old house price. Second, we define the passive LTV = Dit   it

as the homeowner’s LTV at time t given past mortgage choices and the new house price. This is
the LTV that would apply if the homeowner simply rolled over her debt at time t, i.e. if she were
“passive.” Third, there is the actual chosen LTV = Dit /Pit that includes any equity extraction or
injection at time t. By this terminology, the sample in the figure includes borrowers for whom the
passive LTV is at least one notch down from their pre-determined LTV.
    The figure shows two panels in which we compare the density distributions of the three LTV
measures defined above. The x-axis in each panel represents the distance between a given LTV
measure (pre-LTV, passive LTV, or chosen LTV) and the next-notch-up from the passive LTV. Panel
   26
      However, this terminology should not be taken literally: house price appreciation may relax credit constraints even
if it does not move homeowners to a lower interest rate notch.
   27
      While the figure pools all years 2005-15, we have checked that the patterns are roughly the same inside and outside
the recession years.



                                                           25
A illustrates the implications of house price growth by comparing the distributions of pre-LTV
and passive LTV. Two implications are worth highlighting. First, house price growth moves all
borrowers from the positive range (in terms of their pre-LTV) to the negative range (in terms of
their passive LTV). This follows from the fact that we are restricting the sample to households who
are pulled down by at least one notch. Second, house price growth eliminates all bunching at
interest notches: there is bunching at every notch in the pre-LTV distribution, but no bunching in
the passive LTV distribution.28
       How do borrowers respond to the relaxed collateral constraints? Panel B illustrates the impli-
cations of equity extraction behavior by comparing the distributions of the passive LTV and the
final chosen LTV. Strikingly, equity extraction behavior largely recreates the qualitative pattern that
existed before house price growth. We see a dramatic right-shift of the LTV distribution, moving
borrowers back to around zero or into the positive range, and recreating bunching at notches. In
other words, when house price growth pulls households below one or more notches (Panel A),
most of them extract equity back to the next notch above (at zero) or a higher notch (in the positive
range). Hence, this figure shows how house price growth interacts with bunching responses to
interest notches in a way that is consistent with a collateral mechanism.29,30
       To conclude, the multivariate heterogeneity analysis presented in the previous section com-
bined with the notches analysis presented here provides quite compelling evidence of the impor-
tance of the collateral channel. Most previous work on the effect of house prices on household
borrowing was only able to estimate the total effect, because the empirical analyses were based on
house price variation (regional or aggregate variation) that affect both wealth and collateral.
  28
      The fact that the passive LTV distribution primarily falls in the bins (−5, 0) and (−10, −5), with a discrete drop
between the two, is not a bunching response. It follows mechanically from the x-axis normalization and the fact that
most homeowners are no longer 5 or 10 percentage points away from a notch. Furthermore, notice that bunching in
the pre-LTV distribution is attenuated compared to the actual amount of bunching in the last refinance event due to
amortization between the last and current refinance events.
   29
      To be clear, what is new in Figure 15 compared to the more standard bunching analysis in Best et al. (2015) is the
illustration of a dynamic interaction between house price growth and bunching responses.
   30
      It is also conceivable that some refinancers are targeting their previous monthly mortgage payment rather than
borrowing up to a soft collateral constraint. They might do so because of liquidity constraints or behavioral factors (see
Di Maggio et al. 2014 for an analysis of the mortgage payment channel). To explore such effects, Figure A.VI shows the
distribution of changes in monthly mortgage payments between the last and the current mortgage among homeowners
who are pulled down to a lower notch by house price growth (i.e., the same sample as in Figure 15). In this sample,
monthly payments are always reduced by house price growth as it pulls them below interest notches. But the total net
change in the payment depends on other factors such as changes over time in interest rate levels and the amount of
equity they choose to extract. If homeowners extract equity to target an unchanged monthly mortgage payment, then
we would see excess bunching at zero in Figure A.VI. There is arguably a small spike at zero, but overall the distribution
is quite smooth. This shows that, in this setting, homeowners do not primarily target an unchanged mortgage payment
when choosing equity extraction (while they do target collateral notches as shown above).




                                                           26
6   Conclusion

The global financial crisis of 2007-8 has reignited a debate on the role of house prices in driving
household debt. A first generation of papers following the crisis studied this question using re-
gional data in the US and found strong borrowing responses. This paper takes a different method-
ological tack to this question. Rich administrative mortgage data and novel features of the UK
mortgage market allow us to construct a large panel of refinancers and study the relationship be-
tween borrowing and house prices at the household level. Exploring a far more granular source
of house-price variation that relies on idiosyncratic rather than regional variation in house prices,
we find household borrowing responses that are considerably smaller than those found for the
US using regional data. Specifically, we find that a 10% percent increase in individual house price
increases borrowing by 2%. Importantly, when we do not make full use of the panel structure and
consider the pre-crisis period, we obtain similar elasticities to those found for the US.
    Our rich dataset also allows us to explore why borrowing responds to house prices. The strik-
ing finding from this analysis is that there is essentially no heterogeneity in any dimension except
one — loan-to-value — but that this dimension is very strong. In particular, the elasticity is strongly
increasing in LTV ratios, even after controlling non-parametrically for factors such as age, income
and income growth. This heterogeneity analysis together with a test using ’soft’ credit constraints
(interest rate notches based on collateral) strongly suggests that the housing collateral channel is
the main driver of the elasticities we find.
    The magnitude of these responses, and the importance of collateral constraints, has impor-
tant implications for understanding household behavior in both micro- and macro-economics. A
growing literature on macro and housing relies on collateral constraints to obtain realistic macro
responses to boom-bust cycles in the housing market. Our findings affirm such theoretical ap-
proaches and provide microeconometric estimates that could help discipline future research in
this area.




                                                  27
References

A DELINO , M ANUEL , S CHOAR , A NTOINETTE , & S EVERINO , F ELIPE. 2015. House Prices, Collateral,
  and Self-employment. Journal of Financial Economics, 117(2), 288–306. 21

A GARWAL , S UMIT, B EN -D AVID , I TZHAK , & YAO , V INCENT W. 2015. Collateral Valuation and
  Borrower Financial Constraints: Evidence from the Residential Real Estate Market. Management
  Science, 61(9), 2220–2240. 8

A GARWAL , S UMIT, A MBROSE , B RENT W., & YAO , V INCENT W. 2016. The Effects and Limits of
  Regulation: Appraisal Bias in the Mortgage Market. Mimeo. 8

A OKI , K OSUKE , P ROUDMAN , J AMES , & V LIEGHE , G ERTJAN. 2004. House Prices, Consumption,
  and Monetary Policy: a Financial Accelerator Approach. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13(4),
  414–435. 21

ATTANASIO , O RAZIO P., & W EBER , G UGLIELMO. 1994. The UK Consumption Boom of the Late
  1980s: Aggregate Implications of Microeconomic Evidence. The Economic Journal, 104(427), 1269–
  1302. 5, 21

ATTANASIO , O RAZIO P., B LOW, L AURA , H AMILTON , R OBERT, & L EICESTER , A NDREW. 2009.
  Booms and Busts: Consumption, House Prices and Expectations. Economica, 76(301), 20–50.
  1, 3, 5, 21, 23

ATTANASIO , O RAZIO P., L EICESTER , A NDREW, & WAKEFIELD , M ATTHEW. 2011. Do House Prices
  Drive Consumption Growth? The Coincident Cycles of House Prices and Consumption in the
  UK. Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3), 399–435. 1, 3, 4, 5

B EN -D AVID , I TZHAK. 2011. Financial Constraints and Inflated Home Prices During the Real Estate
  Boom. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3), 55–87. 8

B ERGER , D AVID , G UERRIERI , V ERONICA , L ORENZONI , G UIDO , & VAVRA , J OSEPH. 2015. House
  Prices and Consumer Spending. NBER Working Paper 21667. 3, 5, 20, 23

B EST, M ICHAEL , C LOYNE , J AMES , I LZETZKI , E THAN , & K LEVEN , H ENRIK. 2015. Interest Rates,
  Debt and Intertemporal Allocation: Evidence From Notched Mortgage Contracts in the UK.
  Bank of England Staff Working Paper 543. 1, 3, 7, 24, 26, 52



                                                  28
B HUTTA , N EIL , & K EYS , B ENJAMIN J. 2016. Interest Rates and Equity Extraction During the Hous-
  ing Boom. American Economic Review, 106(7), 1742–1774. 5

C AMPBELL , J OHN Y., & C OCCO , J OÃO F. 2007. How do House Prices Affect Consumption? Evi-
  dence from Micro Data. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(3), 591–621. 1, 3, 20, 21

C ARROLL , C HRISTOPHER D., O TSUKA , M ISUZU , & S LACALEK , J IRI. 2011. How Large are Housing
  and Financial Wealth Wffects? A New Approach. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(1), 55–
  79. 4

C ASE , K ARL E., & S HILLER , R OBERT J. 1989. The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family
  Homes. American Economic Review, 79(1), 125–137. 13

C ASE , K ARL E., S HILLER , R OBERT J., T HOMPSON , A NNE K., L AIBSON , D AVID , & W ILLEN , PAUL.
  2012. What Have They Been Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets. Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 265–315. 13

C ASE , K ARL E., Q UIGLEY, J OHN M., & S HILLER , R OBERT J. 2013. Wealth Effects Revisited: 1975-
  2012. NBER Working Paper 18667. 4, 20

C HANEY, T HOMAS , S RAER , D AVID , & T HESMAR , D AVID. 2012. The Collateral Channel: How Real
  Estate Shocks Affect Corporate Investment. The American Economic Review, 102(6), 2381–2409. 21

D AVIDOFF , T HOMAS. 2013. Supply Elasticity and the Housing Cycle of the 2000s. Real Estate
  Economics, 41(4), 793–813. 1

D AVIDOFF , T HOMAS. 2016. Supply Constraints Are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home
  Prices Because They Are Correlated With Many Demand Factors. Critical Finance Review, forth-
  coming. 1

D E F USCO , A NTHONY. 2016. Homeowner Borrowing and Housing Collateral: New Evidence from
  Expiring Price Controls. Mimeo: Kellog School of Management, Northwestern University. 5, 21

D I M AGGIO , M ARCO , K ERMANI , A MIR , & R AMCHARAN , R ODNEY. 2014. Monetary Policy Pass-
  Through: Household Consumption and Voluntary Deleveraging. Mimeo. 26

D I M AGGIO , M ARCO , K ERMANI , A MIR , K EYS , B ENJAMIN J., P ISKORSKI , T OMASZ , R AMCHARAN ,
  R ODNEY, S ERU , A MIT, & YAO , V INCENT. 2017. Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates,


                                                  29
  Household Consumption, and Voluntary Deleveraging. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
  5

G ANONG , P ETER , & N OEL , PASCAL. 2017. The Effect of Debt on Default and Consumption: Evi-
  dence from Housing Policy in the Great Recession. Mimeo. 5

G UREN , A DAM M., M C K AY, A LISDAIR , N AKAMURA , E MI , & S TEINSSON , J ÓN. 2017. Housing
  Wealth Effects: The Long View. Mimeo. 5

H ILBER , C HRISTIAN A.L., & V ERMEULEN , W OUTER. 2016. The Impact of Supply Constraints on
  House Prices in England. The Economic Journal, 126(591), 358–405. 14

H URST, E RIK , & S TAFFORD , F RANK P. 2004. Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing
  and Household Consumption. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36(6), 985–1014. 2, 4, 7

I ACOVIELLO , M ATTEO. 2005. House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
  Business Cycle. American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764. 21

K APLAN , G REG , M ITMAN , K URT, & V IOLANTE , G IOVANNI L. 2015. Consumption and House
  Prices in the Great Recession: Model Meets Evidence. Mimeo. 1, 4, 5, 13

K LEVEN , H ENRIK. 2016. Bunching. Annual Review of Economics, 8, 435–464. 11

L USTIG , H ANNO N., & N IEUWERBURGH , S TIJN G. VAN. 2005. Housing Collateral, Consumption
  Insurance, and Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective. Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1167–1219. 21

M IAN , ATIF, & S UFI , A MIR. 2009. The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
  from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1449–1496. 3

M IAN , ATIF, & S UFI , A MIR. 2011. House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US
  Household Leverage Crisis. American Economic Review, 101(5), 2132–2156. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 14, 21, 23

M IAN , ATIF, & S UFI , A MIR. 2014. House of Debt: How They (And You) Caused the Great Recession, and
  How We Can Prevent It From Happening Again. University of Chicago Press. 1

M IAN , ATIF, R AO , K AMALESH , & S UFI , A MIR. 2013. Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
  and the Economic Slump. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1687–1726. 1, 4

M UELLBAUER , J OHN , & M URPHY, A NTHONY. 1990. Is the UK balance of payments sustainable?
  Economic Policy, 5(11), 347–396. 4

                                                 30
S AIZ , A LBERT. 2010. The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 125(3), 1253–1296. 1, 14

S HILLER , R OBERT J. 2007. Understanding Recent Trends in House Prices and Home Ownership.
  Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 89–123.
  13

S INAI , T ODD , & S OULELES , N ICHOLAS S. 2005. Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against
  Rent Risk. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 763–789. 3, 20

S TROEBEL , J OHANNES , & VAVRA , J OSEPH. 2014. House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices.
  NBER Working Paper 20710. 4




                                                 31
                           F IGURE 1: H OMEOWNERS R EFINANCE A ROUND THE O NSET OF THE R ESET R ATE



                           .12


                            .1
   Fraction of Mortgages




                           .08


                           .06


                           .04


                           .02


                            0
                                 0    1     2      3     4    5      6     7      8              9       10
                                                   Time Between Mortgages (Years)

                                          Refinance When Should                  Refinance After Should
                                          Refinance Before Should


Notes: The figure shows the distribution of the time between mortgage financing events. Households who refinance
between 2 months before and 6 months after the onset of their reset rate are shown in light gray, households who
refinance more than 6 months after the onset of their reset rate are shown in black, and households who refinance more
than 2 months before the onset of their reset rate are shown in white. The data in this figure exclude households for
whom we do not observe the date of reset rate onset.




                                                              32
                                             F IGURE 2: H OUSE P RICES VS A PPRAISALS (N EW P URCHASES )




                                    5000
  Number of Mortgages (Thousands)




                                    4000



                                    3000



                                    2000



                                    1000



                                      0
                                           -50   -40    -30   -20   -10      0     10     20    30         40   50
                                                         House Appraisal - House Price (Thousands)

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of within-house differences between the actual house price and the appraisal
price for transacted properties. This includes both first time buyers and home movers, but not refinancers.




                                                                         33
                 F IGURE 3: H OUSE P RICES VS A PPRAISALS (R EFINANCED H OMES )


                                                            A: No Other Controls

                                           350,000

                                           300,000

                                           250,000
                     Average House Price




                                           200,000

                                           150,000

                                           100,000

                                            50,000

                                                0
                                                2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                                           Year

                                                                  Actual Prices       Appraisals




                                                               B: With Controls

                                           350,000

                                           300,000

                                           250,000
                     Average House Price




                                           200,000

                                           150,000

                                           100,000

                                            50,000

                                                0
                                                2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                                           Year

                                                                  Actual Prices       Appraisals



Notes: The figure compares actual house prices (for transacted properties) with appraisal prices (for refinanced prop-
erties) over time. Panel A plots the raw time series of actual and appraised prices, obtained by regressing each of the
price series on a full set of quarter dummies and plotting the estimated coefficients. Panel B augments the price re-
gressions on quarter dummies with controls for twenty quantiles of the age distribution as well as twenty quantiles of
the postcode-level price distribution (see equation (1)). The panel plots the coefficients on the quarter dummies, plus
a constant equal to the effect of the average age and the average postcode. This panel shows that, once we correct for
compositional differences in age and postcode, there is no significant appraisal bias.



                                                                       34
                           0.25




                           0.20

                                  F IGURE 4: D ISTRIBUTION OF R AW H OUSE P RICE G ROWTH

                                        Households With ≥ 2 Mortgage Observations


                           0.15
  Fraction of Households




                           0.10




                           0.05




                           0.00
                                  -60       -40      -20        0        20              40            60
                                                    House Price Change (logs)

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of raw house price growth among households for whom we observe at least
two mortgage financing events. House price growth is measured as the log change in house prices between the current
and the last mortgage event, multiplied by 100 (i.e., approximately percentage house price growth).




                                                            35
                                              0.25




          F IGURE 5: D ISTRIBUTION OF R AW VS R ESIDUALIZED H OUSE P RICE G ROWTH
                                              0.20

                                                     Households With ≥ 3 Mortgage Observations

                                                               A: Raw Price Growth
                     Fraction of Households   0.15




                                              0.10




                                              0.05

                                              0.25




                                              0.00
                                                       -60   -40      -20        0        20       40    60
                                              0.20                   House Price Change (logs)



                       B: Residualized Price Growth After Absorbing Fixed Effects

                                              0.15
                     Fraction of Households




                                              0.10




                                              0.05




                                              0.00
                                                       -60   -40      -20        0        20        40   60
                                                               Residualised House Price Change (logs)


Notes: The figure shows distributions of house price growth among households for whom we observe at least three
mortgage financing events. Panel A shows the distribution of raw house price growth, while Panel B shows the distri-
bution of residualized house price growth after absorbing household fixed effects, month fixed effects, and county-by-
year fixed effects. In both panels, house price growth is measured as the log change in house prices between the current
and the last mortgage event, multiplied by 100 (i.e., approximately percentage house price growth).



                                                                           36
          F IGURE 6: T HE T IMING OF R EFINANCE E VENTS AND H OUSE P RICE C HANGES

                                                   Conceptual Example
            House Price




                                    2-Year Fixed

                                                                   2-Year Fixed



                                                                                  3-Year Fixed
                                               3-Year Fixed




                                                                                                 2-Year Fixed




                                                                                                                Year
                                0             1           2        3          4             5            6
Notes: The figure illustrates, in a conceptual example, how differences in contract duration choices create variation in
house price changes across households. The graph compares two homeowners who start out at the same time (time
0), live in houses with the same price cycle (the solid blue line), but have different preferences over low-interest rate
durations. One homeowner prefers 2-year fixed interest rate loans, while the other prefers 3-year fixed interest loans.
The homeowner in two-year contracts refinances three times over a 6-year period, facing either positive or negative price
shocks at each event, whereas the homeowner in 3-year contracts refinances only two times facing a zero price shock
each time. Our empirical strategy exploits such within-person variation in price growth driven by duration choices.




                                                              37
         F IGURE 7: H OUSE P RICE C HANGES VS L AST D URATION X T IME OF R EFINANCE


                                                              A: Large Difference in Price Change


                                           10
                     House Price Change (logs)


                                                                        3y in 2013
                                                 5




                                                 0




                                                                         2y in 2010
                                                 -5
                                                      Under 1.5     1.5-2.5      2.5-3.5     3.5-4.5      4.5-5.5        5.5+
                                                                          Duration of Last Mortgage (years)

                                                             2010            2011           2012           2013            2014




                                                              B: Small Difference in Price Change


                                           10
                                                                                                            5y in 2010
                     House Price Change (logs)




                                                                        3y in 2013
                                                 5




                                                 0




                                                 -5
                                                      Under 1.5     1.5-2.5      2.5-3.5     3.5-4.5      4.5-5.5        5.5+
                                                                          Duration of Last Mortgage (years)

                                                             2010            2011           2012           2013            2014



Notes: This figure is the empirical counterpart to the preceding conceptual figure. It plots average house price growth
between refinance events for homeowners who refinance at different points in time (in January of different years) by
bins of the duration of their last mortgage (number of years between the current and the last refinance events). The two
panels show the same graphs, but highlight two different homeowners who experience very different within-person
price patterns due to past duration choices. The homeowner in Panel A experiences a large negative price change
in January 2010, followed by a large positive change in January 2013. The homeowner in Panel B also refinances in
January 2010 and January 2013, but experiences similar price changes in the two events. Our empirical approach uses
such within-person variation for identification.


                                                                                      38
                                                F IGURE 8: M ORTGAGE D EBT AND H OUSE P RICES


                                                      A: Debt Growth vs House Price Growth

                                           30
                                                    Elasticity = 0.30 (0.002)

                                           25
                      Debt Change (logs)




                                           20


                                           15


                                           10


                                            5


                                            0

                                                -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30         38
                                                                      House Price Change (logs)



                                                                B: Debt Elasticity by Year

                                           0.60


                                           0.50


                                           0.40
                      Debt Elasticity




                                           0.30


                                           0.20


                                           0.10


                                           0.00
                                                  2006   2007    2008    2009   2010 2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                                                                   Year


Notes: Panel A plots the average mortgage debt growth in different bins of house price growth, pooling all years 2005-
15. Debt growth and house price growth are measured as log changes between refinance events multiplied by 100
(i.e., approximately percentage changes). The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered at the household level. Panel A also shows the average elasticity of mortgage debt with respect to house prices
across all years. Panel B reports the elasticity for each year separately, showing that the elasticity is pro-cyclical.




                                                                                39
                                                     F IGURE 9: E QUITY E XTRACTION AND H OUSE P RICES


                                                             A: Equity Extraction vs House Price Growth

                                                     30
                                                              Elasticity = 0.23 (0.002)

                                                     25
                      Equity Extraction (logs)




                                                     20


                                                     15


                                                     10


                                                      5


                                                      0
                                                          -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30         38
                                                                                House Price Change (logs)



                                                                   B: Equity Extraction Elasticity by Year

                                                     0.60


                                                     0.50
                      Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                     0.40


                                                     0.30


                                                     0.20


                                                     0.10


                                                     0.00
                                                            2006    2007   2008    2009   2010 2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                                                                             Year


Notes: This figure corresponds to the previous figure, but considers equity extraction when refinancing (as opposed to
total debt growth between refinance events) as the outcome variable. Equity extraction is measured as the log difference
between mortgage debt after refinancing and the outstanding mortgage debt just before refinancing (i.e., the debt the
household would hold if she simply rolled over the existing mortgage debt at the time of refinancing), multiplied by
100. Panel A plots average equity extraction in different bins of house price growth, pooling all years 2005-15. The
dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals, with standard errors clustered by household. Panel A also reports the
average equity extraction elasticity across all years, while Panel B shows the equity extraction elasticity for each year
separately.


                                                                                          40
           F IGURE 10: E QUITY E XTRACTION AND H OUSE P RICES W ITH F IXED E FFECTS


                                                                       A: Household and Month Fixed Effects

                                                             20

                      Conditional Equity Extraction (logs)             Elasticity = 0.21 (0.005)


                                                             15




                                                             10




                                                             5




                                                             0
                                                                  -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0  2     4   6   8 10 12   14   16   20
                                                                                          House Price Change (logs)



                                                             B: Household, Month, and County × Year Fixed Effects

                                                             20

                                                                       Elasticity = 0.20 (0.006)
                      Conditional Equity Extraction (logs)




                                                             15




                                                             10




                                                             5




                                                             0
                                                                  -10 -8   -6   -4   -2    0  2     4   6   8 10 12   14   16   20
                                                                                          House Price Change (logs)


Notes: These panels plot conditional equity extraction in different bins of house price growth based on the fixed effects
specification (3), pooling all years 2005-15. The plotted points are the estimated coefficients on house price growth
dummies, adding a constant equal to the mean predicted value of equity extraction from all the other covariates. In
Panel A, the other covariates are fixed effects for household and month. In Panel B, the other covariates are fixed effects
for household, month, and county x year. The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by household. Each panel reports the average equity extraction elasticity based on a log-linear specification.
The figure shows an almost perfectly log-linear relationship between equity extraction and house prices, and it shows
that the relationhip is unaffected by county x year (conditional on the other fixed effects).



                                                                                                   41
F IGURE 11: E QUITY E XTRACTION                                                           AND     H OUSE P RICES W ITH F IXED E FFECTS          AND   H OUSE -
HOLD C ONTROLS



                                                                      A: Equity Extraction vs House Price Growth

                                                             20

                                                                         Elasticity = 0.20 (0.006)
                      Conditional Equity Extraction (logs)



                                                             15




                                                             10




                                                              5




                                                              0
                                                                    -10 -8    -6     -4    -2     0  2     4   6   8 10 12   14   16       20
                                                                                                 House Price Change (logs)



                                                                             B: Equity Extraction Elasticity by Year

                                                             0.60


                                                             0.50
                      Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                             0.40


                                                             0.30


                                                             0.20


                                                             0.10


                                                             0.00
                                                                     2006     2007        2008   2009   2010 2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                                                                                           Year


Notes: Panel A plots conditional equity extraction in different bins of house price growth based on the specification
with fixed effects and household-level controls in equation (4). The panel is constructed exactly like the previous figure
that is based on specifications without household-level controls. The household controls included here are income level,
income growth, mortgage interest rate, age, a dummy for couples, and dummies for a range of self-reported reasons
for the current and the last refinances. The figure shows that the inclusion of such rich controls makes no difference
to the results. While Panel A is based on all years 2005-15, Panel B shows the equity extraction elasticity for each year
separately. The rich specification considered here has reduced, but not eliminated, the cyclicality in the equity extraction
elasticity.

                                                                                                        42
                                         F IGURE 12: H ETEROGENEITY IN B ORROWING E LASTICITY BY LTV                                                                                                     AND           A GE



                                                          A: Pre-LTV                                                                                                            B: Pre-LTV
                                                     No Other Controls                                                   Controls for Age, Income, and Income Growth

                                  0.80                                                                                                                  0.80




                                  0.60                                                                                                                  0.60
   Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                                                                                     Equity Extraction Elasticity
                                  0.40                                                                                                                  0.40




                                  0.20                                                                                                                  0.20




                                  0.00                                                                                                                  0.00
                                         0-30    30-50         50-60     60-70    70-80          80-85    85+                                                  0-30    30-50         50-60     60-70    70-80          80-85    85+
                                                              Predetermined LTV Ratio (%)                                                                                           Predetermined LTV Ratio (%)




                                                                C: Age                                                                                                                D: Age
                                                     No Other Controls                                           Controls for Pre-LTV, Income, and Income Growth

                                  0.80                                                                                                                  0.80




                                  0.60                                                                                                                  0.60
   Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                                                                                         Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                  0.40                                                                                                                  0.40




                                  0.20                                                                                                                  0.20




                                  0.00                                                                                                                  0.00
                                         20     25       30       35      40      45        50       55    60                                                  20     25       30       35      40      45        50       55    60
                                                                         Age                                                                                                                   Age




Notes: The figure shows heterogeneity in the equity extraction elasticity by LTV (top panels) and by age (bottom panels).
The heterogeneity analysis is based on a pre-determined LTV ratio, namely the LTV ratio at time t absent any equity
extraction/injection at time t and absent any house price growth between t and t − 1. The left panels are based on
univariate specifications that investigate each dimension of heterogeneity on its own, while the right panels are based on
multivariate specifications allowing for heterogeneity in four dimensions simultaneously: LTV, age, income level, and
income growth. The multivariate specification is shown in equation (7). The dashed lines give 95% confidence intervals
based on standard errors clustered by household. The top panels show a strong increasing relationship between LTV
and the borrowing elasticity, consistent with collateral effects. The bottom panels show a negative or flat relationship
between age and the borrowing elasticity, inconsistent with wealth effects.




                                                                                                                43
F IGURE 13: H ETEROGENEITY IN B ORROWING E LASTICITY BY I NCOME AND I NCOME G ROWTH



                                                         A: Income                                                                                                  B: Income
                                                   No Other Controls                                          Controls for Age, Pre-LTV, and Income Growth

                                  0.80                                                                                                       0.80




                                  0.60                                                                                                       0.60
   Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                                                                              Equity Extraction Elasticity
                                  0.40                                                                                                       0.40




                                  0.20                                                                                                       0.20




                                  0.00                                                                                                       0.00
                                         1        2         3         4         5         6          7                                              1        2         3         4         5         6          7
                                             Household Income at Time of Last Mortgage (Quantiles)                                                      Household Income at Time of Last Mortgage (Quantiles)




                                                 C: Income Growth                                                                                           D: Income Growth
                                                   No Other Controls                                          Controls for Age, Pre-LTV, and Income Growth

                                  0.80                                                                                                       0.80




                                  0.60                                                                                                       0.60
   Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                                                                              Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                  0.40                                                                                                       0.40




                                  0.20                                                                                                       0.20




                                  0.00                                                                                                       0.00
                                         1        2         3         4        5        6          7                                                1        2         3         4        5        6          7
                                         Log Change in Household Income Between Mortgages (Quantiles)                                               Log Change in Household Income Between Mortgages (Quantiles)




Notes: The figure shows heterogeneity in the equity extraction elasticity by income level (top panels) and by income
growth (bottom panels). The income level is measured at the time of the last refinance event, while income growth is
measured as the log-change since the last refinance event. The left panels are based on univariate specifications that
investigate each dimension of heterogeneity on its own, while the right panels are based on multivariate specifications
allowing for heterogeneity in four dimensions simultaneously: LTV, age, income level, and income growth. The multi-
variate specification is shown in equation (7). The dashed lines give 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by household. The figure shows that there is relatively little heterogeneity in the borrowing elasticity by either
income level or income growth.




                                                                                                         44
        F IGURE 14: H ETEROGENEITY IN B ORROWING E LASTICITY BY N OTCHES M OVED


                                                                       A: No Other Controls

                                                     0.50



                                                     0.40
                      Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                     0.30



                                                     0.20



                                                     0.10



                                                     0.00
                                                             Relaxed              Unchanged                 Reinforced
                                                                          Change in collateral constraint



                                                            B: Household and Month Fixed Effects

                                                     0.40




                                                     0.30
                      Equity Extraction Elasticity




                                                     0.20




                                                     0.10




                                                     0.00
                                                             Relaxed              Unchanged                 Reinforced
                                                                          Change in collateral constraint


Notes: The figure shows heterogeneity in the equity extraction elasticity by notches moved due to house price changes.
There are interest rate notches at LTV thresholds of 50%, 60%, 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, and 90%. We define the collateral
constraint as being relaxed (reinforced) when house price variation moves the homeowner at least one notch down
(up) and thus reduces (increases) the interest rate on borrowing. Otherwise, the collateral constraint is defined as “un-
changed.” Panel A shows elasticity estimates when including no other controls, while Panel B allows for household and
month fixed effects. The dashed lines give 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by household.




                                                                                   45
        F IGURE 15: H OUSE P RICE G ROWTH AND B UNCHING AT C OLLATERAL N OTCHES


                                               A: Effect of House Price Growth on LTV Distribution

                                               .1



                                              .08
                     Fraction of households



                                              .06



                                              .04



                                              .02



                                               0
                                                    -30          -20       -10       0          10          20        30
                                                          Distance between LTV measure and next-notch-up from passive LTV

                                                                              Passive LTV            Pre-LTV




                                                    B: Effect of Equity Extraction on LTV Distribution

                                               .1



                                              .08
                     Fraction of households




                                              .06



                                              .04



                                              .02



                                               0
                                                    -30          -20       -10       0          10          20        30
                                                          Distance between LTV measure and next-notch-up from passive LTV

                                                                            Passive LTV             Chosen LTV


Notes: The figure is based on a sample of households who are pulled down to a lower notch by house price growth. The
                                                                                            P
two panels show density distributions of three different LTV measures. The pre-LTV = Dit      /Pit−1 is the homeowner’s
LTV at time t given past mortgage choices (i.e., the debt level and amortization schedule chosen at time t − 1, not
                                                                                         P
including equity extraction at time t) and the old house price. The passive LTV = Dit      /Pit is the homeowner’s LTV
given past mortgage choices and the new house price. The chosen LTV = Dit /Pit includes any equity extraction made
at time t. The x-axis in each panel represents the distance between a given LTV measure and the next-notch-up from
the passive LTV. Panel A illustrates the effects of house price growth by comparing the distributions of pre-LTV and
passive LTV. This panel shows that house price growth moves homeowners from the positive to the negative range
and eliminates bunching at interest rate notches. Panel B illustrates the effects of borrowing responses by comparing
the distributions of the passive LTV and the chosen LTV. This panel shows that equity extraction largely recreates the
qualitative pattern that existed before house price growth.
                                                                                    46
                                     TABLE 1: D ESCRIPTIVE S TATISTICS

                                              (1)                  (2)                        (3)

                                        Panel A: Buyers vs Refinancers

                                           Buyers                  All              Refinancers in our
                                                               Refinancers          Estimation Sample
        Age                                 36.47                  42.08                    40.85
                                           (10.13)                 (9.77)                   (8.90)
        Couple                               0.52                   0.54                     0.54
                                            (0.50)                 (0.50)                   (0.50)
        Income                            55,282.17              55,949.83                57,602.96
                                        (556,583.42)           (145,816.42)              (81,440.65)
        Income Change (logs)                                        0.08                     0.08
                                                                   (0.36)                   (0.35)
        Interest Rate                        4.39                   4.51                     3.98
                                            (1.40)                 (1.40)                   (1.50)
        House Price                      229,375.32             248,328.76               256,517.10
                                        (326,209.46)           (361,735.65)             (187,020.25)
        LTV                                 70.72                  56.53                    61.50
                                           (21.67)                (21.80)                  (18.96)
        Observations                      7,119,807             5,935,441                 1,384,346

                              Panel B: Refinancers in our Estimation Sample

                                         Refinance             Refinance            Missing Duration
                                         On-Time               Off-Time
        Age                                 39.77                  41.58                    41.37
                                            (8.69)                 (8.79)                   (9.04)
        Couple                               0.55                   0.53                     0.54
                                            (0.50)                 (0.50)                   (0.50)
        Income                            54,516.32              53,442.66                62,005.61
                                         (48,424.02)            (52,355.65)             (108,733.95)
        Income Change (logs)                 0.08                   0.11                     0.07
                                            (0.31)                 (0.38)                   (0.37)
        Interest Rate                        4.22                   3.60                     3.97
                                            (1.51)                 (1.33)                   (1.53)
        House Price                      245,030.89             233,110.00               276,638.16
                                        (163,127.94)           (158,358.87)             (213,289.69)
        LTV                                 61.56                  63.04                    60.72
                                           (18.30)                (19.27)                  (19.27)
        Observations                       483,852               288,578                   611,916
Notes: The table reports means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for different samples. Panel A compares
descriptive statistics for home buyers (column 1), all refinancers (column 2), and refinancers in our estimation sample
(column 3). Our estimation sample includes homeowners who we observe refinancing at least twice, and for whom
we have sufficient information to precisely measure equity extraction. Panel B compares descriptive statistics for three
subsamples of the refinancers in our estimation sample: households who refinance on-time (between two months before
and six months after the onset of their reset rate), households who refinance off-time, and households where we do not
observe the exact onset of the reset rate.
                                                          47
               TABLE 2: E QUITY E XTRACTION E LASTICITIES BY R EFINANCE T IMING

                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)

                                               Panel A: Full Sample

              Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.234         0.208          0.204         0.197
                                                     (0.002)       (0.005)        (0.006)       (0.006)
              Observations                         1,384,346      1,384,346     1,311,734     1,173,626

                                           Panel B: On-Time Sample

              Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.245         0.183          0.175         0.166
                                                     (0.002)       (0.006)        (0.007)       (0.007)
              Observations                          483,852        483,852       460,077       459,571

                                           Panel C: Off-Time Sample

              Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.317         0.269          0.263         0.252
                                                     (0.004)       (0.011)        (0.012)       (0.013)
              Observations                          288,578        288,578       274,600       273,727

                                 Panel D: Sample With Missing Durations

              Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.188         0.201          0.202         0.197
                                                     (0.003)       (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.009)
              Observations                          611,916        611,916       577,057       440,328


              Control Variables:

              Month FE                                                ×             ×             ×
              Household FE                                            ×             ×             ×
              County x Year FE                                                      ×             ×
              Household Controls                                                                  ×
Notes: The table reports estimates of the equity extraction elasticity across different specifications and samples. Panel
A considers the full sample (summarizing the results of the preceding figures), panel B considers the sample of on-
time refinancers (defined as those who refinance between 2 months before and 6 months after reset rate onset), panel C
considers the sample of off-time refinancers (defined as those who refinance more than 2 months before or more than
6 months after reset rate onset), and panel D considers the sample of refinancers with missing duration information.
Standard errors are clustered by household and shown in parentheses. The household controls included in column (4)
are income level, income growth, the last mortgage interest rate, the age of the borrower, a dummy for couples, and
dummies for a range of self-reported reasons for the current and the last refinance (pure refinance / home improvement
/ debt consolidation / other).




                                                           48
        TABLE 3: E QUITY E XTRACTION E LASTICITIES U SING I NSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES

                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)


           IV Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.150         0.163      0.284        0.295       0.283
                                                     (0.004)       (0.004)    (0.026)      (0.056)     (0.056)
           Observations                              772,430       772,430    772,430     737,168      733,614


           Control Variables:

           Contract Duration FE                                      ×           ×           ×            ×
           Month FE                                                              ×           ×            ×
           Household FE                                                          ×           ×            ×
           County x Year FE                                                                  ×            ×
           Household Controls                                                                             ×
Notes: The table reports estimates of the equity extraction elasticity using instrumental variables. The instruments are
interactions of dummies for the last mortgage contract duration (time until reset), year and region. The table shows
IV elasticities from five different specifications, with the richest specification in column (5) corresponding to equations
(5)-(6). The household controls included in column (5) are income level, income growth, the last mortgage interest rate,
the age of the borrower, a dummy for couples, and dummies for a range of self-reported reasons for the current and
the last refinance (pure refinance / home improvement / debt consolidation / other). Standard errors are clustered by
household and given in parentheses. The IV elasticities with fixed effects (equal to 0.28-0.29) are slightly higher than the
OLS elasticities, but overall the table confirms the qualitative results.




                                                              49
A   Appendix




               50
                                F IGURE A.I: A GGREGATE H OUSE P RICES , C ONSUMPTION ,                                                                                                           AND         M ORTGAGE D EBT



 A: US House Price vs Consumption Growth                                                                                                    B: UK House Price vs Consumption Growth
              15




                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                        30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                          10




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                         Real consumption growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Real consumption growth
  Real house price growth




                                                                                                                                            Real house price growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                              10
                    5




                                                                                                                           5
            0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                              -10
     -5




                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -5
              -10




                                                                                                                                                        -20
              -15




                                                                                                                                                        -30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -10
                                                                                                         -5




                               1975   1980     1985    1990       1995    2000     2005    2010   2015                                                                   1975   1980     1985    1990       1995    2000     2005    2010   2015
                                                                   Year                                                                                                                                      Year

                                             House price growth                  Consumption growth                                                                                    House price growth                  Consumption growth




 C: US House Price vs Mortgage Debt Growth                                                                                                  D: UK House Price vs Mortgage Debt Growth
              15




                                                                                                         15




                                                                                                                                                        30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20                    10 15
                          10




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                          Real mortgage debt growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Real mortgage debt growth
  Real house price growth




                                                                                                                                            Real house price growth
                                                                                                                                                              10
                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                          5
            0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -10 -5
                                                                                                                                              -10
     -5




                                                                                                         -5
              -10




                                                                                                                                                        -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -15
              -15




                                                                                                         -10




                                                                                                                                                        -30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -20




                               1975   1980     1985    1990       1995    2000     2005    2010   2015                                                                   1975   1980     1985    1990       1995    2000     2005    2010   2015
                                                                   Year                                                                                                                                      Year

                                             House price growth                  Mortgage debt growth                                                                                  House price growth                  Mortgage debt growth




Notes: US house price data are from the Federal Reserve Economic Data, US consumption data are from the BEA
National Income and Product Accounts, and US mortgage debt data are from the US Flow of Funds. UK house price
data are from the Nationwide Index, UK consumption data are from the ONS National Accounts, and UK mortgage
debt data are from the Bank of England. All growth rates are log differences multiplied by 100.




                                                                                                                                       51
                     F IGURE A.II: AVERAGE I NTEREST R ATE S CHEDULE IN THE UK (N OTCHES )
                    5.5
                    5




                                                                                            ∆r = 0.471
                              4.5
        Conditional Interest Rate




                                                                                 ∆r = 0.497
                        4




                                                                    ∆r = 0.334
               3.5




                                                          ∆r = 0.231
                                          ∆r = 0.096
         3          2.5
                    2




                                    55   60     65      70       75         80         85          90         95
                                                       Loan to value ratio (%)


Notes: The figure shows the average mortgage interest rate in the UK (in %) as a step function of the LTV ratio, with
sharp jumps (notches) at LTVs of 60%, 70%, 75%, 80%, and 85%. The figure plots coefficients (and confidence intervals)
from a regression of the mortgage interest rate on dummies for each 0.25%-bin of the LTV distribution. To each coeffi-
cient, we add a constant equal to the mean predicted value of the interest rate from all the other covariates. The other
covariates include non-parametric controls for lender, contract duration (time until reset), month of refinance, mortgage
type (fixed interest rate / variable interest rate / capped interest rate / other), repayment type (interest only / capital
and interest / other), term length, reason for refinance, age, couple indicator, and income. The figure is taken from Best
et al. (2015) and further details are provided there.




                                                              52
               F IGURE A.III: T HE E XPLANATORY P OWER OF M ORTGAGE D URATION


                                                           A: Duration Explains Future Price Change


                                             .15
                      Fraction of Households
                      .05          .1
                                    0




                                                   -30         -20         -10          0          10               20           30
                                                                      Residualised House Price Change (logs)
                                                                      Standard FE             Add Duration*Month*County FE
                                                                       2                       2
                                                                      R = 0.608               R = 0.817




                                                          B: Duration Does Not Explain Future Income
                                  .5         .4
                      Fraction of Households
                             .2   .1
                                  0  .3




                                                   -1.5        -1           -.5         0           .5              1            1.5
                                                                            Residualised Income (logs)
                                                                                Standard FE            Add Duration*Month*County FE
                                                              No FE              2                      2
                                                                                R = 0.93               R = 0.964




Notes: Panel A plots distributions of residualized house price growth, with and without fixed effects for the last contract
duration choice (time until reset) interacted with month and county dummies. The panel shows that past duration
choices can explain a large part of the residual price variation (having already absorbed fixed effect for household,
month, and county x year). Panel B investigates if past duration choices can also explain residual income variation and
shows that it cannot. The fact that past duration is able to predict house price growth, but not other determinants of
borrowing such as income, makes it useful for identifying the effects of house prices on borrowing.




                                                                                      53
                                                                            F IGURE A.IV: A LTERNATIVE S PECIFICATIONS


                                                                                             A: From Logs to Levels

                                                                     25
                      Conditional Equity Extraction (in Thousands)           Marginal Propensity to Borrow = 0.11 (0.004)
                                                                             Implied Elasticity = 0.18

                                                                     20



                                                                     15



                                                                     10



                                                                     5



                                                                     0
                                                                          -10-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32   42
                                                                                             House Price Change (in Thousands)



                                                                             B: From House Prices to Housing Net Worth

                                                                     20

                                                                                Elasticity = 0.05 (0.001)
                      Conditional Equity Extraction (logs)




                                                                     15




                                                                     10




                                                                     5




                                                                     0
                                                                          -28 -24 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36           50
                                                                                                Housing Net Worth Change (logs)


Notes: The figure investigates if the previous results are affected by moving from a log-specification to a level-
specification (Panel A) and by moving from house prices to housing net worth as the explanatory variable (Panel B).
Apart from these changes, the figure is based on the previous fixed effects specification (3) and the panels are constructed
in the same way as Figure 10. The results are qualitatively unaffected by the changes, but the alternative specifications
are useful for obtaining different parameters. Panel A yields an estimate of the marginal propensity to borrow (equal
to 0.11), while Panel B yields an estimate of the equity extraction elasticity with respect to housing net worth (equal to
0.05).



                                                                                                            54
                                                      F IGURE A.V: H ETEROGENEITY BY LTV N ON -PARAMETRICALLY



                                                30
         Conditional Equity Extraction (logs)




                                                20


                                                10


                                                 0


                                                -10


                                                -20

                                                      -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30   38
                                                                            House Price Change (logs)

                                                                          0-60            60-80             80+


Notes: The figure plots average equity extraction in different bins of house price growth and in different bins of pre-
determined LTV. Pre-LTV is defined as the LTV ratio at time t absent any equity extraction/injection at time t and absent
any house price growth between t and t − 1. The figure considers three bins of pre-LTV: low leverage (0-60%), inter-
mediate leverage (60-80%), and high leverage (above 80%). The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals based
on standard errors clustered by household. The figure shows that the level of equity extraction decreases with leverage,
while the slope of equity extraction with respect to house price growth increases with leverage. This is consistent with
the collateral channel.




                                                                                   55
                  F IGURE A.VI: D ISTRIBUTION OF THE C HANGE IN M ONTHLY M ORTGAGE PAYMENTS




                            .04




                            .03
   Fraction of households




                            .02




                            .01




                             0
                                  -600 -500 -400 -300 -200 -100 0        100 200 300 400 500                600
                                           Current monthly payments - previous monthly payments

Notes: The figure is based on a sample of households who are pulled down to a lower notch by house price growth.
It shows the distribution of the difference (in GBP) between the household’s current monthly mortgage payments and
previous monthly payments.




                                                              56
             TABLE A.I: E QUITY E XTRACTION E LASTICITIES BY H OME I MPROVEMENT

                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)

                               Panel A: Last Mortgage for Home Improvement

                    Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.191        0.183        0.171        0.162
                                                           (0.006)      (0.011)      (0.013)      (0.014)
                    Observations                           114,566      114,566      108,237      96,613

                             Panel B: Last Mortgage Not for Home Improvement

                    Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.213        0.198        0.189        0.184
                                                           (0.003)      (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.007)
                    Observations                           553,200      553,200      524,513      470,038

                                 Panel C: Purpose of Last Mortgage Unknown

                    Equity Extraction Elasticity            0.337        0.240        0.250        0.235
                                                           (0.002)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.009)
                    Observations                           716,580      716,580      678,984      606,975


                    Control Variables:

                    Month FE                                               ×            ×            ×
                    Household FE                                           ×            ×            ×
                    County x Year FE                                                    ×            ×
                    Household Controls                                                               ×
Notes: The table reports estimates of the equity extraction elasticity, splitting the estimation sample by whether the
last equity extraction decision was made for home improvements or not. Panel A considers homeowners whose last
refinance was for home improvements, Panel B considers homeowners whose last refinance was not for home improve-
ments, while panel C considers homeowners whose last refinance purpose is missing in the data. Standard errors are
clustered by household and shown in parentheses. The household controls included in column (4) are income level,
income growth, the last mortgage interest rate, the age of the borrower, a dummy for couples, and dummies for the
various reasons for both the last and current refinance (pure refinance / home improvement / debt consolidation /
other). The table shows that, across the different fixed effects specifications, the estimated elasticity is quite stable across
samples.




                                                              57
