                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         REAL EXCHANGE RATE POLICIES FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                       Martin Guzman
                                    José Antonio Ocampo
                                      Joseph E. Stiglitz

                                     Working Paper 23868
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23868


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




We are thankful to Rob Davies, Daniel Heymann, Juan Montecino, Ebrahim Patel, Martin
Rapetti, Germán Reyes, Laurence Wilse-Samson, participants of a Seminar at The Department of
Trade and Industry of South Africa, the Economics seminar at the University of Buenos Aires,
Columbia IPD Conference “Exploring New Paths for Development: Experiences for Latin
America and China” (held in Beijing, August 2015), and the Eastern Economic Association for
useful comments and suggestions, two anonymous referees, and Debarati Ghosh, Zaakir Tameez,
and Leo Wang for editorial and research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Martin Guzman, José Antonio Ocampo, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real Exchange Rate Policies for Economic Development
Martin Guzman, José Antonio Ocampo, and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 23868
September 2017
JEL No. D62,F13,F63,L52,O24,P45

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the role of real exchange rate (RER) policies in promoting economic
development. Markets provide a suboptimal amount of investment in sectors characterized by
learning spillovers. We show that a stable and competitive RER policy may correct for this
externality and other related market failures. The resulting development of these sectors leads to
overall faster economic growth. A system of effectively multiple exchange rates is required when
spillovers across different tradable sectors differ. The impact of RER policies is increased when
they are complemented by traditional industrial policies that increase the elasticity of the
aggregate supply to the RER. Among the instruments required to implement a stable and
competitive RER are interventions in the foreign exchange market and regulation of capital
flows. We also discuss the trade-offs associated with alternative stable and competitive RER
policies.

Martin Guzman                                                 Joseph E. Stiglitz
Columbia University                                           Uris Hall, Columbia University
Business School Finance                                       3022 Broadway, Room 212
& Economics Division                                          New York, NY 10027
Studebaker 674                                                and NBER
620 West 132nd Street                                         jes322@columbia.edu
New York, NY 10027
and University of Buenos Aires (IIEP-BAIRES)
mg3463@columbia.edu

José Antonio Ocampo
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
ocampo.joseantonio@yahoo.com
1.        Introduction

          The role of exchange rate policies for economic development is still largely debated.
There are two central and interconnected issues regarding exchange rate policies in the
macroeconomic literature on emerging economies in recent decades that relate to the links
between the balance of payments and macro stability and growth: (i) the role that the exchange
rate plays in facilitating or hindering economic diversification; and (ii) the extent to which the
exchange rate regime and capital account management help manage cyclical swings in external
financing and terms of trade fluctuations in commodity-exporting countries, and open or limit the
space for counter-cyclical macroeconomic policies. Both of these issues highlight the importance
of exchange rate policies in open economies, alongside monetary and fiscal policies, and also the
specific and somewhat contradictory links between exchange rate and monetary policies in
emerging economies subject to strong boom-bust cycles in external financing.

          The first of these issues underscores the central role that economic diversification plays
in the long-term growth of emerging and developing countries (Ocampo, Rada and Taylor, 2009;
Rodrik, 2007 and 2013; Stiglitz and Greenwald, 2014). In this view, scaling up toward activities
with higher technological contents is the key to dynamic growth. These new activities can be
found in natural resources, but are most commonly associated with the development of higher-
tech manufacturing and modern services. The East Asian experiences, first of the Newly
Industrializing Countries and most recently of China, are underscored as success stories of such
diversification (Rodrik, 1994; Lin, 2017). This contrasts with the difficulty faced by a large
number of natural-resource dependent economies in diversifying their production and export
structures, and even the “premature de-industrialization” that several of them have faced (Rodrik,
2016).2

          The second issue—the management of cyclical swings in capital flows—emphasizes the
importance of counter-cyclical macroeconomic policies for long-term growth. The essential
problem in this regard is that capital flows, like finance in general, are pro-cyclical. In

2
  Note that changes in technology and the structure of the global economy mean that the pattern of growth for
countries going forward may have to be markedly different from those that were successful in the past. Global
employment in manufacturing is on the decrease, and those countries seeking to increase industrial employment will
face increasing competition for a diminishing number of jobs. Moreover, there is likely to be some onshoring, with
robotization. See Stiglitz and Greenwald (2014).


                                                        2
commodity-exporting economies, this means, moreover, that capital flows reinforce rather than
mitigate the commodity price cycle. There is overwhelming evidence that capital flows to
emerging and developing countries are pro-cyclical and have become one of the major
determinants—and in many cases the major determinant—of business cycles in emerging
economies.3

        The goal of this paper is twofold. First, we analyze what role real exchange rate policies
can play for fostering economic development. The paper surveys and discusses recent literature
and clarifies how optimal real exchange rate policies are dependent on the conditions under
which they are implemented – including the available policy instruments at the time of their
implementation. Even though the real exchange rate is an endogenous variable and not a direct
policy instrument, we still speak of real exchange rate policies, understanding that these policies
rely on the management of a set of actual policy instruments. Second, we review the instruments
that can be used for implementing optimal real exchange rate policies, and review the evidence
on their effectiveness.

        We argue that in conditions that are common to developing economies, optimality entails
competitive, stable, and effectively multiple real exchange rate policies4. These conditions
include learning spillovers in at least some tradable sectors and the impossibility of subsidizing
these sectors. Any policy that has the potential for reallocating the economy’s factors of
production towards the sector with learning spillovers could be welfare improving. In particular,
if the government could identify the learning spillovers associated with each type of activity and
if it could use subsidies and lump-sum taxes to finance the subsidies, then there would be a set of
subsidies and transfers that would constitute the first best policy response. These policies would
entail an appreciation of the real exchange rate (see Itskhoki and Moll, 2014, and see the
appendix for the analytical development of this proposition). But if the implementation of these


3
  This was well known before the global financial crisis (see, for example, Prasad et al., 2003; and Ocampo, Spiegel
and Stiglitz, 2008), but has been reinforced by the effects of the September 2008 Lehman shock, the effects of
developed countries’ expansionary monetary policies on capital flows toward emerging economies, and the more
recent swings associated with the gradual dismantling of U.S. expansionary monetary policy, the commodity price
collapse and the turbulence in Chinese stock markets.
4
  By this last term we recognize the need to introduce other policy instruments that effectively lead to a less
competitive exchange rate for sectors with negative spillovers, while maintaining the commitment of members of
the International Monetary Fund to avoid multiple exchange rates.


                                                         3
policies is not possible (either because there are severe political economy problems or risks of
rent seeking that impede an efficient allocation of subsidies, or there are international regulations
that impede the implementation of subsidies in the first place), then there is a key role for real
exchange rate policies as second-best policies.

         Under those circumstances, a competitive exchange rate will increase the profitability of
tradable sectors (including new sectors as “infant sectors”, including new export activities).
Implicitly, the competitive real exchange rate acts as a subsidy to the tradable sectors.5 However,
there may be multiple tradable sectors, including some that do not feature learning spillovers.
Therefore, as a means to correct relative prices, optimality will require that the sectors with no
learning spillovers that receive the implicit subsidy implied by the competitive real exchange rate
are taxed, while sectors characterized by learning spillovers retain the implicit subsidy. The
resulting system of effective multiple real exchange rates will help those sectors that must go
through a learning process in order to be competitive. This implies that the exchange rate
operates as a type of industrial policy, or in a broader sense, as a type of production sector
policy6.

         This consideration of real exchange rate policies as a means for fostering the
development of sectors that are associated with larger technological progress is backed up now
by a growing literature that shows that long-term growth in developing countries is positively
associated with the capacity to guarantee a competitive exchange rate (Rodrik, 2008; Rapetti,
Skott and Razmi, 2012; Razmi, Rapetti and Skott, 2012; Rapetti, 2013; and for a review of the
literature, Frenkel and Rapetti, 2014; Damill, Frenkel, and Rapetti, 2014; Missio, Jaime, Brito,
and Oreiro, 2015).

         The conclusion of our analysis of the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of different
policy instruments is that there are in fact certain interventions, as foreign exchange interventions



5
  The intervention that makes the real exchange rate more competitive will be associated with static and dynamic
losses but will also bring dynamic gains. In the margin, the dynamic gain will dominate (Korinek and Serven, 2016).
6
  It should be emphasized that modern industrial policy is not just concerned with expanding the industrial sector.
Instead, it entails any policy directed at affecting the sector composition of the economy or the choice of technology.
Modern industrial policies can be directed not only at promoting growth, but increasing employment, reducing
inequality, promoting the environment, or any other societal objective. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (2014a, 2014b).


                                                          4
and capital account regulations, which are effective for maintaining competitive exchange rates
and for dampening the effects of financial shocks on the exchange rate.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 analyzes the usefulness of
competitive, stable, and effectively multiple real exchange rate (RER) policies as a vehicle for
economic development in economies with low diversification. It also stresses how those policies
must be complemented by other interventions that increase the elasticity of the aggregate supply
to the real exchange rate policies, and discusses the trade-offs for the society in terms of present
versus future consumption associated with their implementation. Sections 3 and 4 describe the
alternative instruments that can be used for achieving a competitive and stable RER,
emphasizing the advantages and disadvantages of each of them; section 3 focuses on capital
account regulations and section 4 on complementary policy interventions in foreign exchange
markets. Section 5 analyzes the challenges that competitive, stable, and effectively multiple RER
policies face; it focuses on the need of coordination of different macroeconomic policies, and on
the challenges that identification of economic trends poses for implementing stable and
competitive real exchange rate (SCRER) policies that can be sustained over time. Section 6
provides conclusions. Finally, the appendix provides analytical clarifications on the
circumstances under which optimality entails the implementation of competitive real exchange
rate policies.




    2. Real Exchange Rate policies for Economic Development

        Many of the developing economies, especially in Africa and South America, are highly
dependent on agricultural as well as non-renewable natural resource exports (fuels and minerals).
The abundance of natural resources, instead of increasing standards of living, has led to
noncompetitive exchange rates that strangulated the development of the tradable non-natural
resource sectors, leading to structures of production with low diversification. The lack of
diversification, in turn, has aggravated the problems of dependence on the terms of trade, leading




                                                 5
to high macroeconomic volatility and vulnerability. This overall failure is known as the resource
curse.7

          There are policies that could effectively attack the macroeconomic problems implied by
the macroeconomic volatility associated with those structures of production, such as stabilization
funds and the counter-cyclical macroeconomic policies supported by active interventions in
foreign capital markets and capital account management to which we refer below (Ocampo,
2008). Nevertheless, those policies are not sufficient to attack two more fundamental problems:
the low labor requirements of those structures of production (particularly fuels and minerals),
and the limited learning spillovers associated with those economic activities (Stiglitz and
Greenwald, 2014).8

          The combination of exchange rate policies with other types of industrial policies may
transform the comparative advantage of economies, with positive effects on economic
development. Properly designed interventions may allow for the development of the sectors that
are more conducive to learning –and hence lead societies to create more and better “social
resources” and to use them more efficiently in the long-term.

          This section describes the role of exchange rate policies for achieving those goals. It
analyzes the characteristics that those policies must contain, and investigates how in specific
structures of production those policies must be complemented by other active interventions (i.e.
other types of industrial policies) that increase the elasticity of the aggregate supply to the real
exchange rate. It also analyzes the trade-offs that the society faces with their implementation, as

7
  There are other dimensions of the resource curse, e.g. related to rent-seeking (for a thorough analysis of factors that
have historically prevented economies rich in resources to make a proper use of them for fostering development, see
Venables, 2016). Some of the excess volatility observed in resource dependent countries is related to the highly pro-
cyclical nature of capital flows, noted earlier (see Humphreys, Sachs, and Stiglitz, 2007). This curse or “disease” can
also be thought as the existence of a wedge between the market exchange rate equilibrium and another (or others)
that makes the emergence of non-resource tradable sectors viable (Bresser Pereira, 2008; Gerchunoff and Rapetti,
2016). The variety of mechanisms through which the abundance of natural resources can affect the economic
performance is analyzed by Van der Ploeg (2011). The literature has provided rationale for using a number of policy
instruments to deal with the the type of resource curse known as Dutch disease (see for instance Corden (2012) for
an analysis of policy options for dealing with Dutch diseases in Australia). While those instruments are not
necessarily mutually exclusive, this paper focuses on understanding how policies that affect the real exchange rate
can play a positive role for the development of sectors that would have a suboptimal (too small) size from the
perspective of the social optimum in a free market solution.
8
  It must be emphasized that while, historically, linkages between natural resource sectors and the rest of the
economy have often been limited, this is at least partly the result of not implementing adequate industrial policies.
See, Greenwald and Stiglitz (2014a, b) and Jourdan (2014).


                                                           6
they may entail the sacrifice of present consumption in exchange for larger levels of future
consumption.




       2.1. Competitive real exchange rates

           A competitive real exchange rate makes investment in the tradable sector more profitable.
It may allow “infant sectors” to emerge and settle. In the absence of interventions, the size of
sectors with large learning spillovers would be suboptimal, as the market would not internalize
the positive effects of those sectors on the rest of the economy. Besides, when there are credit
constraints, the within-sector9 learning spillovers—i.e., the benefits that a learning process would
imply for the same sector in the future—will also be underexploited. Interventions that give these
sectors an advantage over the conditions that the free market solution would provide constitute a
(at least partial) correction of externalities and other market failures.

           These types of benefits are important for all economies, as these pervasive externalities
and market failures are always present no matter the stage of development; but they are
particularly important for developing economies, where there is more to learn and where credit
constraints may be more binding.10 Then, exchange rate policies would be a type of industrial or
more generally production sector policies that would especially benefit economies with more
infant sectors characterized by learning spillovers.11

           At least four caveats must be made in relation to these propositions. The first one refers
to the potential need for complementing real exchange rate policies with other traditional
industrial policies. The second one relates to the challenge of channeling the benefits of
exchange rate policies to the right sectors – i.e. those with larger positive externalities. The third
one refers to the trade-offs that the implementation of these policies imposes on societies. The
rest of this subsection analyzes these issues.


9
    Or, for that matter, within-firm learning potentials.
10
     This is especially so because of the predominance of SMEs in such economies.
11
  Greenwald and Stiglitz (2006) refer to policies promoting development in such economies as infant economy
policies (as opposed to infant industry policies).


                                                            7
            A final caveat, not analyzed in detail here, relates to the international implications of
these policies. Adopting an active exchange rate policy may have negative externalities on other
countries, especially if the country adopting such a policy is a large player in world trade. Also,
if many emerging and developing countries adopted these policies, the joint effect would be
more limited than if fewer economies did so, and there could be fallacy of composition effects
that contribute to the generation of global imbalances.




       2.1.1. The complementarity between the exchange rate and industrial policies

A competitive exchange rate can be viewed as a type of industrial policy that can partially
substitute for other traditional industrial policies12; however, under some circumstances, it must
also be complemented by the implementation of those other policies.

            Given the complex political economy that may be associated with appropriate
management of active industrial policies, and the rent seeking that has sometimes characterized
these policies in the past, many analysts see competitive exchange rates as the right approach for
industrial or production sector policies, as opposed to the approach that consists in what has
come to be called “picking winners”. In this sense, production sector policies must be viewed as
an exercise in correcting market failures, in order to create social capabilities and exploit them
optimally over time—i.e., in “creating” rather than “picking” winners.

            Indeed, competitive exchange rates would not constitute a sufficient policy for correcting
those failures if other conditions that are also necessary for expanding the sectors with larger
learning spillovers were not present. If the non-natural resources tradable sectors that these
policies intend to expand do not have the other necessary conditions to emerge (for instance,
access to technology and credit), the elasticity of aggregate supply to the real exchange rate will
be low.



12
     But, of course, it is far more than an industrial policy.


                                                                 8
           It is then crucial to create those conditions. Other, more traditional industrial policies may
be the right vehicles for creating them. One of those traditional policies is the provision of credit.
Many countries have built up successful development banks to correct a myriad of market
failures: inadequate long-term finance (including for infrastructure), promoting innovative
sectors (“infant sectors” in the terminology of this paper) on and others with positive
externalities (those associated with environmental protection, including combating climate
change), guaranteeing access to finance for SMEs and poor households, and counteracting the
procyclical behavior of private finance (Griffith-Jones, Ocampo and Barros de Castro, 2017).
This is true of major developed countries (notably Germany and Japan) but also several
emerging and developing countries. Even countries that lack national development banks
develop several interventions to guarantee access to finance or regulatory policies that affect the
allocation of credit – the US Small Business Administration and the US Community
Reinvestment Act, for example. The success of development banks is related to the development
of institutional capabilities of the country. The process of building-up development banks
involves learning itself.13 Indeed, successful learning in the development of these institutions
tend to transform them into essential instruments of production sector policies, as well as of the
provision of public goods and socio-economic inclusion.

           Non-convexities – as for instance those associated with sunk costs – may also prevent the
emergence of tradable sectors associated with learning spillovers in the presence of credit-
constraints. A competitive real exchange rate policy also plays a role for the development of
those sectors, through two channels: a reallocation of the domestic demand towards locally
produced goods, and an increase in the foreign demand for the local goods. Thus, the competitive
real exchange rate can give rise to Kaldor-Verdoorn effects in sectors where scale effects are
relevant.14 Under those conditions, a sufficiently large increase in demand will increase the scale
of production to a point where it pays off to meet the sunk costs – within the macroeconomic
constraints to the adoption of expansionary aggregate demand policies.15


13
     See for instance Shimada (2016) for an analysis of the role of development banks in Japan and their evolution.
14
     Verdoorn (1949), Kaldor (1966); see also Setterfield (1997) on the mechanisms of cumulative causation.
15
   Of course, the proposition that there can always be consistent demand-led growth cannot be general. If increases
in the aggregate demand always translated in equivalent increases in the aggregate supply, then there would be a
trivial policy prescription for fostering economic development: aggregate demand should be increased to infinity,


                                                            9
         Investments in infrastructure, education and R&D to enhance the competitiveness of the
learning sectors are other traditional policies that could complement real exchange rate policies.
Investments in human capital are especially profitable when the skills composition of the labor
force is not well tuned for developing the infant sectors. In those situations, re-training the labor
force must be an essential element of the integral development plan.




    2.1.2. Channeling the benefits of competitive RER to the “right” sectors: the need for
             effectively multiple real exchange rates

Economies with strong competitive advantages in natural resources face particularly difficult
challenges in following the recommendation of adopting competitive exchange rate policies.
This is truer if traditional export sectors benefit from high commodity prices, such as those
experienced during the super-cycle of commodity prices that recently came to an end.
Furthermore, although competitive and stable exchange rate policies can help to overcome the
uncertainties and fixed costs that characterize the creation of new sectors of production and
associated learning processes, they also benefit traditional export sectors, including natural
resource-intensive sectors, and generate additional incentives to invest in them16. This is another
reason why exchange rate policy alone may fail to encourage diversification.

          In the absence of interventions, the benefits of commodity booms would be concentrated
on the resource tradable sector, with limited benefits to non-resource sector exports and import
competing sectors (indeed, when commodity booms lead to exchange rate appreciation, these
sectors may be disadvantaged). Besides, pursuing a policy of competitive real exchange rate
implies an “implicit” subsidy to all the tradable sectors, including those that do not feature
learning externalities.

         This is why raising taxes on traditional commodity production (including through export
taxes) to capture part of the commodity price windfall and to channel the benefits of the

and aggregate supply would respond by increasing to infinity as well. This is clearly an absurd proposition, because
it would imply the non-existence of resource constraints.
16
   It is not just that the more competitive exchange rate increases the marginal return to investments in these sectors.
In the presence of imperfect capital markets, the additional revenues may not flow easily to other sectors.


                                                          10
interventions to the right sectors should be part of the policy package under these circumstances.
These interventions would generate the capacity for distributing the benefits of the boom to the
rest of the economy, and would align relative prices with the marginal social returns; this policy
approach creates de facto a system of effectively multiple exchange rates that could make exports
in the non-resource sector competitive.

         The proposition is general: sectors with negative externalities and with smaller learning
spillovers should be more heavily taxed. This tax policy, besides creating the incentives for
expanding the “desirable” sectors, would at the same time contribute to generating the revenues
for running active industrial or production sector policies that increase the elasticity of output to
the real exchange rate policy.

         The strong static comparative advantage of the commodity sector also implies that
industrial policies must particularly aim at exploiting the upstream, downstream, and horizontal
linkages, including the linkages that might be associated with processing and resource extraction
itself – i.e., exploiting the sideway externalities. For this type of an economy, the exploration and
development of linkages with activities that have larger learning spillovers can be the basis of an
effective industrial policy, one that enhances the capabilities of both individuals and firms.17




    2.1.3. The associated trade-offs

A more “undervalued” RER means higher prices of tradable goods and services in terms of the
domestic currency. Therefore, following a policy of competitive RER is associated with lower
real wages in the present, with the objective of achieving higher real wages in the future. The
magnitude of these effects depends on the composition of the consumption basket, and would
tend to be stronger the larger the share of tradables in that basket (a basket that is endogenous).
These trade-offs are also associated with distributive effects: not all the sectors of the society pay
the same “price” in the present for achieving larger economic growth in steady state—and it may



17
   For further elaboration, see the various chapters in Stiglitz, Lin, and Patel (2014), especially Jordan (2014) and
Greenwald and Stiglitz (2014b).


                                                        11
not be clear for the different sectors of the society who will benefit from the increases in
economic growth at the time they are achieved.

           Therefore, the implementation of competitive RER policies requires social coordination
that in many occasions is difficult to achieve—especially so when the sectors that would lose
purchasing power in the present believe that they will not share the potentially larger purchasing
power of the aggregate economy in the future.

           The implementation of competitive real exchange rate policies may be associated with
another trade-off: a more depreciated exchange rate means higher costs of imported inputs.18 But
as long as the domestic production of tradable goods also has domestic contents, the profitability
of the tradable sector will increase. But the development of sectors that eventually become
internationally tradable may take time, i.e. it may take time until firms learn enough as to
become competitive in international markets. If learning requires imported inputs, the cost of
learning will increase with a more depreciated real exchange rate.




       2.2. Stable real exchange rates

           Under the assumption that firms are risk-averse and in the presence of non-convexities,
optimal policies entail a stable real exchange rate. The reason is that the real exchange rate
instability is a major source of uncertainty for the production of tradable (export and import-
competing) goods and services, and therefore discourages investment in these sectors. If firms
are risk averse and face non-convexities as those associated with bankruptcy costs, they will care
not just about the average exchange rate, but also about its volatility.19 Furthermore, exchange
rate instability increases the volatility of cash flows for firms in these sectors, the main source of
funding for small and medium firms in imperfect capital markets, further deterring investments.20




18
     Indeed, import shares may even increase with a devaluation (see Blaum, 2017).
19
     Rothschild and Stiglitz (1971) provide the analytical foundations of this mechanism.
20
   It is now well established that SMEs are especially cash constrained, and that cash flows are the major source of
funding for their investments. This is true even in advanced countries with well-developed capital markets.


                                                           12
         An additional adverse effect of exchange rate instability is associated with the hysteresis
accompanying dynamic economies of scale (e.g., if productivity tomorrow depends on
production today). Under these circumstances, exchange rate appreciation during booms can
generate permanent losses in the production structure, and therefore, adverse effects on long-
term growth—an effect neatly captured in a classic paper by Krugman (1987).

         Short run movements in the exchange rate today are largely related to changes in capital
flows.21 While we focus in this section on the exchange rate effects, we need to recognize that
these changes in capital flows have far more reaching effects than just the change in exchange
rates; for (in the absence of fully countervailing measures by monetary authorities) they affect
the flows of funds to different sectors of the economy, and thus, affect the structure of the
economy.22

         The cyclical behavior that characterizes capital flows goes beyond volatility of short-term
flows, which in turn contribute to volatility in exchange rates. The large and growing literature
on macro-economic externalities (Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Korinek (2010, 2011)) emphasizes
that because of these externalities, there is no presumption that market determined exchange
rates have optimality properties. They provide a theoretical rationale for the capital account
management interventions described in this paper.23




21
   Recent shocks in global financial markets have once again demonstrated that the cyclical supply of finance toward
emerging economies is largely driven by monetary policy and portfolio decisions in industrial countries, related in
turn to the response of banks and portfolio investors to incentives created by monetary and financial events
generated in developed countries and, particularly in the U.S. These responses are called the “search for yield” and
the “flight to safety”, typical of different phases of financial cycles. In emerging economies, the domestic financial
risks are made more complex by the currency mismatches that they generate in domestic economic agents
borrowing abroad (especially in the absence of adequate regulation), as well as the pro-cyclical response to
exchange rate and interest rate movements by portfolio foreign investors in the domestic currency bond and equity
markets of emerging economies, including through carry trade.
22
   Surges in capital flows are thus often associated with real estate bubbles.
23
  Even more challenging in policy terms are the medium-term cycles in the availability and costs of financing. Since
the mid-1970s, emerging economies have experienced three full medium-term cycles of external financing of
emerging economies—mid-1970s to late-1980s, 1990 to 2002, and 2003 to 2009—and may be coming to the end of
a fourth one, which started in late 2009 and has been followed by several episodes of capital outflows since the
initial announcements of U.S. monetary tapering in May 2013, which became more severe since the collapse of
commodity prices in 2014 and the turbulence of Chinese stock markets since mid-2015. The major problem with
these medium-term swings is their strong effect on all major macroeconomic variables: exchange rates, interest
rates, domestic credit, asset prices and, through all of them, on the balance of payment and economic activity.


                                                         13
        A major source of concern of the recent literature and policy debates are the
macroeconomic and financial stability risks generated by swings in both the balance of payment
and domestic finance that are associated with these cycles. Since we are concerned here with the
exchange rate and the capital account, we will concentrate on the balance of payments effects—
although these risks have other implications of major concern for societies, such as perverse
distributive effects.

        The increase in external liabilities associated with capital account booms are sometimes
offset by an increase in foreign assets. Even in these cases, the currency mismatch between the
assets and liabilities generates risks. However, the major problem is when capital account booms
are “absorbed” by growing current account deficits, thus generating a deterioration of external
balance sheets. Large current account deficits are a major source of financial risks when external
financial conditions deteriorate (see, for example, Calvo, 1998). This enhances the probability
and potential costs of balance of payments crises. Furthermore, the associated exchange rate
correction that then takes place generates massive wealth losses associated with currency
mismatches in domestic portfolios, which may lead to a domestic financial crisis. This is
reinforced by the possible bust of the domestic credit and asset price bubbles generated during
the external financing boom.24

        Finally, pro-cyclical capital flows limit the space for counter-cyclical macroeconomic
policies and, more generally, exacerbate major policy trade-offs. For example, exchange rate
flexibility does generate some degree of monetary policy autonomy. However, by attracting
additional capital flows, the use of counter-cyclical monetary policies would only exacerbate
appreciation pressures during booms—in a sense just displacing the effects of pro-cyclical
capital flows to the exchange rate. Besides, as monetary policy itself has sectorial impacts, the
reliance on monetary policy for managing volatility in capital flows disadvantages sectors that
are particularly sensitive to the exchange rate and interest rate. Even then, monetary policy may
be relatively ineffective in countervailing the inflationary impact of capital surges: the decrease
in activity in the interest rate and exchange rate-sensitive sectors can be more than offset by the
stimulus generated by the additional capital inflows induced by the higher interest rates.

24
   Some of these adverse effects might be mitigated by the capital account management techniques described below,
which are part of appropriately designed macroprudential regulations.


                                                       14
        An alternative to reducing the expansionary pressures generated by capital inflows is to
adopt a contractionary fiscal policy. But this makes fiscal policy hostage to capital account
volatility.

        There is, therefore a strong rationale for intervening directly in the source of the cyclical
swings (i.e., on capital flows) or in the exchange rate market, through counter-cyclical
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. These are the issues to which we now turn.




3.      Complementary macroeconomic policy instruments: capital account regulations

        The implementation of competitive and stable real exchange rate policies requires an
identification of effective policy instruments. This section analyzes the role that can be played by
that capital account regulations (CARs).

        CARs play indeed a multiple role: they serve as a macroeconomic policy tool, as a
financial stability tool (Ocampo, 2015) and, following our analysis above, as an instrument for
maintaining a competitive real exchange rate – a role that we could define as a development tool.
As a macroeconomic policy tool, they provide larger room for counter-cyclical monetary
policies. During booms, they increase the space to undertake contractionary monetary policy
while avoiding the exchange rate appreciation pressures that such monetary policy can generate.
By mitigating exchange rate appreciation, they also reduce the risks that rising current account
deficits will generate a future balance of payments crisis. In turn, during crises, they can create
some room for expansionary monetary policies while containing capital flight and excessive
exchange rate depreciation, and the effects of the latter on domestic inflation. The increase in
capacity for counter-cyclical monetary policies reduces the burden on fiscal policies throughout
the business cycle.

        On the other hand, viewed as a financial stability tool, CARs recognize the fact that the
reversibility of capital flows varies significantly according to the nature of capital flows: foreign
direct investment is more stable than portfolio and debt flows and, among the latter, short-term




                                                 15
debt flows are particularly volatile.25 So, as a financial stability tool, CARs aim at moderating the
build-up of debts, and particularly short-term debts, during booms as well as reversible portfolio
flows. These interventions reduce the intensity of the capital account cycle.

        CARs can also be justified as a way of avoiding the negative externalities of volatile
capital flows on recipient countries. These externalities result from the fact that individual
investors and borrowers do not take into account or ignore the effects of their financial decisions
on the level of financial stability in a particular nation, including on the exchange rate and other
macro-economic variables. Such market failures call for a Pigouvian tax—here, taxes on cross-
border financial activities and other regulations (Korinek, 2011).

        Finally, as demonstrated by Jeanne (2012), capital account policies – including all the
policies that affect the private sector’s access to foreign capital – can have persistent effects on
the real exchange rate.26 The evidence is aligned with this theoretical prediction.27 The
experience of China illustrates the mechanisms at play. Between 2002 and 2008, the Chinese
tradable sector experienced grew rapidly; in absence of policy interventions should have led to
an appreciation of the renminbi (due to the Balassa-Samuelson effect). But the appreciatory
pressures were resisted though capital account policies. During the period, there was a large
accumulation of foreign reserves. Instead of an appreciation of the real exchange rate, the
country had a large accumulation of foreign reserves and large trade surpluses.

        CARs can be either administrative (quantitative) or price-based, but there are more
complex typologies (see, for example, IMF 2011). They have also been called “capital flow
management measures” (IMF, 2011) and “capital management techniques” (Epstein et al.,
2003). Administrative regulations include ceilings or prohibitions or ceilings on certain
transactions, minimum stay periods, restrictions on foreign investors taking positions in domestic

25
  The classic treatment of the riskiness of short-term capital is Rodrik and Velasco (2000).
26
  A concern with the implementation of policies that control the capital account is that they could be circumvented.
However, if evasion is costly, the controls will still bind. The evidence shows that contrary to the common
perception that capital controls can be evaded, they indeed affect the cross-market premium (Levy Yeyati,
Schmukler, and Van Horen, 2008). Relatedly, Bengui and Bianchi (2014) find that leakages do not necessarily make
CARs as macroprudential policies less desirable, and that stabilization gains still outweigh the costs of leakages.
27
   See Blanchard, Adler, and de Carvalho Filho (2015), Levy Yeyati and Sturzegger (2007), Levy Yeyati,
Sturzenegger, and Gluzmann (2013), and Montecino (2015). Relatedly, Libman (2017) shows that pegs are
associated with more overvaluation.


                                                        16
securities or rules that only allow certain agents (residents and corporates) to undertake certain
transactions. In turn, price-based regulations include unremunerated reserve requirements on
capital inflows (URRs) or tax provisions applying to foreign-currency liabilities (see, on the
latter, Stiglitz and Bhattacharya 2000).

        All of them belong to the family of what have come to be called “macroprudential
regulations”. This concept was proposed before the global financial crisis,28 but has only
received widespread acceptance in recent years, including in the IMF’s “institutional view” of
capital account management. In fact, CARs should be seen as part of a continuum, which goes
from regulation on financial transactions of domestic residents in the domestic currency
(traditional prudential regulation), to those of domestic residents transacting in foreign currency,
to those involving domestic agents’ transactions with foreign residents.

        As components of the broader family or macroprudential regulations, those that focus
directly on the capital account can be partly substituted by domestic prudential regulations. For
example, a good fairly generalized regulatory practice is managing the net foreign exchange
exposure of domestic financial institutions. This may entail forbidding banks and other domestic
financial intermediaries from holding net liability positions in foreign currency, or using
differential reserve requirements for liabilities of the domestic banks in domestic vs. foreign
currencies. These regulations can be combined with oversight of the currency exposure of the
firms to which the banks lend. One disadvantage of replacing purely domestic regulations for
those that directly affect capital flows is that they do not encompass direct borrowing abroad by
non-financial agents. A specific advantage of CARs is that they aim at the direct source of
financial volatility.

        Most of the literature on the effectiveness of CARs comes from the analysis of individual
countries or comparative experiences of countries that apply them.29 This has been
complemented by an increasing number of multi-country studies.


28
  See, for example, the concept of “counter-cyclical prudential regulations” in Ocampo (2003), as well as the work
of the Bank for International Settlements on what they already termed the “macroprudential perspective”.
29
  See, among others, several papers by the IMF (2011) and IMF experts (Ariyoshi et al. 2000; Ostry et al. 2010,
2011 and 2012; the literature reviews of Magud and Reinhart (2007), Magud, Reinhart and Rogoff (2011), Ocampo
(2008) and Ocampo and Erten (2014); and the broad review of the debates on CARs in Gallagher (2014).


                                                       17
           The strongest consensus in the literature relates to the improvement in the quality of
capital inflows generated by CARs, by lengthening the maturity of external debt obligations.
There is also a fairly broad agreement in the capacity of regulations to increase monetary policy
independence by partly delinking the interest and exchange rate effects of capital flows, thus
allowing countries greater scope to increase domestic interest rates during booms and avoid
raising them during crises while partly avoiding the exchange rate effects of such policies.

           In contrast, there is no agreement on whether CARs can be used to affect overall capital
inflows and exchange rates. Exchange rate effects are generally found to be statistically
insignificant or at least temporary. The same is true of overall capital flows, implying that these
regulations are “speed bumps”30 rather than permanent restrictions31. This implies that it may be
necessary to modify regulations to respond to ways private agents learn to circumvent
regulations. However, speed bumps do make direct contributions to financial stability.
Historically, financial crises have been associated with manias, typically including the rapid
expansion of credit that in turn led to the rapid growth of prices of some type of assets
(Kindleberger and Aliber, 2011).32 Speed bumps may effectively discourage the creation of
bubbles.




30
     This is the term used by Bhattacharya (1997), Stiglitz (1999) and Ocampo and Palma (2008), among others.
31
  Some CARs do, however, affect the relative attractiveness to, say, foreign exchange exposures, and thus should be
expected to have a long run effect.
32
   Prolonged manias in presumably stable environments have also been associated with more severe crises
(Gluzmann, Guzman, and Howitt, 2014; Guzman and Howitt, 2015).


                                                         18
        These effects may depend on the nature and strength of the regulations.33 Using two
instruments simultaneously may also enhance their effectiveness, as shown in the analysis by
Rincón and Toro (2010) which illustrates the stronger effects of central bank interventions in
foreign exchange markets and URRs on exchange rates when these interventions were adopted
simultaneously.

        CARs also have real effects. According to IMF research, countries that had CARs in
place before the global financial crisis were able to mitigate the contraction of GDP during the
crisis (Ostry et al., 2012). This was confirmed by Erten and Ocampo (2017), who found that
CARs not only helped countries avoid a strong impact of the crisis but also overheating during
the recovery, indicating that they are, overall, an effective counter-cyclical policy instrument.

        The literature has also discussed the advantages and disadvantages of several forms of
regulations: regulating inflows versus outflows, administrative vs. price-based, and temporary
versus permanent interventions. On the first of these issues, there is a preference for regulating
inflows. However, the empirical evidence, including in past IMF research, indicate that
regulations of outflows are more effective than those on inflows.34

        There is also a preference for price-based over administrative regulations, as they are
more market friendly and less susceptible to political economy failures (rent seeking and
corruption). But again, the evidence in the literature, including past IMF research, is that
administrative regulations may be more effective. Theory shows that in general, when
information is imperfect and contracts are incomplete, it is optimal to use a set of controls that
contain both price regulations to affect incentives and quantity regulation to affect constraints
(Weitzman, 1974; Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1977).

        In relation to temporary versus permanent regulation, the crucial issue is whether
countries have the institutions in place when they needed, rather than having to improvise them,
risking their ineffectiveness. This is closely related to the associated learning process as to how
33
   See, for example, the comparative study of the effects of CARs on inflows in Chile, Colombia and Malaysia in the
1990s (Ocampo and Palma, 2008), which concluded that the harsher 1994 Malaysian regulations had the strongest
effect and, in turn, those of Colombia were more effective than those of Chile because the tax equivalent of the
unremunerated reserve requirement (URR) was larger. Similarly, the strong tax on outflows introduced by Malaysia
in 1998 is generally considered to have been very effective (Kaplan and Rodrik, 2002).
34
   See the older research by the IMF (Ariyoshi et al. 2000) and Erten and Ocampo (2017).


                                                        19
to use them, and the capacity to design rules that incorporate the most important adjustments
required through the business cycle. In both regards, having permanent regulatory systems in
place that can be used in a counter-cyclical way—including temporarily phasing out the
regulations when there are no balance of payments pressures—is better than improvising
institutions to manage either booms or crises.35




4.       Complementary policy interventions in foreign exchange markets

         It can be argued that the basic disadvantage of capital market regulations is that they
segment domestic from international markets. It can be argued, however, that this recognizes the
reality that markets are already segmented. In fact, the basic flaw of capital account liberalization
is that it does not recognize the implications of this fact. In any case, the most common rationale
for opening the capital account is that countries positively value being integrated into global
financial markets. This preference, plus the generally negative view on regulating capital flows
that prevailed before the global financial crisis, is why countries generally prefer to intervene in
foreign exchange markets.

         Such interventions have indeed become a major rule in many emerging and developing
countries, particularly after the emerging countries’ crisis that started in East Asia in 1997. A
major result of this is that, in contrast to the mainstream view that prevailed in the 1990s,
according to which only polar regimes were stable—hard pegs or freely floating exchange
rates—the dominant exchange rate regime in emerging and developing countries has become
intermediate regimes, in particular managed exchange rate flexibility (see Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and
Rogoff, 2017). In fact, and in contrast to the mainstream views a decade ago, IMF research now
shows that managed floats are significantly less prone to crises (Ghosh, Ostry and Qureshi,
2014). This indicates that the pragmatic choice of many emerging and developing countries has
been a correct one.



35
  Klein (2012) finds that temporary controls are less effective than permanent controls, and that this is likely due to
the fact that countries with long-standing controls have a larger probability of having incurred the sunk costs that
building a system of surveillance requires, thus enforcement of controls works better in the latter economies.


                                                         20
         Interventions in foreign exchange market among countries differ, however, in terms of
the magnitude and symmetry of their interventions through the business cycle. For example,
among the five major Latin American countries with managed floats, Peru is the country that
most massively intervenes in foreign exchange markets, followed by Chile (if we include the
copper stabilization funds as a complement to foreign exchange reserves); Brazil falls in an
intermediate position, and Colombia and Mexico have the most moderate levels of intervention
(though Mexico has intervened more heavily since the global financial crisis). The unsurprising
result is that Peru has had the most stable real exchange rate over the past decade (Ocampo and
Malagón, 2015). Obviously, the magnitude of the necessary interventions depends on the capital
account regime as well as the global conditions that determine the size and volatility of capital
flows.

         Managing fluctuations in foreign exchange earnings associated with commodity export
price cycles also aim to smooth real exchange rates, and in this sense are complementary with
those that try to avoid real exchange fluctuations associated with capital account volatility. In
this sense, stabilization funds, such as those used by Chile to accumulate funds during copper
price booms, play a complementary role to foreign exchange reserves.

         A cursory look at trends in foreign exchange reserves in emerging economies shows also
that interventions in foreign exchange markets tend to be asymmetrical. In particular, the
massive accumulation of reserves prior to the global financial crisis was followed by a rather
moderate use of such reserves during the peak of the crisis—the year or so after the collapse of
Lehman Brothers. One rationale is that there is an inherent asymmetry in the fact that emerging
countries’ central banks issue domestic currency but not dollars (or euros). Since the demand for
the domestic currency increases during booms, reserve accumulation is one way of supplying the
additional money; beyond the point that central banks view it as appropriate to issue domestic
currency, they can also sterilize the reserve accumulation. In contrast, the degrees of freedom
that they have when foreign reserves dwindle are more limited, and the reduction in reserves may
itself generate strong adverse speculative pressures, rising risk premiums and capital flight. So,
given the asymmetries that emerging and developing countries face, the asymmetrical
management of foreign exchange reserves is a rational response of authorities.




                                               21
         In any case, central bank preferences differ significantly in this regard. Analyzing five
large Asian economies over the past decade, Sengupta and Sen Gupta (2014) find that all
countries accumulated reserves during capital account surges but they allowed them to fall
during episodes of sudden stop in external financing in a very diverse way. India and Korea
reduced their reserves during such episodes but Indonesia and Thailand did not, while Malaysia’s
response depended on the specific episode. This reveals, according to the authors’ analysis, the
stronger relative preference by Indonesia and Thailand for exchange rate stability as a policy
objective relative to monetary independence.

         If the basic problem of CARs is that they segment capital markets, the major
disadvantage of reserve accumulation is that it is costly. As it is well known, the basic problem
in this regard is that reserves are invested in very low-yield safe assets; so, if reserves are
accumulated to avoid the appreciation of the exchange rate in the face of booming and higher
yield private capital flows, the cost can be sizable. If reserve accumulation is sterilized, there are
also domestic costs associated with such sterilization. As reserves have become sizable in most
countries, these costs have increased (see, for example, the estimates of Gallagher and Shrestha,
2012).

         However, there are circumstances in which sterilization costs can be compensated by the
returns on accumulated foreign exchange reserves. This was the case of Argentina during 2003-
2008, a period in which that country followed a policy of stable and competitive real exchange
rate (and also of multiple effective exchange rates, determined by a structure of differential taxes
on exports). To reach the real exchange rate “targets”, the Central Bank followed a managed
floating regime within a monetary framework of targeting a monetary aggregate. To achieve the
monetary targets, the Central Bank had to sterilize part of the increase in liquidity generated by
its intervention in foreign exchange markets through the issuing of short and medium term
securities. As the interest payments on short and medium term securities were not greater than
the yields obtained from international reserves, sterilized foreign interventions were not costly in
net terms.

         Furthermore, while countries have traditionally held low yielding assets in their reserves,
they have increasingly recycled some of the reserves into higher yielding asset purchases,



                                                 22
generating significant returns. In general, however, when for one reason or another, a country is
unable to manage its reserves to yield significant return, a more active use of CARs may be seen
as a less costly way of intervention.

         Overall, what this analysis indicates is that best practice in open emerging economies
subject to boom-bust cycles in external financing is the complementary use of traditional
macroeconomic policies with interventions in foreign exchange markets and capital account
regulations.36 These interventions have proven effective. While the studies of the 1980s had
largely rejected the effectiveness of interventions in foreign exchange markets, subsequent
studies have contested those earlier results, and have shown that interventions are indeed
effective.37




5.       Additional policy coordination challenges with the implementation of SCRER
         policies

         The effectiveness of SCRER policies depends on the capacity of being maintained at
least until the infant sectors become competitive and the learning externalities that those policies
aim to foster are built up.

         One of the challenges for using a SCRER as industrial policy is to avoid a large pass-
through from nominal exchange rate depreciation to prices. There is evidence that countries with
more volatile nominal exchange rates have higher pass-through elasticities (Campa and




36
  These interventions must be seen as a complement and not a substitute for counter-cyclical macroeconomic
policies, and of industrial policy. They should also not be seen as a sort of “interventions of last resort” once other
macroeconomic policies have been exhausted, but rather as part of the normal counter-cyclical policy package.
37
   See for instance Sarno and Taylor (2001) for a comparative review of the empirical literature of the 1980s and
1990s; the study concludes that the studies of the 1990s, that are supportive of the effectiveness of intervention,
should be given more weight than the studies of the 1980s, that had two major handicaps: the lack of data on
intervention and the lack of survey data on exchange rate expectations. More recently, Adler and Tovar (2011)
studied the effects of sterilized foreign exchange interventions from 2004 to 2010 for a panel of 15 economies (most
of them Latin American). They found that interventions are effective for maintaining the real exchange rate
persistently undervalued, but this effect is stronger when the capital account is more closed.


                                                         23
Goldberg, 2005).38 A corollary from this relationship is that a policy that targets nominal
exchange rate stability would also decrease the pass-through to prices, making the SCRER policy
more sustainable.

         Generally, pass-through elasticities will depend on the characteristics of the market
structure. Under the law of one price, in highly competitive markets there would be a perfect
pass-through from movements in the exchange rate to domestic prices of tradable goods.39 But a
less than infinity elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods would decrease
the pass-through elasticity. Consistently, empirical studies show that pass-through elasticities are
larger when the economy is more open. The elasticities also depend on macroeconomic
conditions: they are smaller in recessions than in booms (Goldfjan and da Costa Werlang, 2000).

         The sustainability of SCRER requires coordination with fiscal and monetary policies, and
importantly, it requires a proper identification of productivity trends. Macro policies should in
this sense generate an essential enabling environment for industrial policies to be effective.
Policies that encourage significant increases in consumption based on the expectation of future
increases in productivity—perhaps as a consequence of the real exchange and other industrial
policies—may fail dramatically if those expectations are not subsequently realized. If macro
policies turn out to be over-expansionary ex-post, they may result in inflationary pressures that
will severely damage the capacity for pursuing competitive real exchange rates. The recent case
of Argentina is an indication of these risks: When the country followed a SCRER policy (2003-
2008), the macroeconomic performance was successful. When that strategy stopped being
followed (since 2010), economic performance was mediocre (Damill, Frenkel, and Rapetti,
2015).

         Ultimately, the success of SCRER policies will depend on the capacity of being sustained
at least until the infant sectors grow, and this capacity will in turn depend on the possibility of


38
   The quoted study provides evidence only for OECD countries. This empirical finding is consistent with Devereux
and Engel (2001) theory, in which a higher volatility of the exchange rate makes the choice of foreign currencies for
transaction invoices more likely. Then, variations in the exchange rate would have a larger effect on prices.
39
   Matters are somewhat more complicated than this discussion suggests. For instance, if the country purchases
mostly machine goods from abroad, then a change in the exchange rate might not affect the short run marginal costs
of production. If the country imports mostly food, the impact on manufactured goods will depend on the structure of
the labor market and wage bargaining processes.


                                                         24
financing the complementary traditional industrial policies and of ensuring an economic
structure associated with a low pass-through. Avoiding boom-go-bust situations is central for
achieving those conditions.




6.     Conclusions

       There are a variety of historical experiences that support the claim that stable and
competitive real exchange rate (SCRER) policies are good for economic development, as
demonstrated by a number of Asian economies (Rodrik, 2008; Razmi et al., 2012), and more
recently by Argentina during 2003-2008 (Damill, Frenkel, and Rapetti, 2015).

       This paper has described the theoretical foundations for those policies. We note that the
main argument against such interventions—that they represent interference in the free
functioning of markets, which, in the absence of such intervention would ensure efficiency—has
been undermined by research over the past decades. In the absence of government intervention,
markets are not in general either efficient or stable. Today, in fact, every government intervenes
in the market, at the very least through the setting of interest rates (monetary policy). There is no
such thing as a “pure” market equilibrium.        Indeed, the market equilibrium is affected by
virtually every regulation that affects the macro-economic equilibrium, including those that
affect domestic savings and investment.

       We argued that a SCRER sets (some of) the necessary conditions for increases in
diversification of the tradable sector. But in order to incentivize the sectors with larger learning
spillovers, other complementary conditions must be established. Particularly, the sectors with
smaller learning spillovers must be taxed more heavily, in order to create a structure of shadow
prices that reflects the true social benefits and costs. The revenues from that tax structure may
serve the function of funding other traditional industrial policies that would increase the
elasticity of the aggregate supply to real exchange rate policies, such as the provision of credit to
the infant sectors, investments in infrastructure and R&D, and investments in education that
allow for a reconversion of the composition of the labor force to one that is complementary of
the pursued structure of production.


                                                 25
       A variety of capital account regulations and foreign exchange market interventions can be
used for achieving the goal of a SCRER. Those instruments may play a key role for achieving
macroeconomic and financial stability. We argue that the question should not be which
instrument to utilize. Rather, there should be a portfolio of instruments; direct interventions
combined with capital account management techniques, and in the latter case, price as well as
administrative interventions. We have argued that pursuing a stable, competitive, and effectively
multiple exchange rate can promote economic development, and given the instability of global
financial markets, this requires flexible and sustained interventions. And these interventions and
instruments need to be used in combination with, and in coordination with, a range of other
monetary, macro-economic and micro-instruments, including, most notably, industrial policies.
Exchange rate management is thus both an instrument of industrial policy, and a policy that can
enhance the power of other instruments.




                                               26
Appendix

This appendix sketches a simple two-period model for a small open economy with learning
spillovers in the production of a tradable good, in order to clarify the conditions under which the
implementation of competitive (and effectively multiple) real exchange rate policies is optimal.




Case 1. Two goods: a tradable and a non-tradable

Suppose the economy produces two goods, a tradable good           and a non-tradable good     . There
is a set of identical consumers-workers of measure     that has preferences defined by




where          ,          ,       ,           , with          ,            ,            ,

and     is the consumption of good          in period ,            . For simplicity we assume the
representative consumer has no impatience, and inelastically supplies her unit of time in each
period as labor at the market wage    . Labor is perfectly mobile across sectors.

Each sector     and     is composed by identical firms, indexed by . There is free entry in both
sectors. Production in each sector requires labor as the only input. The production functions are
described by

                                      (1)

                                      (2)

where         and       denote the production of the non-tradable and the tradable good by an

individual firm, with         ,               , and                            . The latter assumption

corresponds to the existence of learning spillovers in the tradable sector, as productivity of an
individual firm in the tradable sector is increasing in the aggregate production of tradable goods.
For simplicity, we assume that in the decentralized solution                      in equilibrium (this




                                                 27
assumes that the learning gain is compensated by an equivalent destruction of capabilities in the
first period).

The consumer has perfect access to international credit markets. There is no default, and we
assume the international interest rate is zero. The budget constraints of the consumer are




and




where      is the price of good   and     denotes net savings in the first period. Equilibrium in
labor markets must satisfy the clearing condition             +                   . The economy’s
constraints are




The real exchange rate in the decentralized solution

From the utility maximization problem and the profit maximization problems, we obtain




Thus, the evolution of the real exchange rate in the decentralized equilibrium,          , is given
by




                                                28
The real exchange rate in the planner’s solution

The planner resolves the utility maximization problem subject to the resource constraints and the
technological constraints. The difference with respect to decentralized solution is that the planner
internalizes (2), the learning-by-doing externality.

The real exchange rate in the planner’s first best solution,   , is given by




Thus, in the first best equilibrium the real exchange rate appreciates. The reason is that the
planner is moving labor from the non-tradable sector to the tradable sector; then, the non-
tradable good becomes more scarce, and its relative price increases.

A subsidy per unit of production of the non-tradable good that is equal to the learning externality
would take the economy to the first best. In the first best, consumers experience a decrease in the
relative price of the tradable good (that is the real exchange rate appreciation) and producers
experience an increase in the relative profitability of the tradable good.




Real exchange rate policies for economic development

If somehow it is not possible to provide a subsidy to the sector with the learning externality, the
government can still resort to policies that affect the real exchange rate as a second best. Capital
account policies as described in Jeanne (2012) or Korinek and Serven (2016) can be used for that
purpose.

Suppose the government controls the capital account, purchases tradable goods in                -- a
purchase that is funded with a lump sum tax -- saves them in the form of foreign reserves, and
gives them back to the consumer in              also in the form of a lump-sum. Then, the real
exchange rate under the intervention will be more depreciated than in the decentralized solution



                                                 29
in the first period:          . The depreciation reverts in the second period. This intervention is
optimal in the margin, because the net gain is the learning externality. Going beyond the margin,
the intervention creates both a static and dynamic distortion (the dynamic distortion,
corresponding to the intertemporal misallocation of consumption, would not exist in an infinite
horizon model as the one from Korinek and Serven, 2016), as well as a dynamic gain. The
optimal magnitude of the depreciation will be determined by the equalization of the distortion
costs and the dynamic gain.




Case 2. Two goods: a tradable and a non-tradable

Suppose next that there there are two tradable sectors, a resource sector     where learning does
not occur, and a non-resource sector    where learning occurs, and one non-tradable sector.

The production function for the resource sector is




with         .

The preferences of the representative consumer in this extended economy are described by




and the consumer’s budget constraints are now




and




Optimality now requires




                                                 30
A policy that makes the real exchange rate more competitive will now face a targeting problem.
It will increase the relative price of both the non-resource tradable good that has the learning
externality and the resource tradable that does not have it. The competitive real exchange rate
policy is providing an implicit subsidy to the two tradable sectors, but there is no gain from
subsidizing the resource sector. The solution to this targeting problem will then involve a tax to
the resource sector that eliminates the advantage that the initial foreign exchange intervention
creates, that is, a tax   such that




The tax revenues can be used for purchasing the non-resource tradable goods in the first period
that the intervention requires.

Thus, in the environment with multiple tradable goods with different learning spillovers and in
the absence of instruments to implement the first best, a policy of competitive and effectively
multiple real exchange rates will be a second-best – it will be a policy that will promote
economic development.




                                               31
References

Adler, Gustavo, and Camilo Tovar (2011), “Foreign Exchange Intervention: A Shield against
       Appreciation Winds?” IMF Working Paper 11/165. Washington, DC: International
       Monetary Fund.
Ariyoshi, Akira, Karl Habermeier, Bernard Laurens, Inci Ötker-Robe, Jorge Iván Canales-
       Kriljenko, and Andrei Kirilenko (2000), “Capital Controls: Country Experiences with
       Their Use and Liberalization”, Occasional Paper No. 190, Washington D.C.:
       International Monetary Fund.
Bengui, Julien, and Javier Bianchi (2014), “Capital flow management when capital controls
      leak.” In 15th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, Washington, DC, pp. 13-14.
Bresser-Pereira, Luiz Carlos (2008), “The Dutch disease and its neutralization: a Ricardian
       approach”, Revista de Economia Política 28, No. 1: 47-71.
Bhattacharya, Amar (1997), “Private Capital flows to Developing Countries,” Washington, D.C.:
       World Bank.
Blanchard, Olivier, Gustavo Adler, and Irineu de Carvalho Filho (2015), “Can Foreign Exchange
      Intervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from Global Capital Flow Shocks”, IMF
      Working Paper 15/159.
Blaum, Joaquín (2017), “Importing, Exporting and Aggregate Productivity in Large
      Devaluations”, Working Paper (Presented at NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge MA,
      2017).
Calvo, Guillermo (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of
       Sudden Stops”, Journal of Applied Economics, Vol. 1, No. 1, November 1998, pp. 35-54.
Campa, Jose Manuel, and Linda S. Goldberg (2005), “Exchange rate pass-through into import
      prices,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87.4: 679-690.
Corden, W. Max (2012), “Dutch Disease in Australia: Policy Options for a Three-Speed
      Economy,” The Australian Economic Review, vol.45, No.3, pp. 290-304.
Damill, Mario, Roberto Frenkel, and Martin Rapetti (2015), “Macroeconomic Policies in
       Argentina 2002-2013,” Comparative Economic Studies.
Dasgupta, Partha, and Joseph Stiglitz (1977), "Tariffs vs. quotas as revenue raising devices under
      uncertainty," The American Economic Review 1977:975-981.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel (2001), Endogenous currency of price setting in a
      dynamic open economy model, WP8559, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Epstein, Gerald, Ilene Grabel, and K.S. Jomo (2003), “Capital Management Techniques in
       Developing Countries”, in Ariel Buira (ed.), Challenges to the World Bank and the IMF:
       Developing Country Perspectives. London: Anthem Press, chapter 6.
Erten, Bilge and José Antonio Ocampo (2017), “Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Account
       Regulations”, IMF Economic Review, 65(2): 193-240.




                                               32
Frenkel, Robert, and Martin Rapetti (2014), “The real exchange rate as a target of
       macroeconomic policy”, Paper 74, Buenos Aires: Iniciativa para la transparencia
       financiera, www.itf.org.ar
Gallagher, Kevin (2014), Ruling Capital: Emerging Markets and the Reregulation of Cross-
       Border Finance, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Gallagher, Kevin, and Elen Shrestha (2012), “The Social Cost of Self-Insurance: Financial
       Crisis, Reserve Accumulation, and Developing Countries”, Global Policy, 3,4:501-509.
Gerchunoff, Pablo, and Martín Rapetti (2016), “La economía argentina y su conflicto
      distributivo estructural (1930-2015)”, El Trimestre Económico 83, no. 330 (2016).
Goldfajn, Ilan, and Sergio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang (2000), The pass-through from depreciation
       to inflation: a panel study, Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Rio de Janeiro,
       Departamento de Economía.
Ghosh, Atish R., Jonathan David Ostry, and Mahvash Saeed Qureshi (2014), Exchange Rate
      Management and Crisis Susceptibility: A Reassessment. International Monetary Fund.
Gluzmann, Pablo, Martin Guzman, and Peter Howitt (2014), “Stability of Expectations and
      Severity of Crises”. Paper Presented at the International Economic Association World
      Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, 2014.
Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (2006), “Helping infant economies grow: Foundations
      of trade policies for developing countries.” The American Economic Review (2006):141-
      146.
Greenwald, B. and J. E. Stiglitz (2014a), “Industrial Policies, the Creation of a Learning Society,
      and Economic Development,”, in The Industrial Policy Revolution I: The Role of
      Government Beyond Ideology, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Justin Yifu Lin (eds.), Houndmills,
      UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 43-71.
Greenwald, B. and J. E. Stiglitz (2014b), “Learning and Industrial Policy: Implications for
      Africa,” in Joseph E. Stiglitz, Justin Yifu Lin, and Ebrahim Patel (eds.), The Industrial
      Policy Revolution II: Africa in the 21st Century, Houndmills, UK and New York:
      Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 25-29.
Griffith-Jones, Stephany, José Antonio Ocampo and Lavinia Barros de Castro (eds.) (2017). The
        Future of National Development Banks. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press,
        forthcoming.
Guzman, Martin and Peter Howitt (2015), “Learning, Expectations, and the Financial Instability
     Hypothesis”. In Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics: Lessons from the Crisis and
     Beyond, edited by J.E. Stiglitz and M. Guzman, Chapter 6. Palgrave.
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2011), “Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows:
      Cross-Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework”, IMF Policy Paper, 14 February.
Itskhoki, Oleg and Benjamin Moll (2014), “Optimal Development Policies with Financial
       Frictions”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19994.
Jeanne, Olivier (2012), “Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate”, in NBER
       International Seminar on Macroeconomics (pp. 7-42), University of Chicago Press.


                                                33
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek (2010), Managing credit booms and busts: A Pigouvian
       taxation approach. No. w16377. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jourdan, Paul (2014), “Toward a Resource-Based African Industrialization Strategy”, in Joseph
       E. Stiglitz, Justin Yifu Lin, and Ebrahim Patel (eds.), The Industrial Policy Revolution II:
       Africa in the 21st Century, Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.
Kaldor, Nicholas (1966), Causes of the Slow Growth in the United Kingdom, Cambridge
       University Press, Cambridge.
Kaplan, Ethan, and Dani Rodrik (2002), “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?”, NBER
      Working Paper 8142.
Kindleberger, Charles P., and Robert Z. Aliber (2011), Manias, panics and crashes: a history of
       financial crises. Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
Klein, Michael W. (2012), “Capital Controls: Gates and Walls,” Brookings Panel on Economic
       Activity, Fall.
Korinek, Anton (2010) "Regulating capital flows to emerging markets: An externality view.",
      Mimeo.
Korinek, Anton (2011), "The new economics of prudential capital controls: A research
      agenda." IMF Economic Review 59.3: 523-561.
Korinek, Anton, and Luis Serven (2012), “Undervaluation through foreign reserve accumulation:
      Static losses, dynamic gains”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 64, 104-136.
Krugman, Paul (1987), "The narrow moving band, the Dutch disease, and the competitive
     consequences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on trade in the presence of dynamic scale
     economies." Journal of Development Economics 27, No. 1: 41-55.
Macartan Humphreys, Jeffrey Sachs and J. E. Stiglitz (eds.) (2007), Escaping the Resource
      Curse, New York: Columbia University Press.
Yeyati, Eduardo Levy, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Neeltje Van Horen (2008), “Crises, capital
       controls, and financial integration”, The World Bank Development Economics Research
       Group, Policy Research Working Paper 4770.
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger (2007), "Fear of floating in reverse: exchange
      rate policy in the 2000s." In LAMES-LACEA Annual Meetings.
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, Federico Sturzenegger, and Pablo Alfredo Gluzmann (2013), "Fear of
      Appreciation." Journal of Development Economics 101 (2013): 233-247.
Libman, Emiliano (2017), “The effects of exchange rate regimes on real exchange rate
      misalignment.” International Review of Applied Economics: 1-23.
Lin, Justin (2017), “Joseph Stiglitz and China’s Transformation Success,” in Economic Theory
       and Public Policies: Joseph Stiglitz and the Teaching of Economics (Martin Guzman,
       ed.), Columbia University Press, New York, NY (forthcoming).
Magud, Nicolas E., and Carmen M. Reinhart (2007), “Capital Controls: An Evaluation.” In
      Sebastian Edwards (ed.), Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies:
      Policies, Practices and Consequences. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, ch. 14.


                                                34
Magud, Nicolas E., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2011) “Capital Controls: Myth
      and Reality—A Portfolio Balance Approach,” NBER Working Paper No. 16805.
Missio, Fabricio Jose, Frederico Jayme Jr, Gustavo Britto, and José Luis Oreiro (2015), “Real
       Exchange Rate and Economic Growth: new Empirical Evidence”, Metroeconomica,
       forthcoming.
Montecino, Juan (2015), “Capital Control and the Real Exchange Rate: Do Controls Promote
      Disequilibria?”, UMass Amherst Department of Economics Working Paper 2015-02.
Ocampo, José Antonio (2003), “Capital Account and Counter-Cyclical Prudential Regulation in
     Developing Countries”, in Ricardo Ffrench-Davis and Stephany Griffith-Jones (eds),
     From Capital Surges to Drought: Seeking Stability for Emerging Markets. London:
     Palgrave Macmillan.
Ocampo, José Antonio (2008), “A Broad View of Macroeconomic Stability”, in Narcis Serra and
     Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds), The Washington Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New
     Global Governance. New York: Oxford University Press, ch. 6.
Ocampo, José Antonio (2015), “Capital Account Liberalization and Management”, UNU-
     WIDER Working Paper 2015/048, May.
Ocampo, José Antonio, Codrina Rada, and Lance Taylor. Growth and policy in developing
     countries: a structuralist approach. Columbia University Press, 2009.
Ocampo, José Antonio, and Gabriel Palma (2008), “The Role of Preventive Capital Account
     Regulations”, in José Antonio Ocampo and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.), Capital Market
     Liberalization and Development. New York: Oxford University Press, ch.7.
Ocampo, José Antonio, Shari Spiegel, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (2008), “Capital Market
     Liberalization and Development”, in José Antonio Ocampo and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds),
     Capital Market Liberalization and Development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ocampo, José Antonio, and Bilge Erten (2014), “Capital Account Regulations: Role,
     Effectiveness, and the IMF’s Institutional View”, in Luiz Carlos Bresser-Pereira, Jan
     Kregel and Leonardo Burlamaqui (eds.), Financial Stability and Growth: Essays on
     Financial Regulation and New Developmentalism, Milton Park: Routledge.
Ocampo, José Antonio, and Jonathan Malagón (2015), “Colombian Monetary and Exchange
     Rate Policy over the Past Decade”, Comparative Economic Studies, 53:3, pp. 454-482.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi,
       and Dennis B. S. Reinhardt (2010), “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls”, IMF Staff
       Position Note, SPN/10/04, Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Luc Laeven, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash
       S. Qureshi, Annamaria Kokenyne, (2011), “Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools to
       Use?” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/06, Washington D.C.: International Monetary
       Fund.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi (2012), “Tools for
       Managing Financial-Stability Risks from Capital Inflows,” Journal of International
       Economics, 88 (2):407–421.



                                             35
Prasad, Eswar S., Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Rose (2003). “Effects of
       Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence”. IMF
       Occasional Paper, No. 220, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Prasad, Eswar S., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian (2007), Foreign capital and
       economic growth, Working Paper 13619, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rapetti, Martin (2013). “Macroeconomic policy coordination in a competitive real exchange rate
       strategy for development.” Journal of Globalization and Development 3.2: 1-31.
Rapetti, Martin, Peter Skott and Arslan Razmi (2012), “The real exchange rate and economic
       growth: Are developing countries different”, International Review of Applied
       Economics, 2012:1-9.
Razmi, Arslan, Martin Rapetti, and Peter Skott (2012), “The real exchange rate and economic
      development,” Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 23.2:151-169.
Rincón, Hernán and Jorge Toro (2010), “Are Capital Controls and Central Bank Intervention
      Effective?” Borradores de Economia 625, Bogotá: Banco de la República.
Rodrik, Dani (1994), “Getting Interventions Right: How South Korea and Taiwan Grew Rich,”
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4964.
Rodrik, Dani (2007), One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions and Economic
       Growth, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rodrik, Dani (2008), “The real exchange rate and economic growth,” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, Fall: 365-412.
Rodrik, Dani (2013), “The Past, Present and Future of Economic Growth,” Working Paper 1,
       Geneva: Global Citizen Foundation.
Rodrik, Dani (2016), “Premature Deindustrialization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 21(1) 1-33.
Rodrik, Dani, and Andrés Velasco (2000), “Short-Term Capital Flows”, in Proceedings of the
       Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 1999, Washington, DC:
       World Bank, pp. 59-90.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1971), “Increasing risk II: Its economic
      consequences”, Journal of Economic Theory 3, No. 1: 66-84.
Sarno, Lucio, and Mark P. Taylor (2003), “Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange
       Market: Is it Effective, and, If so, How Does It Work?” Journal of Economic Literature,
       Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 839-868.
Sengupta, Rajeswari and Abhijit Sen Gupta (2014), “Capital Flows and Capital Account
      Management in Selected Asian Economies”, Paper Prepared for the CIGI-INET Project
      on Macroeconomic and Financial Cooperation, September.
Setterfield, Mark (1997), “‘History versus Equilibrium’ and the Theory of Economic Growth”,
        Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 21, No.3, pp. 365-378.
Shimada, Go (2016), “Inside the Black Box of Japan’s Institution for Industrial Policy: An
      Institutional Analysis of the Development Bank, Private Sector, and Labor,”, in
      Efficiency, Finance, and Varieties of Industrial Policy (Noman and Stiglitz, eds.),
      Columbia University Press, New York, NY.

                                             36
Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Reforming the global economic architecture: lessons from recent crises." The
        Journal of Finance 54.4 (1999): 1508-1522.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2014), “The Lessons of the North Atlantic Crisis for Economic Theory and
        Policy,” in Geroge Akerlof, Olivier Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz
        (eds.), What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis, Cambridge,
        Mass. and London: MIT Press, pp. 335-347.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Amar Bhattacharya (2000), “The Underpinnings of a Stable and
        Equitable Global Financial System: From Old Debates to a New Paradigm”, in
        Proceedings of the Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 1999.
        World Bank, Washington, DC, pp. 91-130.
Stiglitz, Joseph, and Bruce Greenwald (2003), Towards a new Paradigm in Monetary
        Economics. Cambridge University Press.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Bruce C. Greenwald (2014), Creating a Learning Society: A New
        Approach to Growth, Development, and Social Progress, New York: Columbia
        University Press.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Justin Yifu Lin, and Ebrahim Patel (eds.) (2014), The Industrial Policy
        Revolution II: Africa in the 21st Century, Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave
        Macmillan.
Van der Ploeg, Frederick (2011), “Natural Resources: Curse or Blessing,” Journal of Economic
      Literature, 49:2, 366-420.
Venables, Anthony J. (2016), “Using Natural Resources for Development: Why Has It Proven
      So Difficult?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 30, No. 1 (Winter), pp. 161-
      183.
Weitzman, Martin L. (1974), “Prices vs. quantities,” The Review of Economic Studies (1974):
      477-491.




                                               37
