NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDUCING INFORMATION FRICTIONS IN VENTURE CAPITAL:
THE ROLE OF NEW VENTURE COMPETITIONS
Sabrina T. Howell
Working Paper 23874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23874

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised January 2018

Previously circulated as "Learning from Feedback: Evidence from New Ventures" and "Are New
Venture Competitions Useful?" This project was generously funded by the Kauffman Foundation.
For especially useful comments, I thank Manuel Adelino, Tom Åstebro, Tania Babina, Shai
Bernstein, Edward Glaeser,Will Gornall, Boyan Jovanovic, Saul Lach, Augustin Landier, Josh
Lerner, Song Ma, Holger Mueller, Ramana Nanda, David Robinson, Rick Townsend, Annette
Vissing-Jørgensen, Ayako Yasuda, and participants at the NBER Entrepreneurship Working
Group, Olin Corporate Finance Conference, Yale Junior Finance Conference, IDC Herzliya Eagle
Labs Conference, Queens University Economics of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Conference,
UC Berkeley- Stanford Innovation and Finance Conference, Georgia State CEAR Conference,
and the Tech Scheller seminar. Finally, I thank Adam Rentschler of Valid Evaluation, and all the
others who provided the data, including Lea Lueck, Allison Ernst, and Catherine Cronin. Lucy
Gong, Sreyoshi Mukherjee, and Jack Reiss provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Sabrina T. Howell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Reducing Information Frictions in Venture Capital: The Role of New Venture Competitions
Sabrina T. Howell
NBER Working Paper No. 23874
September 2017, Revised January 2018
JEL No. G24,G4,L1,L2,L26,O3
ABSTRACT
Venture capital, an important source of financing for potentially high-growth new businesses, is
believed to suffer from information frictions. This paper quantifies the magnitude of these
frictions among participants in new venture competitions. In a regression discontinuity design
with data from 87 competitions, winning a round increases the chances of external financing by
about 35 percent. Winning is most impactful for ventures ranked just above the cutoff but that
receive no cash prize, and judge ranks strongly predict venture success. The results indicate that
information problems in new venture finance are large, and competitions can help resolve them
through certification.

Sabrina T. Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23874

1.

Introduction

Venture capital (VC) is a crucial resource for financing and nurturing potentially high growth but
risky new ideas (Kaplan and Lerner 2010, Gornall and Strebulaev 2015). However, it suffers from
information asymmetry between entrepreneurs and investors (Gompers and Lerner 2001, Ozmel,
Robinson and Stuart 2013). Declining costs of starting a new venture may have intensified this
problem over the past decade.1 Ewens, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2018) document that lower
barriers to entrepreneurial entry have created greater uncertainty about startup quality among earlystage VC investors. Yet there is little evidence about the size of information frictions or how
consequential they might be in terms of startup real outcomes.
This paper uses data from new venture competitions to shed light on information frictions
in new venture finance. In a competition, early-stage startup founders present their businesses to
a panel of expert judges, whose scores determine which ventures win each round. Private ranking
data permit a regression discontinuity design to estimate the effect of winning, independently of
the effect of any cash prize. Specifically, the data include 87 competitions in 17 U.S. states between
2007 and 2015. The 4,328 participating ventures are linked to employment, financing, and survival
outcomes. Founders are linked to education and career histories. There are no local subsistence
businesses – such as restaurants or landscapers – that often contaminate efforts to study highgrowth entrepreneurship (Levine and Rubinstein 2016).
Within a competition-round, winning increases a venture’s chances of raising subsequent
external finance by between nine and 13 percentage points, relative to a mean of 24 percent, after
controlling for any cash prize. The effect is robust to an array of alternative specifications,
1

This is especially due to the advent of cloud computing. See Miller and Bound (2011), Economist (2014), Palmer
(2012), and Ewens, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2018). Y Combinator Founder Paul Graham (2013) wrote in 2008,
“The other reason no one was doing quite what we do is that till recently it was a lot more expensive to start a startup.”
(http://paulgraham.com/ycombinator.html).

1

including one with judge fixed effects. The most conservative estimates from preliminary rounds
and among non-cash prize winners suggest an 8.5 percentage point effect, or 35 percent of the
mean. This finding, which demonstrates that new venture competitions certify winning startups as
higher quality for early-stage investors, offers a magnitude for information frictions among
participating ventures.
New venture competitions are part of a larger phenomenon of new intermediaries that have
emerged in the past two decades to support and finance early-stage startups, especially those
founded by young, first-time entrepreneurs. These also include accelerators, incubators, and
crowdfunding platforms. Accelerators have received some attention in the literature (Hochberg
and Fehder 2015, Gonzalez-Uribe and Leatherbee 2017, and Yu Forthcoming). There are also
studies of crowdfunding, including Mollick (2014) and Hildebrand, Puri and Rocholl (2016). In
contrast, new venture competitions have received little academic attentions.

They are now

ubiquitous, organized by universities, governments, corporations, and other institutions around
the world seeking to promote high-growth entrepreneurship.
Four findings strongly suggest that certification is the primary mechanism for the effect of
winning on financing: (a) winning is impactful among marginal ventures; (b) winning has an effect
independently of any effect of cash prizes; (c) winning is more impactful for Internet- or softwarebased ventures; and (d) judge scores and ranks are informative about outcomes. First, ventures of
marginally investible quality should benefit from a quality signal. Consistent with this, the effect
is larger (16-17 percentage points) using narrow bandwidths of one or two firms around the cutoff
for winning. Further, winning a preliminary round but not a final round is at most only slightly
less impactful than winning a final round. The quality distribution is wider in preliminary rounds,
potentially making a signal more valuable. These results indicate that winning is impactful among
ventures that the judges deem marginal.
2

Second, it may be the case that winning is useful because cash prizes directly alleviate
financial constraints. The data permit separately identifying the effect of the cash prize, as not
all winners receive prizes and prize amounts vary within a competition. An additional $10,000 in
prize money increases the probability of subsequent financing by about four percent. However,
this effect is not robust to all specifications. Further, the economic magnitude of the effect seems
small: winning an average prize of $73,000 has a smaller effect than winning only a preliminary
round. More importantly, not only is winning a preliminary round but not a final round useful, but
winning a final round is most useful to those winners that do not receive a cash prize. Top-ranked
winners may be less financially constrained because they can send strong signals independently of
the competition. These results suggest that the cash prize, which is awarded to the highest ranked
winners, may to some degree crowd out private investment.
The relatively small effect of the cash prize is somewhat inconsistent with related studies
in developing countries. For example, McKenzie (2017) finds that a Nigerian business plan
competition cash prize has large, positive effects on firm outcomes.2 In the U.S. setting, prizes
appear second-order to information effects, possibly reflecting the relative importance of
information asymmetry in the U.S. context. In developing countries, startups may have to rely on
internally generated funds because VC is absent altogether. They may also have business models,
such as small-scale manufacturing, that require more initial fixed capital.
Related to this point, signaling may be more important when a venture’s initial prototyping
stage is not costly. This leads to the third piece of evidence for certification, that Internet- or
software-based ventures, rather than hardware ventures, drive the effect of winning. Ewens, Nanda
and Rhodes-Kropf (2018) show that low startup costs for Internet- or software-based ventures yield
more marginal entrants and enable VCs to conduct more initial, high-risk funding experiments.
2

Also see Klinger and Schündeln (2011) and Fafchamps and Quinn (2017).

3

Therefore, generating a better signal by winning a competition should have a larger effect for
Internet- or software-based ventures.
The final finding (d) is that consistent with an important role for information, the judge
ranks are strongly predictive of success – proxied with venture financing, survival and
employment – even in competitions where ventures do not learn their ranks and so cannot be
affected by them. The effects of rank are large in magnitude. For example, a one decile
improvement in rank is associated with a 1.8 percentage point increase in the chances of
financing, which is more than the effect of an additional $10,000 in cash prize. Overall ranks are
aggregated from specific criteria ranks. Of these, the team criterion best predicts initial venture
success, consistent with Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan and Strebulaev (2016) and Bernstein,
Korteweg and Laws (2017). However, technology/product scores are strongly predictive – and are
the only predictor – of long run, high-level success (acquisition/IPO). This speaks to the “horse
vs. jockey” debate; team may matter most initially, but the business may matter most in the long
run (see Kaplan, Sensoy and Strömberg 2009).
There are two alternative channels to certification. One is that the judges themselves are
the subsequent investors in startups. If this were the case, competitions might reduce search costs
through a convening function. However, in only 0.2 percent of judge-venture pairs did the judge or
judge’s firm invest in the venture. Controlling for this has no effect on the estimates. Second, the
effect could reflect type revelation on the part of the entrepreneur. That is, the signal of winning
may alleviate information problems for the entrepreneur rather than the investor. In this case,
losing should lead to abandonment. However, the effect of winning on venture survival is much
smaller than the effect on financing and is less robust.
Winning a competition seems to primarily serve a certification function, signaling quality
to the market and reducing search frictions between VCs and entrepreneurs, in the sense of
4

matching models such as Inderst and Müller (2004), Sørensen (2007), and Ewens, Gorbenko and
Korteweg (2018). The results are consistent with VCs using new venture competitions to help
identify promising startups, particularly among more marginal startups that may be just barely
positive NPV investments and may have the greatest uncertainty.
The findings should be interpreted as applying to the type of startup that participates in a
new venture competition. Unfortunately, it is difficult to assess representativeness, as there are no
data available on the universe of new ventures at hazard of receiving external financing, especially
with the requisite business and founder characteristics (an effort is made in Section 2.3). That said,
it seems likely that the startups in this sample are relatively marginal, as the best networked or
highest quality ideas might be expected to receive VC without additional intermediation. Also, as
there are no comprehensive data on competitions, it is impossible to establish that the programs
studied here, while diverse, are representative of the universe of competitions. With these caveats
in mind, the results suggest that information frictions in early-stage startup finance are large. This
paper builds on the literature on information asymmetry in VC, which includes Hellmann (2006),
Lindsey (2008), Tian (2011), Cao (2018), and Hochberg, Serrano and Ziedonis (2018).
This paper also provides the first systematic, causal evaluation of whether and how U.S.
new venture competitions are useful to participating startups. Given the substantial resources –
both money and time – that organizers and judges contribute to competitions, it is important to
understand their effects. Beyond financing, this paper shows that winning affects real outcomes.
It increases survival, having at least 10 employees, and the chances of an acquisition or IPO. This
contributes to the literature evaluating programs and policies to encourage entrepreneurship, which
includes Lach (2002), Klapper, Laeven and Rajan (2006), Howell (2017), Hombert, Schoar, Sraer
and Thesmar (2016), and Barrows (2018), beyond the work cited above.3
3
Barrows (2018) evaluates accelerators and competitions that use the YouNoodle platform. Comfortingly, he also
finds positive effects of winning on firm outcomes. An advantage of the data in this paper is that they permit a

5

The following section discusses the data, sample representativeness, and summary statistics.
Section 3 presents the estimation strategy. Section 4 analyzes the effect of winning and Section 5
assesses the cash prize and certification as possible channels. Section 6 concludes.

2.

New venture competition data

This section introduces the new venture competition data (Section 2.1) and presents summary
statistics (Section 2.2). Startups and founders in the data are compared to the U.S. startup
ecosystem in Section 2.3.

2.1.

The competitions

New venture competitions, in which founders present (or “pitch”) their technologies and business
models to a panel of judges, have proliferated in the past decade. Sponsored by universities,
foundations, governments, and corporations, among other institutions, competitions usually aim
to serve convening, certification, education, and financing functions. They appear to now be an
important part of the startup ecosystem, particularly for first-time founders. For example, among
the 16,000 ventures that the data platform CB Insights reports received their first seed or Series
A financing between 2009 and 2016, 14.5 percent won a competition. There are no data on the
number of competitions in the world, but casual observation suggests that nearly every non-profit
university sponsors at least one, and most U.S. state governments and many national governments
provide public funds to support competitions.4
sharp regression discontinuity design. For the subset of firms with observed outcomes in Barrows (2018), there is no
discontinuity in the probability of winning at the cutoff.
4
For example, New York has at least three publicly funded competitions. Two examples of publicly
funded competitions in this paper are the Arizona Innovation Challenge, which awards $3 million annually,
and the National Clean Energy Business Plan Competition, with $2.5 million in allocated funding.
On NY, see https://www.nypl.org/help/services/startup, http://queensstartup.org/, and http://www.binghamton-

6

This paper uses data from 87 competitions between 2007 and 2016. The individual
competitions are listed in Appendix Table A.1. Data from these competitions permit observing
startups and their founders at an earlier stage, with greater granularity, and in a larger sample than
prior studies. Further, unlike many data sources commonly used to study entrepreneurship, such
as the Survey of Consumer Finances or the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, local subsistence
businesses do not appear. The data were obtained individually by the author from program
administrators who were either cold-called or previously known to the author and from Valid
Evaluation, a company that provides application and judging software as a service.

The

competitions are therefore not randomly selected, but effort was made to include a variety of
competition types. Some are organized by universities, which are clearly a major sponsor. The
competitions are held in a variety of U.S. locations, including major hubs and areas without
substantial entrepreneurial activity. There is no sense in which it is possible to assess whether the
competitions are “representative,” as there are no existing data on competitions (accelerator
programs are substantively different).
All the competitions studied here have the following features: (1) They include a pitch
event, where the venture presents its business plan for 5-15 minutes; (2) Volunteer judges privately
score participants; (3) Venture ranks in the round determine which ventures win; (4) Ranks and
scores are secret, except when a feedback competition privately informs a venture of its rank; (5)
The organizer does not take equity in any participating ventures; (6) The organizer explicitly seeks
to enable winners to access subsequent external finance. The competitions are usually open to the
public, but typically there are few people besides the judges in the room, except in the final round.
In most competitions, judges score or rank based on six criteria: Team, Financials, Business
Model, Market Attractiveness, Technology/Product, and Presentation. These criteria scores or
ny.gov/binghamton-local-development-corporation-bldc.

7

ranks are aggregated into a judge-specific venture score or rank. When scores are used, they
are ordered to produce ranks. Judge ranks are then averaged to create an overall rank, which
determines round winners. The econometrician observes all ranking and scoring information. This
includes overall ranks and individual judges’ scores and ranks. In no case do founders observe
individual judge scores or ranks. Judges score independently and observe only their own scoring,
and never overall ranks.5 Winning participants are typically listed on a program website.
Summary statistics about the competitions are in Table 1 Panel 1. Competitions consist of
rounds (e.g. semifinals), and sometimes judging occurs in panels within a round. The mean number
of judges in a competition-round-panel is 17. The median competition has two rounds. Within the
113 preliminary rounds, the average number of participating ventures is 45. Within final rounds,
this average is 19. Importantly for the regression discontinuity design, there are multiple winners
in most rounds, with a median of 11 winners in preliminary rounds and four in final rounds. The
average prize is $73,000, and ranges from $2,000 to $275,000. Only 64 percent of winners in final
rounds receive cash prizes.
In 34 of the competitions, representing 35 percent of unique ventures, ventures receive an
email after the round containing their overall and criteria ranks. Ventures learn only their own
ranks, and not those of other participants. In the remaining 53 competitions, participants do not
observe any rank information. There are no systematic differences in the way judges score or in
services (e.g. mentoring, networking, or training) across the two competition types. In no case
did a competition with feedback advertise itself as providing relative ranks or more feedback in
general, so ventures with greater informational needs could not have selected into them. Judges
were not informed that feedback would be provided, so there is no reason to believe they would
exert greater effort in the feedback competitions. Judges also cannot learn from the feedback, as
5

Judges could in theory report their scores to each other. This is unlikely, as 17 judges score a venture on average.

8

they observe only their own scoring.
This paper uses four transformations of the rank and score data. The first measure is decile
rank calculated for the round and within winners and losers separately. Decile ranks divide the
group into ten equal bins, with the best ranks in decile one, and the worst in decile 10. The second
measure is rank centered around the cutoff for winning, so that a rank of one indicates the lowestranked winner, and a rank of negative one indicates the highest-ranked loser. For example, if there
are four winners, the first-place winner will have a centered rank of four, and the second-place
winner will have a centered rank of three. The third measure is judge decile rank, calculated among
ventures that the judge scored. Finally, z-scores are calculated for the subset of competitions that
begin with raw scores. The z-score indicates how far, in terms of standard deviations, a given
absolute score falls relative to the sample mean. A higher z-score is better.

2.2.

Ventures, founders, and judges

The 4,328 unique ventures are described in Table 1 Panel 2. Ventures were matched to investment
events and employment using CB Insights, Crunchbase, AngelList, and LinkedIn.6 Care was taken
to account for name changes, as early-stage startups often change their names. In researching
the ventures, 765 name changes were identified. On average, 24 percent of participating ventures
raise private investment (angel or venture capital) after the round. At the time of the competition,
ventures are on average 1.9 years old, and 44 percent of them are incorporated as a C- or Scorp.7 Thirty-five percent are located in either California, Massachusetts, or New York. Fifty-two
6

The match rates for companies were 19 percent, 15 percent, 36 percent, and 45 percent, respectively. The match
rate of founders to LinkedIn was 79 percent. For LinkedIn, only public profile data is used by non-logged-in users,
based on Google searches for person and school or firm. VentureXpert was not used as it has poor coverage of very
early-stage investment, and has not been found by the author to outperform the combination of the three datasets used
here to identify external financing events.
7
Age is determined by the venture’s founding date in its application materials. Ventures that describe themselves
as “not yet founded” are assigned an age of zero.

9

percent are known to have business models centered around the Internet or software. There are
558 ventures that participate in multiple competitions.
Venture survival, which averages 34 percent, indicates that the venture had at least one
employee besides the founder on LinkedIn as of August 2016. While some startups may not
initially appear on LinkedIn, if they are ultimately successful they almost certainly will, because
their employees will identify themselves as working at the company. That is, companies rarely
remain in “stealth” mode forever. This measure of survival is not ideal and induces truncation bias
(mitigated by time fixed effects). However, it is the best available measure for very early-stage
ventures. An obvious alternative, the presence of a website, is a poor survival measure because
websites often stay active long after a venture has failed. An outcome variable that proxies for
meaningful real economic activity is having at least 10 employees on LinkedIn as of August 2016,
which averages 20 percent. Three percent of the sample experiences an acquisition or IPO, which
represents right-tail success from the perspective of a very early-stage venture.
Founders are described in Table 1 Panel 3, using data from the competitions and LinkedIn
profiles. Founders are mostly first-time entrepreneurs. Twenty-two percent of founders are women,
and 73 percent are men (the remaining five percent have ambiguous names and no clear LinkedIn
match).8 Age is calculated based on birth year, which is approximated as the college graduation
year less 22. Eighteen percent graduated from a top 10 college (see Appendix Table A.2 for
definitions), and 20 percent are students at the time of the competition. Almost half of founders
have an MBA, and two-thirds of the MBAs are from top 10 programs.
Judges participate to source deals, clients, job opportunities, or as volunteer work. There are
2,514 unique judges, described in Appendix Table A.3, of whom 27 percent are VCs, 20 percent
8
Genders were assigned to founder names using the Blevins and Mullen (2015) algorithm, based on gender-name
combinations from the U.S. Social Security Administration. Unclear cases, such as East Asian names, were coded by
hand.

10

are corporate executives, and 16 percent are angel investors. Ventures and judges are assigned to
16 sectors. Sector assignations come from competition data, and each venture is assigned only one
sector. Judge sectors are drawn from LinkedIn profiles or firm webpages, and judges may have
expertise in multiple sectors. Ventures and competitions are sorted by state in Appendix Table
A.4. There is concern that the judges investing themselves might contaminate any impact of the
competitions on venture financing. Careful comparison of funded ventures’ investors and judges
revealed 95 instances of a judge’s firm invested in the venture, and three instances of a judge
personally investing.
These data shed new light on venture and founder characteristics associated with startup
success. In Appendix Table A.5, subsequent financing and having at least 10 employees are
projected on characteristics. More founder job experience, being an Internet or software venture,
being located in a VC hub state, and having prior financing are all strongly associated with
success. Having an MBA is negatively associated with success. This relationship is weak for
financing, but column 4 suggests that founders with MBAs are 5.4 pp (27 percent of the mean)
less likely to have at least 10 employees, significant at the 0.01 level. Conversely, attending a top
10 college is associated with a higher likelihood of investment. Kaplan, Klebanov and Sorensen
(2012) find a similar relationship between college selectivity and success for CEOs of VC-backed
companies.9

2.3.

Sample representativeness

There is little existing empirical analysis of startups before their first external funding event.
Therefore, there are no obvious benchmarks against which to assess whether the participating
ventures are representative. However, an attempt is made to compare the startups in this sample to
9

A similar exercise using founder college majors does not find strong variation. Majoring in either entrepreneurship
or political science/international affairs is weakly associated with success.

11

other data about first-time, early-stage U.S. startups and their founders. Appendix Table A.6
compares the distribution of ventures to overall U.S. VC investment. The share of software
startups, 37 percent, is close to the national average of 40 percent in both deals and dollars. In
part because VC investment in clean energy has declined dramatically in recent years (Saha and
Muro 2017), as well as the presence of the Cleantech Open competition, the data are skewed
towards clean energy.
The competitions take place in 17 U.S. states. With the exception of Arizona, the top
20 states for venture location in the data almost entirely overlap with the top 20 states for VC
investment, though the data has fewer ventures from California and more from Massachusetts.
This may be expected from early-stage ventures, as startups often move to Silicon Valley to raise
VC. The probability of an IPO or acquisition, three percent, is comparable to the five percent
found in Ewens and Townsend (2017)’s sample of AngelList startups. Ventures average three team
members, similar to the 2.6 founders on the AngelList platform in Bernstein, Korteweg and Laws
(2017). The median founder age is 29 years, which is roughly representative of startup founders.10

3.

Estimation strategy

A regression discontinuity (RD) design permits establishing a causal effect of winning a
competition. Estimation is based on Equation 1.
YiP ost = ↵ +

1 W onRoundi,j

+ f Rank/Zscorei,j/k +

2 P rizei

+

j/k

+ 0 Xi + "i,j

(1)

The dependent variable YiP ost is a binary measure of venture i’s success. A function of rank
or z-score is at the competition-round-panel (j) or judge (k) level. P rizei is the dollar amount
10

The average Y-Combinator founder is just 26, and the average entrepreneur age at company founding among
startups with at least a $1 billion valuation between 2003 and 2013 was 34 (https://techcrunch.com/2010/07/30/ronconway-paul-graham/ and https://techcrunch.com/2013/11/02/welcome-to-the-unicorn-club/).

12

that the venture won, if any. Fixed effects for either the competition-round-panel ( j ) or judge
( k ) are included. The former absorb the date and location. Venture controls Xi include whether
the company received investment before the round, whether any of the venture’s judges or those
judges’ firms ever invested in the venture, 17 sector indicator variables, company age, and whether
the founder is a student. These, especially age, reduce the sample size and are not included in most
specifications. Standard errors are clustered by competition-round-panel or by judge.
A valid RD design requires that treatment not cause rank. This is not a problem here, as
the award decision happens after ranking. One way this setting differs from a conventional RD
design is that the ranking is ordinal rather than cardinal. This is similar to the ordinal ranking used
in an RD design in Howell (2017); in both settings, the differences in the true distance between
ranks should be the same on average. That is, errors in differences on either side of cutoff in any
given competition should average out. To address any concerns with an ordinal running variable,
z-scores based on nominal scores are employed in an alternative specification.
The rating variable is also discrete - the average number of participants is 45 for
preliminary rounds, and 19 for final rounds. This discreteness is less severe than that in Howell
(2017), where there are on average 10 applicants per grant competition. Lee and Card (2008) note
that the fundamental econometrics are not different with a discrete rating variable, even if there is
greater extrapolation of the outcome’s conditional expectation at the cutoff. To determine the
appropriate polynomial, the goodness-of-fit test for RD with discrete covariates from Lee and
Card (2008) is employed, which compares unrestricted and restricted regressions.11 Also note that
a McCrary (2008) test for density around the cutoff is not relevant here, since by definition the
11

The unrestricted projects the outcome on dummies for each of K ranks. The restricted is a polynomial like
(ESSRestr. ESSU nrestr. )/(K P )
, where ESS is the error sum of
Equation 1. The goodness-of-fit statistic is: G ⌘
ESSU nrestr. (N K)
squares from regression, N is the number of observations, and P is the number of restricted parameters. G takes an
F-distribution. The null hypothesis is that the unrestricted model does not provide a better fit. If G exceeds its critical
value, the null is rejected in favor of a higher order polynomial.

13

ranks around the cutoff are populated equally.
The primary empirical concern is whether ranks are manipulated around the cutoff, because
the cutoff in a valid RD design must be exogenous to rank (Lee and Lemieux 2010). That is, the
identification strategy is threatened if judges or organizers sort ventures on unobservables around
the cutoff. This is extremely unlikely because judges score independently and typically only score
a subset of participating ventures. Scores are then averaged and sorted to create ranks, as explained
in Section 2.1.
Reassuringly, observable baseline covariates and pre-assignment outcome variables are
smooth around the cutoff using both decile ranks and centered ranks. This is shown with decile
ranks in Figure 1 for venture variables observable at the time of the competition, such as previous
financing and whether the venture is incorporated.

Similarly, Figure 2 shows that founder

characteristics observable at the time of the competition, such as having a BA from a top 10
college, being female, and the number of previous jobs, are continuous across winners and losers.
The figures use final rounds and decile ranks. They are similar when preliminary rounds or
centered rank are used instead. Note that with decile rank, the winner and loser local polynomial
lines overlap because the winning share varies across rounds.12

4.

Effect of winning

4.1.

Effect of winning on subsequent financing

Visual evidence of the effect of winning is in Figures 3 (using decile ranks) and 4 (using centered
ranks around the cutoff). In each case, the top two graphs show the probability of subsequent
external financing in preliminary and final rounds. The middle two graphs show the probability of
12

There are no losers in the top bin, and winners are truncated at the fifth decile.

14

venture survival, and the bottom two graphs show the probability of having at least 10 employees.
The positive effect of winning is apparent in all cases, especially for preliminary rounds. In the
decile graphs, the winner line lies above the non-winner line, and in the cutoff graphs, there is a
clear discontinuous jump at the cutoff. This provides strong evidence of a substantial raw effect of
winning.
Regression estimates of the effect of winning are in Table 2, using variants of Equation
1. The dependent variable is subsequent external financing. Final and preliminary rounds are
included. Further, some ventures participate in multiple competitions, and all observations are
included. Thus, in this main specification, a venture can appear multiple times. Using overall
decile rank in the round, winning a round increases a venture’s chances of subsequent external
finance by 8.8 percentage points (pp), relative to a mean of 24 percent. The preferred specification
in column 2, where decile ranks on either side of the cutoff are used, finds an effect of 13 pp. When
a rich array of venture controls is added (substantially decreasing the sample size), the effect is 7.9
pp (column 3).
Equation 1 is estimated at the judge-venture level in Table 2 Panel 1 column 4. That is,
each observation is a judge’s rank of the venture within a competition-round-panel. This model
includes judge fixed effects and controls for the venture’s decile rank within ventures that the judge
scored. Year fixed effects are also included. Note that judges often participate in multiple rounds
and in some cases are observed in multiple competitions, so judge fixed effects are quite different
from the competition-round-panel fixed effects used in other specifications. This model finds a
larger effect of winning, at 17 pp. Standard errors are clustered by judge, but the standard error is
essentially unchanged when clustering by venture.
Subsequent specifications use alternative controls. Table 2 Panel 1 column 5 uses z-scores
and so is restricted to the subsample of competitions that use scores before force-ranking
15

participants. Panel 2 columns 1-3 use various forms of centered rank around the cutoff. In
columns 1-2, linear and quadratic centered rank yield the same effect as the main specification.
The goodness of fit test discussed in Section 3 finds that linear rank is optimal. When centered
rank is controlled for separately among winners and losers, the effect is somewhat larger (column
3).
To assess the effect of winning near the cutoff, Table 2 Panel 2 columns 4-7 use narrow
bandwidths. When only one venture on either side of the cutoff is included, the effect is 16 pp. It
is 11 pp when cash prize winners are excluded (column 5). With two ventures on either side of the
cutoff, the effect is 14 pp overall and 8.6 pp without prize winners (columns 6-7). The differences
between the estimates with and without winning a prize are not significantly different from one
another.

4.2.

Effects by round type

In order to shed light on the mechanism, it is useful to decompose the overall effect of winning
into that of the cash prize and the type of round (preliminary or final). It is possible to identify
the prize separately from winning for two reasons. First, as mentioned in Section 2.1, only 64
percent of winners in final rounds receive cash prizes. Second, the prize amount typically varies
across winners that do win cash prizes within a final round. The average standard deviation of
prize money within final round prize winners is $12,300. While prize amounts may vary with
competition characteristics, competition fixed effects absorb this variation. The regressions in
Table 2 consistently find that an extra $10,000 increases the probability of financing by nearly 1
pp. This implies that the average prize of $73,000 increases the chances of financing by 7.3 pp.
The effect of cash prizes appears linear, as there is no effect of higher order functions of the prize,
such as the prize squared.
16

This positive effect of a cash prize is smaller than the effect of winning even a preliminary
round and is not as robust. Table 3 column 1 includes dummies for winning a preliminary round,
a final round, and a prize. Note that for prize winners, all three of these will equal one. The
effect of winning a preliminary round after controlling for winning the final round is 8.1 pp. The
prize indicator has a near-zero and insignificant coefficient. Columns 2 and 3 establish this more
rigorously by restricting the sample to final rounds. The effect of winning is 12 pp, and there is
no effect of an additional $10,000 in cash prize (column 2). When prize winners are excluded
from the sample, and the point estimate of winning a final round rises to 17 pp (column 3). This
indicates that the effect of winning a final round is driven by marginal winners that do not win a
cash prize.
The sample is restricted to preliminary rounds in Table 3 columns 4-6. The effect of winning
a preliminary round is 14 pp (column 4), which is slightly higher than the overall effect using all
rounds with the same specification in Table 2 column 2. After controlling for whether the venture
won the final round (column 5) the effect of a preliminary win is 8.6 pp. It is 8.5 pp when final
round winners are excluded from the sample (column 6). The difference between the coefficients
on winning final and preliminary rounds is significant at the .05 level in column 5. Note, however,
that both coefficients on winning are relative to preliminary round losers. Winning a preliminary
round but not a final round is at most only somewhat less useful than winning a final round (8.6 pp
vs. 12 pp, which are not significantly different from one another). In sum, winning a cash prize is
useful, but is not nearly as useful as winning the round.

4.3.

Effect of winning on real outcomes

Real startup outcomes – survival, having at least 10 employees, and being acquired or going public
– are considered in Table 4. The first four columns use the whole sample, the next three preliminary
17

rounds, and the final three a bandwidth of two ventures on either side of the cutoff. First, consider
the probability of venture survival. Winning has a 4.7 pp effect across all rounds, though this
is significant only at the .1 level (column 1). It loses significance in preliminary rounds but is a
robust 7.7 pp with the narrow bandwidth (column 8). There may be concern that dead ventures are
miscoded and in fact reflect a “pivot” and venture name change. As mentioned above, care was
taken to identify name changes. Nonetheless, some miscoding may remain. Therefore, column
2 considers founders that subsequently founded or were the CEO of a different company, in case
these other companies are in fact the original ventures with new names. There is no effect of
winning. This not only serves as a robustness test, but also indicates that winning does not affect
entrepreneurship as a career for the founder, despite being useful for the venture.
Having at least 10 employees is a measure of real economic activity. In the context of earlystage ventures, it is a meaningful marker of success. The bottom two graphs in Figures 3 and 4
show a clear jump at the cutoff in preliminary rounds, indicating a significant effect of winning.
Winning increases the chances of having at least 10 employees by 5.1 pp across all rounds, and
6.3 pp in preliminary rounds (Table 4 columns 3 and 6). It has a similar effect using the narrow
bandwidth, of 5.9 pp (column 9). There are not many acquisitions or IPOs in the data; the mean
is just three percent. The effect of winning on these successful exits is not quite significant in all
rounds or with the narrow bandwidth (columns 4 and 10), but it is 2.6 pp in preliminary rounds
(column 7). At almost 100 percent of the mean, this effect is large in economic magnitude. For all
outcomes in Table 4, the results are similar with controls for centered rank.

4.4.

Effect of rank

A striking finding from Tables 2-4 is that rank and score strongly predict success after controlling
for winning and competition fixed effects. For example, a one decile improvement in rank among
18

losers is associated with a 1.8 pp increase in the probability of external financing, which is 7.5
percent of the mean (Table 2 Panel 1 column 2). Individual judge ranks are also predictive within
judge (Table 2 Panel 1 column 4). Importantly, the effect of rank persists within the no-feedback
competitions, where ranks cannot directly affect venture outcomes (Table 6 Panel 1 column 6).
The criteria ranks are also informative. Table 5 shows the association between criteria ranks
and outcomes, controlling for win status. A higher team rank (i.e. the quality of the founders) is
the strongest predictor of success for all outcomes except IPO/acquisition. Similarly, Bernstein,
Korteweg and Laws (2017) and Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan and Strebulaev (2016) find that earlystage investors care most about information regarding founder team quality. For IPO/acquisition,
the only criterion with predictive power is product/technology, and this is quite robust. Therefore,
in these data, team is most relevant for low-level, early-stage success, while technology matters
most for high-level, late-stage success. This speaks to the “horse vs. jockey” debate, suggesting
that the team matters initially, but the business matters in the long run. It is consistent with Kaplan,
Sensoy and Strömberg (2009), who examine 50 public firms and find that business lines but not
management remain stable from startup to IPO.
The strong predictive power of rank found here contrasts with the U.S. Department of
Energy ranks of SBIR grant applicants in Howell (2017), which are uninformative about firm
outcomes. There are a number of differences between the SBIR grant process and new venture
competitions. One is that competition judges tend to be expert market participants rather than
government officials. Nearly half of the judges in these data are angel or VC investors (Appendix
Table A.3). Unreported regressions examine the predictive power of rank by judge occupation.
There is little difference across investor, lawyer/consultant/accountant, and corporate executive
judges.

Perhaps surprisingly, entrepreneur judges are the exception: their scores have no

predictive power. There is no relationship between judge-venture sector match and the predictive
19

power of judge ranks.

4.5.

Robustness tests

Robustness tests confirm the main effect of winning and find it to be consistent across relevant
subsamples.

In Table 6 column 1, errors are clustered by competition rather than

competition-round-panel. Venture or judge clusters also yield similar results to the main model
(unreported). In column 2, ventures in which a judge or judge’s firm invested are excluded, in
case these judges’ favorable opinion of the ventures mechanically causes winning or rank to
predict financing. Column 3 restricts observations to a venture’s first competition. Column 4 uses
a logit model instead of OLS and finds that winning doubles the odds of receiving financing. Note
that logit is not preferred as it drops groups without successes (i.e. panels without ventures that
subsequently received financing).

Column 5 restricts the sample to competitions that gave

participants feedback by informing them of their rank in the round, while column 6 restricts the
sample to competitions that did not provide feedback. The effect is somewhat larger in the
no-feedback competitions, at .17 pp, though the difference is not statistically significant.
The main model uses competition fixed effects, so the results should not be affected if
participants are on average higher quality in some competitions. However, to ensure robustness
and explore potential heterogeneity, Table 6 Panel 2 divides the sample by competition type. The
effect is 12 (15) pp in competitions not held at (held at) universities (columns 1-2). The effect
is unchanged when the two largest competitions are excluded (HBS New Venture Competition in
column 3 and Arizona Innovation Challenge in column 4). The effect is very similar to the main
result when small competitions (less than 30 participants) are excluded (column 5).
The final columns of Table 6 Panel 2 divide the sample by venture and founder
characteristics. The effect is robust to restricting the sample to ventures located in California,
20

Massachusetts, and New York (column 6), to incorporated ventures (column 7), to founders with
MBAs (column 8), and to student founders (column 9).
Judge ranks remain predictive of outcomes in all cases except among founders with MBAs.
They are most predictive for incorporated ventures, which may be easier to assess because they
are more mature. The above robustness tests for winning in Table 6 go through for survival and
10+ employees; these are available on request. With the exception of technology type (discussed
below), the remarkable consistency of the effect across subsamples indicates that conditional on
selecting into participating in a competition, winning provides ventures with roughly homogenous
benefits.

5.
5.1.

Interpretation
Channel 1: Cash

Non-dilutive cash may directly alleviate financing constraints. Founders could, for example, use
it to build initial prototypes of their products, which might reduce uncertainty about the startup
among prospective investors. Cash could also improve the bargaining position of the entrepreneur
or reduce the amount of outside equity needed. Indeed, independently of winning, the cash prize
is useful, with positive effects on financing, survival, and employment (Tables 2 and 4).
Yet the effect is economically small relative to the effects of winning either a preliminary or
final round, and the effect of winning a final round is stronger among winners that do not receive a
prize. The effect of the cash prize is also small relative to the predictive power of rank. Even in the
specification where it has the largest, most robust coefficients, the effect of an additional $10,000
is similar to or smaller than one decile of rank’s predictive power. It is also smaller in economic
magnitude than the effect of U.S. Department of Energy SBIR grants found in Howell (2017). The
21

effect of an additional $10,000 in SBIR grants on the probability of subsequent financing is 0.66
pp, or eight percent of the sample mean, compared to about one pp, or four percent of the sample
mean, for the same amount of competition prize money.13
Heterogeneity in the effect of the cash prize exists for two variables and suggests that the
cash prize is more impactful among more financially constrained ventures. Table 7 interacts all
covariates except the competition fixed effects with a characteristic C. Column 1 shows that the
cash prize has a significantly smaller effect for founders with elite college degrees.14 Column 2
shows that the cash prize has a significantly smaller effect for founders who were previously was
the CEO or founder of a different venture (i.e., serial entrepreneurs). Founders with top college
degrees are likely wealthier (Chetty, Friedman, Saez, Turner and Yagan 2017) and may have
superior access to investor networks. The sensitivity of non-elite college founders’ venture
outcomes to cash suggests that cash prizes may help to level the entrepreneurship playing field.
Serial entrepreneurs also may have better access to investor networks and may have accumulated
capital from the previous venture.

Both these types of founders are likely less financially

constrained.

5.2.

Channel 2: Certification

Winning could be an informative signal to the market, especially to early-stage investors. If
certification is the primary mechanism for the positive effect of winning on financing and real
outcomes, it should be the case that:
13

A $150,000 SBIR grant increased the probability a venture subsequently received external financing by about
10 pp. Thus an extra $10,000 in SBIR grants was associated with a 0.66 pp increase in financing, while in the
competition context an extra $10,000 is associated with about a 1 pp increase. The sample means are eight and 24
percent, respectively.
14
The definition of “elite” is the top ten colleges (Appendix Table A.2). The result is robust to only using HarvardStanford-MIT, or the top twenty colleges.

22

1. Winning has a strong effect independent of any cash prize effect;
2. Judge scores and ranks are informative about outcomes;
3. Winning is impactful among marginal ventures;
4. Winning is more impactful for Internet- or software-based ventures.
The first two are the most important, and the second two are ancillary. The evidence is consistent
with the first hypothesis. Table 3 shows that winning has an effect separately from the prize.
Moreover, winning a final round is more impactful among winners that do not receive a cash prize
(Table 3 column 3). Further, winning an average prize of $73,000 has a smaller effect than winning
only a preliminary round. Finally, while the cash prize has a positive effect in some specifications,
it is not robust across models (e.g. Table 3 columns 1, 2, and 5). The cash prize, which is awarded
to the highest ranked winners, may to some degree crowd out private investment.
Second, since winning is a binary transformation of judge ranks, rational investors should
perceive winning as a quality signal only if the aggregated opinion of the judges is informative
about venture outcomes. As explained in Section 4.4, the judge ranks are strongly predictive of
success, even in competitions where ventures do not learn their ranks and so cannot be affected by
them. This is consistent with an important role for information in how the competitions are useful.
The third hypothesis is that a quality signal should be impactful for marginal ventures that
are not clearly positive NPV investments. Two findings are consistent with this. First, the effect is
larger (16-17 pp) using narrow bandwidths of one or two firms around the cutoff for winning.
This means that the effect is larger for firms that just barely won, relative to higher ranked
winners. These results indicate that ventures of more marginal quality in the vicinity of the cutoff
benefit most from winning, rather than the effect being consistent among lower- and
higher-ranked winners. Second, information asymmetry between ventures and investors is likely
23

higher in preliminary rounds. There should be more uncertainty about quality for preliminary
round participants because they include all finalists as well as a left tail of lower-quality ventures.
However, preliminary round winners are less observable, which should be expected to temper
potential certification. Table 3 demonstrates that winning a preliminary round is independently
very useful. Winning a preliminary round but not a final round is at most only slightly less useful
than winning a final round (the difference between 8.6 and 12 pp in columns 2 and 5). These
results point to winning having an effect for those ventures that the judges deem marginal.
The last hypothesis is that certification from winning should be more impactful among
Internet- or software-based ventures. There are two reasons, both of which emerge from the theory
and findings in Ewens, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2018). First, the low costs of starting an Internetor software-based venture should increase entry, resulting in more marginal entrants. Second,
precisely because it is cheaper to experiment in funding these sorts of ventures, investors can more
readily pursue a “spray and pray” strategy with minimal due diligence than they can with hardware
startups that require large initial investments. Therefore, the signal of winning a competition,
which is essentially costless for the VC to acquire, is likely to be more impactful. Table 7 column
3 shows that the main effect of winning is driven by Internet- or software-based ventures. The cash
award is not more or less helpful for these ventures.
There are two alternative explanations for the effect of winning. First, it may be that the
investors driving the main effect are the judges themselves; recall that about half of judges are
angel or VC investors. If this were the case, the competitions might reduce search costs through a
convening function. However, as Appendix Table A.3 shows, in only 0.2 percent of judge-venture
pairs did the judge or judge’s firm invest in the venture. Further, as mentioned above, controlling
for the judge or judge’s firm investing has no effect on the estimate. Second, it is possible that the
effect could reflect type revelation on the part of the entrepreneur. If an entrepreneur is uncertain
24

about the quality of his own venture, he might perceive winning as a positive signal and be more
likely to continue rather than abandon the venture. If this is the case, it means that the certification
function serves to alleviate information problems for the entrepreneur as well as (or in lieu of) the
investor. However, the effect of winning on venture survival is much smaller than the effect on
financing, at about 14 percent of the mean (Table 4 column 1), relative to 54 percent for financing
(Table 2 column 2). This suggests that the effect of winning is primarily to reduce information
asymmetry with investors.
In sum, the large effect of winning independent of the cash prize effect and fact that ranks
are informative indicate that competitions produce valuable signals to early-stage investors about
venture quality. While certification may not be the only way that competitions are useful to
entrepreneurs, it is an important mechanism driving the effect. Using the most conservative
estimates from preliminary rounds and non-prize winners, the effect of certification is between 8
and 9 pp, or a 35 percent increase relative to the mean of 24 percent (Table 2 Panel 1 column 6,
and Table 4 columns 1, 5, and 6). This contrasts with the finding in Howell (2017) that SBIR
grants do not serve a certification function, and instead appear useful because the cash award
funds prototyping. In the competition context, winning has a larger effect among winners that do
not receive a cash prize. Top-ranked winners can send strong signals independently of the
competition and so are likely less financially constrained.

6.

Conclusion

In the presence of asymmetric information and search costs, it is difficult for VCs to identify the
most promising early-stage startups. As the barriers to entry have fallen, especially for Internetand software-based ventures, new intermediaries are screening and offering support to very early-

25

stage startups. Such intermediaries could serve an information provision function, filling a gap
that may have emerged as some VCs either shift to later stages of the startup lifecycle or do less
independent due diligence. In the context of competitions, an important new intermediary, this
paper demonstrates the large magnitude of information frictions in early-stage startup financing.
It shows that new venture competitions help identify promising ventures by certifying winning
ventures as high quality. Marginal winners benefit a lot, consistent with being the ventures for
which information asymmetry is a binding constraint on financing.
This paper also provides the first systematic, causal evaluation of whether and how new
venture competitions are useful to participating startups. Winning has economically significant
positive effects on subsequent financing, employment, and successful exit (acquisition/IPO).
Notably, winning is quite useful in preliminary rounds and is most useful among those final round
winners that do not receive cash prizes. Cash prizes are useful, but their effect is small relative to
the effect of winning and the predictive power of rank. These results have implications for
competition organizers. Rather than focusing on large cash prizes, competitions might consider
directing resources to improving the quality of judging and market signaling.

26

References
Barrows, G. (2018), Do entrepreneurship policies work? evidence from 460 start-up program competitions
across the globe, Technical report.
Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A. and Laws, K. (2017), ‘Attracting early-stage investors: Evidence from a
randomized field experiment’, The Journal of Finance 72(2), 509–538.
Blevins, C. and Mullen, L. (2015), ‘Jane, John... Leslie? A historical method for algorithmic gender
prediction’, Digital Humanities Quarterly 9(3).
Cao, R. (2018), ‘Information frictions in new venture finance: Evidence from product hunt rankings’,
Working Paper .
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Saez, E., Turner, N. and Yagan, D. (2017), ‘Mobility report cards: The role of
colleges in intergenerational mobility’.
Economist (2014), ‘A cambrian moment’, Special Report .
report/2014/01/17/a-cambrian-moment.

https://www.economist.com/special-

Ewens, M., Gorbenko, A. S. and Korteweg, A. (2018), ‘Venture capital contracts’. Working paper.
Ewens, M., Nanda, R. and Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2018), ‘Cost of experimentation and the evolution of venture
capital’, Journal of Financial Economics 128(3), 422–442.
Ewens, M. and Townsend, R. R. (2017), ‘Investors and the entrepreneurship gender gap’. Working Paper.
Fafchamps, M. and Quinn, S. (2017), ‘Aspire’, The Journal of Development Studies 53(10), 1615–1633.
Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N. and Strebulaev, I. A. (2016), ‘How do venture capitalists make
decisions?’. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J. (2001), ‘The venture capital revolution’, Journal of economic perspectives
15(2), 145–168.
Gonzalez-Uribe, J. and Leatherbee, M. (2017), ‘The effects of business accelerators on venture performance:
Evidence from start-up chile’, The Review of Financial Studies 31(4), 1566–1603.
Gornall, W. and Strebulaev, I. A. (2015), ‘The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence from public
companies’, Working Paper .
Hellmann, T. (2006), ‘Ipos, acquisitions, and the use of convertible securities in venture capital’, Journal of
Financial Economics 81(3), 649–679.
Hildebrand, T., Puri, M. and Rocholl, J. (2016), ‘Adverse incentives in crowdfunding’, Management Science
63(3), 587–608.
Hochberg, Y., Serrano, C. J. and Ziedonis, R. H. (2018), ‘Patent collateral, investor commitment, and the
market for venture lending’, Journal of Financial Economics .
Hochberg, Y. V. and Fehder, D. C. (2015), ‘Accelerators and ecosystems’, Science 348(6240), 1202–1203.
Hombert, J., Schoar, A., Sraer, D. and Thesmar, D. (2016), ‘Can unemployment insurance spur

27

entrepreneurial activity? evidence from france’. Working Paper.
Howell, S. T. (2017), ‘Financing innovation: Evidence from R&D grants’, The American Economic Review
107(4), 1136–1164.
Inderst, R. and Müller, H. M. (2004), ‘The effect of capital market characteristics on the value of start-up
firms’, Journal of Financial Economics 72(2), 319–356.
Kaplan, S. N., Klebanov, M. M. and Sorensen, M. (2012), ‘Which CEO characteristics and abilities matter?’,
The Journal of Finance 67(3), 973–1007.
Kaplan, S. N. and Lerner, J. (2010), ‘It ain’t broke: The past, present, and future of venture capital’, Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance 22(2), 36–47.
Kaplan, S. N., Sensoy, B. A. and Strömberg, P. (2009), ‘Should investors bet on the jockey or the horse?
evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies’, The Journal of
Finance 64(1), 75–115.
Klapper, L., Laeven, L. and Rajan, R. (2006), ‘Entry regulation as a barrier to entrepreneurship’, Journal of
financial economics 82(3), 591–629.
Klinger, B. and Schündeln, M. (2011), ‘Can entrepreneurial activity be taught? quasi-experimental evidence
from central america’, World Development 39(9), 1592–1610.
Lach, S. (2002), ‘Do r&d subsidies stimulate or displace private r&d? evidence from israel’, The journal of
industrial economics 50(4), 369–390.
Lee, D. S. and Card, D. (2008), ‘Regression discontinuity inference with specification error’, Journal of
Econometrics 142(2), 655–674.
Lee, D. S. and Lemieux, T. (2010), ‘Regression discontinuity designs in economics’, Journal of economic
literature 48(2), 281–355.
Levine, R. and Rubinstein, Y. (2016), ‘Smart and illicit: Who becomes an entrepreneur and does it pay?’,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Lindsey, L. (2008), ‘Blurring firm boundaries: The role of venture capital in strategic alliances’, The Journal
of Finance 63(3), 1137–1168.
McCrary, J. (2008), ‘Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density
test’, Journal of econometrics 142(2), 698–714.
McKenzie, D. (2017), ‘Identifying and spurring high-growth entrepreneurship: experimental evidence from
a business plan competition’, American Economic Review 107(8), 2278–2307.
Miller, P. and Bound, K. (2011), The Startup Factories: The rise of accelerator programmes to support new
technology ventures, NESTA Discussion Paper.
Mollick, E. (2014), ‘The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study’, Journal of business venturing
29(1), 1–16.
Ozmel, U., Robinson, D. T. and Stuart, T. E. (2013), ‘Strategic alliances, venture capital, and exit decisions
in early stage high-tech firms’, Journal of Financial Economics 107(3), 655–670.

28

Palmer, M. (2012), ‘Cloud computing cuts start-up costs’, Financial Times .
Saha, D. and Muro, M. (2017), ‘Cleantech venture capital: Continued declines and narrow geography limit
prospects’, Brookings Institution Report .
Sørensen, M. (2007), ‘How smart is smart money? a two-sided matching model of venture capital’, The
Journal of Finance 62(6), 2725–2762.
Tian, X. (2011), ‘The causes and consequences of venture capital stage financing’, Journal of Financial
Economics 101(1), 132–159.
Yu, S. (Forthcoming), ‘How do accelerators impact the performance of high-technology ventures?’,
Management Science .

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Panel 1: Competitions
N

Mean

Median

S.d.

Min

Max

# competitions

87

# competition-rounds

200

# competition-round-panels

454

# competitions with feedback

34

# rounds per competition

87

2

2

.69

1

3

# ventures in preliminary rounds

113

45

35

43

6

275

# ventures in final rounds

87

19

12

21

4

152

# winners in preliminary rounds

113

12

11

9.3

1

64

# winners in final rounds

87

4.5

4

3.7

1

25

Prize| Prize> 0 (thousand nominal $)

167

73

30

86

2

275

Days between rounds within competition

88

23

17

31

0

127

# judges in round-panel

543

17

9

23

1

178

Mean

Median

S.d.

Min

Max

Panel 2: Ventures
N
# unique ventures

4,328

Ventures in multiple competitions (#|> 1)

558

2.52

2

0.98

2

9

# founders/team members at first competition

2305

3.1

3

1.6

1

8

Venture age at first competition (years)

2073

1.9

0.77

3

0

20

Incorporated at round

4328

0.44

In hub state (CA, NY, MA)

4328

0.35

Internet/software

4328

0.52

Survival (Has >1 employee as of 8/2016)

4328

0.34

Has

4328

0.2

Raised external private investment before round

7099

0.16

External private investment after round

7099

0.24

Angel/VC series A investment before round

7099

0.09

Angel/VC series A investment after round

7099

0.15

Acquired/IPOd as of 9/2016

4328

0.03

10 employees as of 8/2016

30

Panel 3: Founders (Venture Leader - One Per Venture)‡
N

Mean

Median

S.d.

Min

Max

29

10.2

17

75

# founders

3228

# founders matched to LinkedIn profile

2554

Age (years) at event (college graduation year-22)

1702

32.8

Female

3,228

0.22

Male

3,228

0.73

Number of total jobs

2554

6.63

6

3.93

0

50

Number of jobs before round

2547

4.41

4

2.66

0

10

Number of locations worked in

2554

2.71

2

2.27

0

29

Is student at round

2554

0.2

Graduated from top 20 college

2554

0.27

Graduated from top 10 college

2554

0.18

Graduated from Harvard, Stanford, MIT

2554

0.1

Has MBA

2554

0.48

Has MBA from top 10 business school

2554

0.33

Has Master’s degree

2554

0.17

Has PhD

2554

0.13

Previous founder (founded different company before
competition)
Founder or CEO of subsequent venture after round

2554

.02

2554

0.17

±

Note: This table contains summary statistics about the competitions (panel 1), ventures (panel 2), and founders/team
leaders (panel 3) used in analysis. Only the mean is provided for binary variables, other statistics provided for
continuous variables. Data on ventures post-competition data is based on matches to CB Insights (752 unique
matches), Crunchbase (638), AngelList (1,528), and LinkedIn (1,933). ‡ From LinkedIn profiles. Not all competitions
retained founder data, so the number of venture leaders is less than the number of ventures. ± Gender coding by
algorithm and manually; sexes do not sum to one because some names are both ambiguous and had no clear LinkedIn
match.

31

Table 2: Effect of Winning on Subsequent External Financing
Panel 1
Dependent variable: Financing after round

Won Round
Decile rank

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

.088***
(.018)
-.02***
(.0027)

.13***
(.026)

.079**
(.036)

.17***
(.015)

.15***
(.019)

-.011***
(.0044)
-.018***
(.0025)

-.0059
(.0054)
-.013***
(.0031)

Decile rank winners
Decile rank losers
Within-judge decile rank

-.006***
(.0011)

Z-score winners

.0089***
(.0023)

.0085***
(.0024)

.0085***
(.0029)

.011***
(.0034)

.0074
(.024)
.031***
(.011)
.012**
(.0055)

N
Y
N

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

N
Y
Y

N
Y
N

6023
.16

6023
.16

3487
.4

26663
.4

3973
.19

Z-score losers
Prize (10,000$)

Venture controls
Comp.-round-panel f.e.
Judge & year f.e.
N
R2

Note: This panel shows regression estimates of the effect of winning, rank, and cash prize on whether the venture
raised external financing after the competition using variants of Equation 1. The level of observation is a venture in a
round (or panel, if the competitions divides rounds into discrete judging panels). Decile rank is the overall decile rank
in the round, while decile rank winners (losers) is the decile rank within the round’s winners (losers). A smaller rank is
better (one is best decile, 10 is worst decile). Venture controls include whether the company received investment before
the round, whether any of the venture’s judges or those judges’ firms ever invested in the venture, 17 sector indicator
variables, company age, and whether the founder is a student. Competition fixed effects control for the date. Column 4
uses judge fixed effects, and the level of observation is judge-venture-round. Column 5 uses z-scores instead of ranks,
and is restricted to the subsample of competitions that use scores before force-ranking participants. Errors clustered
by competition-round-panel except in column 4, where they are clustered by judge. *** indicates p-value<.01.

32

Panel 2
Dependent variable: Financing after round
Bandwidth around cutoff
1 venture
2 ventures
No prize
No prize
winners
winners

Won Round
Centered rank

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

.13***
(.017)
.0018***
(.00032)

.13***
(.019)
.0018***
(.00056)
-2.9e-07
(3.9e-06)

.17***
(.019)

.16***
(.046)

.11*
(.064)

.14***
(.029)

.086**
(.037)

.0037
(.0095)

Centered rank2
Centered rank winners

.0095***
(.0024)

.0095***
(.0024)

-.0066***
(.0019)
.0023***
(.00042)
.0088***
(.0024)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

6023
.16

6023
.16

6023
.16

971
.52

781
.6

1712
.35

1404
.37

Centered rank losers
Prize (10,000$)

Comp.-round-panel f.e.
N
R2

.007
(.0062)

Note: This panel shows regression estimates of the effect of winning, rank, and cash prize on whether the venture
raised external financing after the competition using variants of Equation 1. The level of observation is a venture in
a round (or panel, if the competitions divides rounds into discrete judging panels). Centered rank is the venture’s
rank in the round centered around the cutoff for winning, such that a rank of 1 is the lowest-ranked winner, and -1 is
the highest ranked loser. If there are three winners, the highest-ranked winner will have centered rank of 3. If there
are 20 losers, the lowest-ranked loser will have centered rank of -20. Columns 4 and 5 restrict the sample to ranks
immediately around the cutoff. Columns 4-5 use only one venture on either side of the cutoff, and columns 6-7 use
two ventures on either side of the cutoff. Cash prize winners are excluded in columns 5 and 7. Competition fixed
effects control for the date. Errors clustered by competition-round-panel. *** indicates p-value<.01.

33

Table 3: Effect of Award and Round on Subsequent External Financing
Dependent variable: Financing after round
Sample:

All

(1)
Won prelim round
Won final round
Decile rank winners
Decile rank losers
Prize (dummy)

.081***
(.027)
.2***
(.033)
-.0096**
(.0039)
-.018***
(.0025)
.00079
(.032)

Prize (10,000$)

Comp.-round-panel f.e.
N
R2

Final rounds
no prize
winners
(2)

.12**
(.05)
-.00047
(.0076)
-.019***
(.004)

(3)

.17*
(.085)
-.01
(.012)
-.019***
(.0041)

.0052
(.0033)

Preliminary rounds
no final
winners
(4)

(5)

(6)

.14***
(.03)

.085**
(.034)

-.015***
(.0052)
-.018***
(.0031)

.086***
(.03)
.2***
(.044)
-.012**
(.0049)
-.017***
(.0031)

.012***
(.0032)

.0032
(.0037)

-.011*
(.0058)
-.017***
(.0031)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

6023
.17

1617
.17

1286
.12

4406
.16

4406
.17

4148
.14

Note: This panel shows regression estimates of the effect of winning, rank, and cash prize on whether the venture
raised external financing after the competition using variants of Equation 1. The level of observation is a venture in
a round (or panel, if the competitions divides rounds into discrete judging panels). Decile rank is the overall decile
rank in the round, while decile rank winners (losers) is the decile rank within the round’s winners (losers). A smaller
rank is better (one is best decile, 10 is worst decile). Column 2 restricts the sample to final rounds, and column 3 to
ventures in final rounds that did not win a cash prize. Columns 4-6 restrict the sample to preliminary rounds. Columns
7 further restrict the sample to ventures in preliminary rounds that did not ultimately win a prize. Competition fixed
effects control for the date. Errors clustered by competition-round-panel. *** indicates p-value<.01.

34

Table 4: Effect of Rank and Winning on Additional Outcomes
Sample:
Dependent variable:

Won Round
Decile rank winners
Decile rank losers

35

Prize (10,000$)

Comp.-round- panel f.e.
N
R2

All

Preliminary rounds
10+
Acquired/
employees
IPO

Survival

Bandwidth of 2 around cutoff

Survival

Founder
subsequent
entrep.

10+
Acquired/
employees
IPO

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

.047*
(.028)
-.006
(.0043)
-.023***
(.0028)
.0062*
(.0032)

-.00053
(.02)
-.0013
(.0027)
.0012
(.0016)
-.00059
(.0013)

.051*
(.027)
-.0041
(.0044)
-.017***
(.0023)
.0074***
(.0026)

.018
(.012)
-.0028*
(.0017)
-.0011
(.001)
.0002
(.0013)

.05
(.031)
-.0059
(.0052)
-.024***
(.0031)

.063**
(.03)
-.0045
(.0051)
-.016***
(.0027)

.026**
(.012)
-.0035**
(.0018)
-.0008
(.0012)

.077**
(.03)

.059**
(.029)

.0091
(.013)

.0053
(.0051)

.0082*
(.005)

-.0019
(.0012)

Y
6023
.17

Y
6023
.32

Y
6023
.14

Y
6023
.083

Y
4406
.16

Y
1712
.4

Y
1712
.36

Y
1712
.3

Y
4406
.13

Y
4406
.094

Survival

10+
Acquired/
employees
IPO

Note: This table shows regression estimates of Equation 1. Survival is one if the venture had 1 employee besides the founder on LinkedIn
as of 8/2016. 10+ employees is defined analogously. Acquired/IPO indicates that the venture was acquired by another company or went public.
In columns 1-4, the whole sample is used. In column 2, the dependent variable is one for founders that subsequently founded or were the CEO
of another company. This could reflect unidentified name changes, but if not, it is a measure of serial entrepreneurship. In columns 5-7, only
preliminary rounds are included. In columns 8-10, the sample is restricted to a bandwidth of 2 ventures on either side of the cutoff for winning.
The level of observation is a venture-round. Some rounds divide ventures into panels. Rank is defined as in Table 3. Competition fixed effects
control for the date. Errors clustered by competition-round-panel. *** indicates p-value<.01.

Table 5: Effect of Criteria Rank on Venture Outcomes
Dependent variable:

Decile rank in round:
Team
Financials
Business Model
Market
Tech./Product
Presentation
Won Round
Judge/judge co invested

Comp,-round-panel f.e.
Judge f.e.
N
R2

Financing after round

10+ Employees

Acquired/IPO

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-.021***
(.0057)
-.014**
(.0067)
.0032
(.016)
.01
(.015)
.0098
(.0078)
-.015**
(.0059)
.14***
(.024)
.47***
(.11)

-.023***
(.0053)
-.0079
(.005)
.002
(.011)
-.0091
(.011)
.0031
(.0054)
-.0098**
(.0043)
.2***
(.013)
.56***
(.027)

-.0091
(.0063)
-.036***
(.0083)
.0024
(.014)
.0075
(.013)
-.0015
(.0069)
.0074
(.0071)
.1***
(.032)

-.017***
(.0049)
-.026***
(.0057)
.0035
(.011)
-.011
(.011)
-.0081
(.0054)
.008
(.0052)
.17***
(.015)

.00069
(.0026)
.0034
(.0031)
.0046
(.0074)
-.00047
(.0072)
-.0062**
(.0024)
-.0032
(.0024)
.011
(.013)

-.0012
(.0024)
.0023
(.0027)
-.0059
(.0074)
.0039
(.0074)
-.0056**
(.0024)
-.0013
(.0022)
.023***
(.0068)

Y
N

N
Y

Y
N

N
Y

Y
N

N
Y

1926
.15

8794
.14

1926
.13

8794
.12

1926
.065

7043
.066

Note: This table contains regression estimates of the relationship between criteria-specific ranks and venture outcomes.
The level of observation is a venture in a round (or panel, if the competitions divides rounds into discrete judging
panels). The criteria ranks are averaged to produce the overall ranks used in other tables. A smaller decile rank is
better (one is best decile, 10 is worst decile). Financing after round is an indicator for the venture raising private
external investment after the round. 10+ employees is one if the venture had 10 employees besides the founder on
LinkedIn as of 8/2016. Competition fixed effects control for the date. Errors clustered by competition-round-panel or
judge, depending on fixed effects. *** indicates p-value<.01.

36

Table 6: Robustness Tests of Effect of Winning
Panel 1
Dependent variable: Financing after round

Won Round
Decile rank winners
Decile rank losers
Prize (10,000$)

Comp.-round-panel f.e.
N
R2

Logit

Feedback

No
feedback

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

.13***
(.03)
-.011**
(.0043)
-.018***
(.0027)
.0085***
(.0023)

.13***
(.026)
-.012***
(.0043)
-.018***
(.0025)
.0088***
(.0023)

.13***
(.027)
-.012**
(.0047)
-.017***
(.0026)
.0067*
(.0039)

.71***
(.14)
-.069***
(.021)
-.13***
(.017)
.036***
(.011)

.13***
(.034)
-.0091
(.0061)
-.011***
(.0033)
.011**
(.0055)

.17***
(.04)
-.017***
(.0063)
-.025***
(.0033)
.0068**
(.0027)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

6023
.16

5925
.16

4920
.17

5484
.12

3422
.2

2601
.13

Note: This panel shows regression estimates of the effect of winning, rank, and cash prize on whether the venture
raised external financing after the competition using variants of Equation 1. The level of observation is a venture in a
round (or panel, if the competitions divides rounds into discrete judging panels). Decile rank is the overall decile rank
in the round, while decile rank winners (losers) is the decile rank within the round’s winners (losers). A smaller rank
is better (one is best decile, 10 is worst decile). Column 1 clusters errors by competition. Column 2 omits ventures in
which a judge or judge’s firm invested. Column 3 restricts observations to a venture’s first competition. Column 4 uses
a logit model instead of OLS. Column 5 restricts the sample to competitions that gave participants feedback (informed
them of their rank in the round), while column 6 restricts the sample to competitions that did not provide feedback.
Competition fixed effects control for the date. Errors clustered by competition-round-panel except in columns 1 and
4, where they are clustered by competition and judge, respectively. *** indicates p-value<.01.

37

Panel 2
Dependent variable: Financing after round
Sample:

Won Round
Decile rank winners
Decile rank losers

38

Prize (10,000$)

Comp.-round-panel f.e.
N
R2

University comps
Omitted
Only

HBS NVC
omitted

AIC
omitted

No small
comps

Ventures
in VC hub
incorp.
states

Founders
with
students
MBAs

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

.12***
(.039)
-.012**
(.0057)
-.022***
(.0029)
.0081***
(.0026)

.15***
(.037)
-.01
(.008)
-.011**
(.0043)
.01*
(.0057)

.13***
(.029)
-.013***
(.0046)
-.021***
(.0026)
.0078***
(.0024)

.13***
(.029)
-.01**
(.005)
-.015***
(.0029)
.01***
(.0039)

.15***
(.028)
-.013***
(.0047)
-.019***
(.0026)
.0082***
(.0025)

.13***
(.049)
-.011
(.0082)
-.011**
(.0049)
.0074
(.012)

.14***
(.038)
-.015**
(.0059)
-.025***
(.0034)
.0074***
(.0027)

.12**
(.053)
-.0056
(.011)
-.0091
(.0057)
.017*
(.0094)

.13**
(.056)
-.014
(.012)
-.024***
(.006)
.012
(.0086)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

3616
.11

2407
.24

5235
.15

4460
.19

5442
.17

1968
.28

3288
.18

1637
.34

1183
.33

Note: This table shows regression estimates like those in Panel 1. The sample is divided by competition, venture, or founder characteristics. Column 1
excludes competitions organized by universities, while column 2 includes only these competitions. Columns 3 and 4 omit the two largest competitions in
the data, the HBS New Venture Competition and the Arizona Innovation Challenge, respectively. Column 5 omits competitions where there are less than
30 participants. Competition fixed effects control for the date. Errors clustered by competition-round-panel. *** indicates p-value<.01.

Table 7: Heterogeneity in Effect of Rank and Winning on External Finance

Dependent variable: Financing after round
C:

Won Round
Won Round·C
Decile rank winners
Decile rank winners·C
Decile rank losers
Decile rank losers·C
Prize (10,000$)
Prize (10,000$)·C
C

Comp.-round- panel f.e.
N
R2

Founder BA from
top 10 college

Founder founded
previous company

Internet/software-based
venture

(1)

(2)

(3)

.13***
(.028)
-.0027
(.081)
-.011**
(.0046)
-.0039
(.013)
-.018***
(.0026)
.0068
(.0083)
.0098***
(.0024)
-.013**
(.0056)
.076
(.049)

.097***
(.035)
.049
(.058)
-.0057
(.0059)
-.013*
(.0077)
-.015***
(.003)
-.0075
(.0048)
.013***
(.0029)
-.0084**
(.004)
.14***
(.03)

.041
(.031)
.21***
(.056)
-.0089*
(.0048)
-.0087
(.0076)
-.014***
(.0024)
-.011**
(.0048)
.0042
(.0036)
.0016
(.0044)
.28***
(.036)

Y

Y

Y

6023
.17

6023
.18

6023
.24

Note: This table shows regression estimates of heterogeneity in the effect of winning, rank, and cash prize on whether
the venture raised external financing after the competition. The level of observation is a venture in a round (or panel,
if the competitions divides rounds into discrete judging panels). The characteristic in the column header is interacted
with all covariates except the competition fixed effects. Competition fixed effects control for the date. Errors clustered
by competition-round-panel. *** indicates p-value<.01.

39

Figure 1: Continuity of Venture Covariates

Note: This figure shows probabilities of venture-specific covariates observed at the time of the competition by
percentile rank in the round (lower percentile rank is better). Final rounds are used. There are no losers in the top bin,
and winners are truncated at the fifth decile. The lines overlap because the share of participants that win varies across
rounds. Local polynomial with Stata’s optimal bandwidth. 95% CIs shown.

40

Figure 2: Continuity of Founder Covariates

Note: This figure shows probabilities of founder-specific covariates observed at the time of the competition by
percentile rank in the round (lower percentile rank is better). Final rounds are used. There are no losers in the top bin,
and winners are truncated at the fifth decile. The lines overlap because the share of participants that win varies across
rounds. Local polynomial with Stata’s optimal bandwidth. 95% CIs shown.

41

Figure 3: Effect of winning with percentile rank

Note: This figure shows probabilities of subsequent financing (top), survival (middle), and having 10+ employees
(bottom) by percentile rank in the round (lower percentile rank is better). There are no losers in the top bin, and
winners are truncated at the fourth and fifth decile for preliminary and final rounds, respectively. The lines overlap
because the share of participants that win varies across rounds. Local polynomial with Stata’s optimal bandwidth.
95% CIs shown.

42

Figure 4: Effect of winning with centered rank around cutoff

Note: This figure shows probabilities of subsequent financing (top), survival (middle), and having 10+ employees
(bottom) by the venture’s centered rank around the cutoff for winning. Centered rank improves from left to right. A
rank of 1 indicates the lowest ranked ranked winner (the winner with the worst rank, which just barely won). A rank
of -1 indicated the highest ranked loser (the loser which just barely lost). Local polynomial with Stata’s optimal
bandwidth. 95% CIs shown.

43

Online Appendix

to
“Reducing Information Frictions in Venture Capital: The Role
of New Venture Competitions”
ww

Sabrina T. Howell

Online Appendix

44

Table A.1: Competitions
Panel 1
Competition Name

Arizona Innovation
Challenge Fall
Arizona Innovation
Challenge Spring
Angel Capital Summit
BRF Entrepreneur
Accelerator Program (EAP)
CU CleanTech New Venture
Challenge
Clean Energy Challenge
Cleantech Open: California
Cleantech Open: North
Central
Cleantech Open: Northeast
Cleantech Open: Pacific
Northwest
Cleantech Open: Rocky
Mountain
Cleantech Open: South
Central
Cleantech Open: Southeast
Colorado Capital
Conference 2013
Colorado Digital Health
Challenge
DOE Cleantech Business
Plan Competition
Energize 2013
Energy Security Prize, EIA
Track
Harvard Business School
New Venture Competition

City

State

Years

# unique
ventures

# unique
judges

# rounds
per comp.

Phoenix

AZ

2012-2015

489

90

2

Phoenix

AZ

2012-2015

610

87

2

Denver
Shreveport

CO
LA

2014-15
2014

195
22

55
4

1
1

Boulder

CO

2012-13

27

35

1

Chicago
Redwood
City
Minneapolis

IL
CA

2013
2009-14

50
231

55
163

2
2

MN

2010-13

109

103

2

Boston
Portland

MA
OR

2009-13
2009-13

233
62

137
38

2
2

Denver

CO

2009-13

133

61

2

Austin

TX

2011-13

11

12

2

Atlanta
Denver

GA
CO

2011-13
2013

24
52

37
23

2
2

Denver

CO

2014

33

46

2

Washington

D.C.

2013

6

5

2

Snowbird
Washington

UT
D.C.

2013
2013

22
16

12
18

1
2

Boston

MA

1999-2015

817

563

2‡

Online Appendix

45

Panel 2
Competition Name

Illinois Clean Energy
Student Challenge
Imagine H2O Infrastructure
Challenge
Innosphere Admissions
MIT Clean Energy Prize
Missouri Clean Energy
Student Challenge
OEDIT Advanced
Industries Accelerator
Energy and Natural
Resources
Ohio Clean Energy Student
Challenge
TransTech Energy
Conference 2012
Massachusetts Clean
Energy Center Catalyst
Grant Program
Rice University Business
Plan Competition

City

State

Years

# unique
ventures

# unique
judges

# rounds
per comp.

Chicago

IL

2013

26

9

1

San
Francisco
Fort Collins
Cambridge
St. Louis

CA

2013-15

160

31

3

CO
MA
MO

2013-15
2013-15
2013

32
156
14

46
80
9

1
2-3h
1

Denver

CO

2015

36

7

1

Cleveland

OH

2012-13

12

8

1

Morgantown

WV

2012

20

25

1

Boston

MA

2012-15

250

134

2

Houston

TX

2004-2015

480

694

3†

Notes: This table lists the programs whose competitions are used in this paper. ‡ First round done in panels of 4-8
ventures and 5-15 judges per panel, varies somewhat year to year (note: there is small finals for top three teams, all of
which win a cash prize. Do not have data for this final round) † First round, challenge round, and semifinal rounds all
"tracked" into panels (what RBPC calls "flights"). First round tracked by sector, then firms randomized across panels.
non-winners of first round go on to "Challenge" round. There is also pre-competition business plan stage. h Depends
on year.

Online Appendix

46

Table A.2: University and MBA Rankings

Top Twenty U.S. Universities

Top Ten MBA Programs

Rank

Name

Rank

Name

1

PRINCETON

1

HARVARD

2

HARVARD

2

STANFORD

3

YALE

3

CHICAGO

4

COLUMBIA

4

UPENN

5

STANFORD

5

MIT

6

CHICAGO

6

NORTHWESTERN

7

MIT

7

UC BERKELEY

8

DUKE

8

DARTMOUTH

9

UPENN

9

YALE

10

CALTECH

10

COLUMBIA

11

JOHNS HOPKINS

12

DARTMOUTH

13

NORTHWESTERN

14

BROWN

15

CORNELL

16

VANDERBILT

17

WASH ST LOUIS

18

RICE

19

NOTRE DAME

20

UC BERKELEY

Note: This table describes the university rankings used in analysis. Source: US News & World Report 2016
Rankings.

Online Appendix

47

Table A.3: Sector and Judge Data

Panel 1: Sectors

Panel 2: Judge Professions
Sectors‡

# unique judges

Ventures Judges

All

2,514

Air/water/waste/agriculture

146

31

Venture Capital Investor

676

Biotech

182

64

sssElite VC (by IRR/Multiple)

21

Clean tech/renewable energy

712

273

Angel Investor

397

Defense/security

64

66

sssMean (med) AngelList investments

Education

37

118

Professor/Scientist

44

Energy (fossil)

61

373

Business Development/Sales

83

Fintech/financial

53

522

Corporate Executive

498

Food/beverage

88

24

Founder/Entrepreneur

240

Health (ex biotech)

270

291

Lawyer/Consultant/Accountant

369

1,404

586

Non-Profit/Foundation/Government

164

Manuf./materials/electronics

323

96

Other

193

Media/ads/entertainment

57

157

Real estate

61

82

# judge-venture pairs in which judge

Retail/consumer goods

139

159

personally invested in venture

Social enterprise

42

42

# judge-venture pairs in which

Transportation

136

51

judge’s firm invested in venture

95

Total # judge-venture score pairs

47,066

# judge-venture pairs in same sector

8,139

IT/web

†

⇤

12.8 (8)

3

Note: This table lists the number of ventures by technology type and the number of judges by profession. † Preqin top
20 VC firm by either IRR or Multiple, as of 2016. ⇤ Identifies as angel investor in competition data, or has AngelList
profile and at least one investment (160 judges). ‡ Venture sectors from competition data; each venture assigned to
one sector. Judge sectors based on LinkedIn profile or firm webpage; judges may have expertise in multiple sectors.

Online Appendix

48

Table A.4: Company & Competition States

State

#
competitions
in state

# ventures
located in state

State

Arizona

8

665

Idaho

9

California

7

298

Kentucky

13

Massachusetts

34

1,146

Michigan

24

Colorado

16

250

Rhode Island

9

85

Arkansas

14

New York

#
competitions
in state

# ventures
located in state

Minnesota

2

46

North Carolina

14

Utah

3

48

Montana

7

Washington

40

Florida

16

Illinois

62

Hawaii

6

Nevada

28

Indiana

21

Texas

14

70

Missouri

Oregon

3

21

South Carolina

4

Wisconsin

28

Vermont

4

Connecticut

20

DC

4

Iowa

17

Kansas

9

Maryland

23

Alaska

2

Maine

8

Tennessee

10

New Jersey

14

New Hampshire

5

28

South Dakota

3

Pennsylvania

26

Delaware

3

Virginia

20

Wyoming

5

North Dakota

7

Louisiana

13

New Mexico

10

West Virginia

Georgia

18

Mississippi

1

Oklahoma

4

Foreign

26

Ohio

2

1

1

19

2

Note: This table lists the number of competitions and unique ventures by state. Companies that changed states are
assigned their earliest state.

Online Appendix

49

Table A.5: Unconditional association between characteristics and success
Dependent Variable:

Founder student at round
Founder top 10 college
Founder has MBA
Founder top 10 MBA
Venture age > median
Venture in VC hub state
Financing before round
Venture incorp. at round
Founder # jobs before round
Founder age > median
Venture social/ clean tech
Venture Internet/software
Venture # team members

N
R2

Financing after round
(1)
(2)
-.023
(.047)
.061*
(.035)
-.052
(.034)
-.034
(.041)
-.023
(.028)
.093**
(.038)
.088**
(.038)
-.0049
(.036)
.029***
(.0056)
-.02
(.029)
-.14***
(.039)
.14***
(.039)
.03**
(.014)
1184
.072

.016
(.028)
.051***
(.018)
-.0095
(.017)
-.029
(.021)

10 employees as of 8/2016
(3)
(4)

-.13***
(.015)
.12***
(.021)
.0087
(.0063)

.029
(.042)
.035
(.037)
-.061
(.038)
.042
(.046)
.0091
(.025)
.057*
(.034)
.15***
(.036)
.033
(.032)
.023***
(.0059)
-.063**
(.031)
-.024
(.047)
.068*
(.038)
.035***
(.01)

3346
.1

1184
.06

.088***
(.018)
.19***
(.028)
.021
(.018)
.014***
(.0027)

.043
(.028)
.032
(.022)
-.054***
(.018)
.028
(.023)

.09***
(.019)
.16***
(.023)
.07***
(.017)
.0091***
(.0026)

-.044**
(.017)
.074***
(.021)
.017***
(.0058)
3346
.061

Note: This table contains the unconditional association of characteristics and success, using the OLS regression:
YiP ost = ↵ + 0 Ci + "i,j where C is a vector of characteristics. Standard errors clustered by competition-round.
Columns 2 and 4 have a much larger sample because they omit venture and founder age, which are not available for
many ventures.

Online Appendix

50

Table A.6: Representativeness of Sample

Panel 1: Venture Sectors
% ventures in data

% U.S. VC deals

% U.S. VC deal amt

Air/water/waste/agriculture

3.9%

Biotech

4.8%

10.8%

12.9%

Clean tech/renewable energy

18.9%

3.3%

2.0%

Defense/security

1.7%

Education

1.0%

Energy (fossil)

1.6%

Fintech/financial

1.4%

1.9%

5.4%

Food/beverage

2.3%

Health (ex biotech)

7.2%

8.8%

6.1%

IT/software/web

37.2%

40.4%

39.8%

Manuf./materials/electronics

8.6%

7.4%

6.0%

Media/ads/entertainment

1.5%

9.6%

8.0%

Real estate

1.6%

Retail/apparel/consumer goods

3.7%

6.8%

9.9%

Social enterprise

1.1%

Transportation

3.6%

Online Appendix

51

Panel 2: Venture States (top 20 states in data)
% ventures in
data

% U.S. VC deals

% U.S. VC deal
amt

Massachusetts

35.5%

9.7%

9.6%

Arizona

20.6%

0.6%

0.2%

California

9.2%

40.6%

57.3%

Colorado

7.8%

2.0%

1.3%

New York

2.6%

10.6%

10.6%

Texas

2.2%

3.7%

2.0%

Illinois

1.9%

2.2%

1.9%

Utah

1.5%

1.3%

1.2%

Minnesota

1.4%

0.7%

0.6%

Washington

1.2%

2.6%

2.0%

Nevada

0.9%

0.1%

0.0%

Wisconsin

0.9%

0.5%

0.2%

Ohio

0.9%

1.6%

0.4%

Pennsylvania

0.8%

4.6%

1.1%

Michigan

0.7%

0.1%

0.6%

Maryland

0.7%

1.6%

1.5%

Oregon

0.7%

1.0%

0.4%

Indiana

0.7%

0.4%

0.1%

Connecticut

0.6%

1.3%

0.8%

Virginia

0.6%

1.7%

0.7%

Note: This table compares the frequency of ventures in this sample with U.S. VC deals from the National Venture
Capital Association’s 2016 Yearbook.

Online Appendix

52

