                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE BENEFITS AND COSTS OF DONOR ADVISED FUNDS

                                       James Andreoni

                                     Working Paper 23872
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23872


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




The author wishes to thank the National Science Foundation, grants SES-1427355 and
SES-1658952, for financial support, and Alex Kellogg for his valuable assistance. I am also
grateful for helpful comments by Jane Gravelle, Gerald Auten, Thomas Barthold, Robert Moffitt,
and James Poterba. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by James Andreoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Benefits and Costs of Donor Advised Funds
James Andreoni
NBER Working Paper No. 23872
October 2017
JEL No. H2,H24,H26,H3

                                         ABSTRACT

Donor Advised Funds (DAFs) are now a major source of charitable donations in the US,
responsible for 1 in 10 dollars donated to charity in 2015. In 2016, Fidelity Charitable, whose
only mission is to provide DAFS, became the largest charity in the US. Paradoxically, most
people have never heard of DAFs or Fidelity Charitable. This leads us to ask, who uses DAFs and
why, what is the impact of government tax policy toward DAFs, and could the extra fiscal cost of
subsidizing DAFs be balanced out by an extra public gain of new charity resulting from tax
policy toward DAFs?


James Andreoni
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
andreoni@ucsd.edu
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                                     1

2 What is a Donor Advised Fund?                                                                                    2
  2.1 Tax Policy Toward Giving without DAFs . . . . . . . . . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    2
  2.2 Tax Policy Toward Donor Advised Funds . . . . . . . . . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
  2.3 How Important are DAFs and DAF Tax Policy? . . . . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    5
  2.4 Why are DAFs Predominantly Used by the Wealthy? . . .                   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9

3 How Donors Use Donor Advised Funds                                                                              10
  3.1 Giving Non-Cash Assets more Easily . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
  3.2 Smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
  3.3 Forced Sales, Lumpy Assets, and other Large Capital Gains               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
  3.4 Tax Arbitrage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14

4 Benefits and Costs: Conceptual Issues                                                                           15
  4.1 What is a Benefit of Donor Advised Funds? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                               16
  4.2 What are the Costs of Donor Advised Funds? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                17
  4.3 Combining Benefits and Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            19

5 DAF Benefit Cost Analysis                                                                                       19
  5.1 The DAF Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
  5.2 Choosing a Discount Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21
  5.3 Shifting Contributions to Include more Non-cash Assets      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
  5.4 Fraction of Asset Value that is Capital Gains . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   24
  5.5 The Rate of Return on Assets Invested in DAFs . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25
  5.6 Finding the Shelf-life of a DAF Contribution. . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   26

6 The Benefit-Cost Calculation                                                                                    29

7 Tax Policy Changes over the Sample Period                                                                       34

8 Conclusion                                                                                                      38




                                              i
1       Introduction
The largest charity in America in 2016 is one that a vast share of the American population
has never heard of. The charity is called Fidelity Charitable Gift Fund, and its mission is
to manage Donor Advised Funds.1 Remarkably, Fidelity Investments, the parent company
to Fidelity Charitable, conducted a survey of their investment clients who could benefit
financially from a Donor Advised Fund and discovered that 64% of those surveyed had “no
idea” about Donor Advised Funds. Yet, in 2015, 10% of all charitable donations claimed on
tax returns were made to Donor Advised Funds. How can they be so popular and important
to charities everywhere, yet so widely unknown to potential donors?
    In this article, I will, introduce readers to Donor Advised Funds (or DAFs) and the tax
policy toward them. I will explain how the sponsors of DAFs, such as Fidelity Charitable,
act as financial intermediaries in the market for charitable giving in order to help donors save
more tax dollars as they give money to charity. I will also show how the data can reveal how
DAFs can be so dominant in charitable giving and yet so unknown. More importantly, I will
argue that DAFs are consequential to all Americans for their impact on government tax rev-
enues and on the number of dollars going to charity. 2 Gathering these components together
brings us to the the primary purpose of this article: to evaluate DAFs according to standard
concepts of benefit-cost analysis. In particular, the analysis will ask what would need to
be true for the policy to create more new charitable giving than it costs the government in
forgone tax revenues.
    As we will see, a foundational reason for a giver to use a DAF is to save additional
taxes on a household’s current giving–no increase in giving is required to claim the extra
tax savings of DAFs. If they are used this way, they may create no benefits for society, but
add significantly to the tax costs to the US Treasury. On the other hand, if DAF donors
are motivated to dedicate all of their additional tax savings to their charitable giving, then
DAFs would break even as a policy. If donors give beyond this, or create other socially
valuable returns, DAFs will be a net benefit as a tax policy.
    Although they have become popular only recently, DAFs have been with us since the
1930s, shortly after the introduction of the charitable deduction.3 Had they been introduced
    1
     See the Chronicle of Philanthropy, https://www.philanthropy.com/article/Fidelity-Charitable-
Knocks/238167.
   2
     See also Sherlock and Gravelle (2012) for a comprehensive view of DAFs and an assessment of payout
rates. These authors cite great heterogeneity across individuals and across sponsoring organizations, a fact
I will return to.
   3
     The income tax was introduced in the US with the Revenue Act of 1913, after ratification of the 16th
amendment to the constitution. The War Revenue Act of 1917 revised the income tax code to include a
charitable deduction.



                                                     1
as new legislation this year, the Congressional Budget Office would be required to “score”
the legislation to estimate whether the social value of the proposal out-weighs the shared
costs, and would make conjectures about the incidence or distributional aspects of DAFs.
Unfortunately, the legal rules surrounding DAFs protect the individual DAF accounts from
public scrutiny. But, as I hope to convince you, we can learn quite a bit about the flows of
benefits and costs of DAFs to make meaningful comparisons of the two.
    As we continue, it is important to keep in mind that the objective of this exercise is to
look at things from the point of view of a disinterested taxpayer. That is, we should not
concern ourselves with how this institution of Donor Advised Funds affects our own giving,
tax bill, social esteem, fundraising goals, prestige, or self-image. Our job is to learn whether
our country as a whole has made a good bargain when extending extra tax preferences to
those who give through Donor Advised Funds, or whether DAFs reduce the efficiency of the
current system of subsidies to giving.
    The next section will review charitable tax policy, including DAFs. Section 3 will discuss
how DAFs save tax payments and loosen constraints set by other tax policies toward giving.
Sections 4 and 5 will discuss the concepts of benefit-cost analysis and derive the parameters
for our analysis. The benefit-cost calculation will be presented in section 6 and discussed in
section 7. Section 8 is a conclusion.


2     What is a Donor Advised Fund?
Before talking about DAFs, it will help to first discuss standard tax policy toward charitable
giving. We can then contrast that with how DAFs expand the possibilities for giving and
tax savings.


2.1    Tax Policy Toward Giving without DAFs
In US tax law, a qualified charity must gain an IRS tax classification as a 501(c)(3) organi-
zation. Individual tax-filers who itemize deductions can deduct their donations to 501(c)(3)
organizations from their taxable incomes. If one is facing a marginal tax rate on income of,
say 35%, then a $1000 donation will reduce a donor’s tax bill by $350, resulting in a net cost
of $650 for each $1000 given. Most states with income taxes also allow a deduction, further
lowering the price of giving.
    In addition to cash, one can also give appreciated assets, such as equities, artworks,
and real estate. Imagine giving something easily valued, such as stock in a publicly traded
company. If the asset were to be liquidated before giving, the owner would pay capital gains


                                               2
tax of as much as 23.8% on long terms gains (assets held for a year or more). Thus, stocks
worth $1000 that had been purchased for $400 would first generate $143 in capital gains tax
(that is, 23.8% of the gain of $600), leaving the donor with $857. Giving this net amount to
charity then earns a tax deduction, which reduces income taxes by $339 (that is, $857 times
the marginal tax rate of 0.35). In sum, the $1000 asset yields $857 for charity and a net tax
savings of $197. However, if one gives the asset directly, then the charity gets the full $1000,
the $143 tax on capital gains is forgiven, and the full $1000 face value of the asset can be
deducted from income. Given this way, the $1000 asset yields $1000 for the charity, earns a
tax deduction on the full $1000 (now worth $350) and a swing in the donor’s bank account
of $493 (= $143 + $350).
    Clearly, giving the asset directly is more advantageous for tax purposes. But the difference
between giving most assets and giving cash is only a technical one. The irony in giving assets
is that most charities follow a policy of liquidating any non-cash gifts, like equities, as soon
as possible upon receipt.4 So any difference between the donor or the recipient liquidating
the asset is of little practical consequence, yet the consequences are very real for the donors’
tax payments and, potentially, for the charities’ receipts.
    Two seldom discussed constraints on giving are potentially quite important for DAFs.
First, gifts of non-cash assets that do not have any easily identified “fair market value,”
such as real estate, works of art, or shares in closely held corporations, are required to have
professionally conducted appraisals if their values are of any significance.5 Second, there are
limits on the fraction of income that can be claimed as a charitable deduction each year.
Donors who are giving cash can deduct up to 50% of Adjusted Gross Income (AGI, which can
be thought of as income net of standard adjustments, such as subtracting IRA contributions
and adding in unemployment benefits and IRA distributions). If appreciated property is
given, the limit is 30% of AGI.6 Deductions that exceed these caps can, however, be carried
forward up to five years.
    Finally, it should be noted that only those who itemize deductions on their tax returns
   4
     There are several compelling reasons for this. One is to avoid any apparent conflicts of interest. Second,
this protects the charity from being a victim of any insider trading–giving away a stock that is about to
decline substantially in value could be a very shrewd move for someone with an informational advantage.
   5
     People claiming donations of assets above $5000 must seek professional appraisals of the assets and
submit form 8283 with their taxes. For property worth $500,000, they also need to include a written
“qualified appraisal.” For things worth less than $5000, the IRS basically trusts donors to be truthful.
See IRS tax code, sections 170(f)(11)(C) and 170(f)(11)(D). Interestingly, Colinvaux (2013) notes that, for
historical reasons, the valuation method for deducting assets has been set at the “fair market value” to the
donor rather than the more appropriate notion of value to the charity.
   6
     This limit applies to “capital gains property,” but there are a complicated set of exceptions. For a full
description, see https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/charitable-organizations/charitablecontribution-
deductions.



                                                      3
can claim a charitable deduction. This means those with lower incomes who live in states
with small or non-existent state income taxes, or pay no home mortgage interest cannot
benefit from even the charitable deduction, to say nothing of the DAFs.


2.2     Tax Policy Toward Donor Advised Funds
Imagine a donor wishing to give $100 to a small local charity, say a food bank. Coincidentally,
the donor owns shares with substantial capital gains selling for $100 per share. Ideally the
donor would like to give one share of stock to the food bank in order to get the maximum
tax savings. Unfortunately, the cost transferring and liquidating the single share of stock
would be so high that food bank would likely refuse the gift of the non-cash asset. Wouldn’t
it be convenient, therefore, if the donor could give a the shares easily to another charity who
can accept them, and for a small fee, send the food bank a check for $100? This is what
Donor Advised Funds do.
     DAFs are brokerage-like accounts that are sponsored by qualified 501(c)(3) charities.
These charities accept the donors’ funds into the sponsored account. The sponsor legally
owns the money donated, but acts only as an intermediary by a allowing the DAF donor
two important “advising” rights. The donor can advise the sponsor on how to invest the
donation and when funds in the account should be liquidated and sent to another 501(c)(3)
charity, or used for other charitable purposes. While the sponsor, who is the legal owner of
the fund, can stipulate its own time spending and investment limits, such constraints would
be voluntary—none are required by the law.
     Giving money to charity through a DAF is very much like giving money directly from a
brokerage account, with three important differences. First is timing. The tax consequences
of a charitable deduction are absorbed when money goes into the DAF rather than when
it is granted out of the DAF to a traditional charity. Once in the DAF, however, there are
no tax consequences of trading or reinvesting funds, and all gains and losses accrue to the
eventual charitable recipients.
     Second is convenience. It is easy to avoid capital gains taxation by donating securities,
artwork, or real estate to a DAF before liquidating them, whereas this could be impossible
for some smaller donations without a DAF.
     Third is commitment. Once in the DAF, any funds account can only be withdrawn in
the form of grants to charitable organizations.7
   7
     An interesting observation from the Fidelity Charitable annual Giving Reports, is that among the top
10 or 20 recipients of DAF grants each year is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. Mormons,
as they are otherwise called, are required by their faith to donate 10% of their income and gains annually.
Thus commitment is provided by their faith, not by the legalities of DAF. This may explain why Mormons
find DAFs attractive–they gather the benefits without adding a constraint.


                                                    4
    How DAFs differ from trusts or private foundations? First, the typical foundation is much
larger. In 2015, private foundations averaged about $9.5 million in assets, while individual
DAFs averaged $292,000. However, DAFs can be opened and ready to operate in a matter of
a few hours, and at low cost. Private foundations, by contrast, can take months or years to
establish, involving great expense. As a result, in 2015 there existed around 82,000 private
foundations, but nearly 270,000 DAFs. Importantly, foundations do much more than grant
money to other organizations, and often pursue agendas of their own, employing staff and
affording allowances to trustees. DAFs primarily make grants existing charities, although
they can pay management fees to the sponsors of the DAFs.
    A contentious difference between DAFs and foundations is the “five percent payout rule”.
The rule states that private foundations must distribute at least 5% of their assets annually
as either grants or as “eligible administrative expenses.” When adopted, the point of this
rule was to guarantee taxpayers a fair rate of return on money subsidized when donated to
the foundations, while at the same time not bleeding so much money from foundations that
it would force them to eventually disappear. In debating the law, the Treasury argued that a
5% was justifiable because carefully invested endowments would on average yeild 6.75%. 8 In
principle, since DAFs allow the advising rights to be given away or bequeathed upon death,
DAFs can legally live forever. Just how long money lingers in a DAF will be an important
feature to be explored here.


2.3     How Important are DAFs and DAF Tax Policy?
Do DAFs involve enough money for policy makers to really worry about? Perhaps surpris-
ingly, the answer is a resounding yes.
    Figure 1 illustrates recent trends in DAFs. From 2007 to 2015, contributions to DAFs
   8
     See the discussion of this debate writte by Eugene Steurele for The Commission on Private Philanthropy
and Public Needs,” published by the US Treasury in 1977, pages 1663–1666. Interestingly, Fidelity Charitable
has voluntarily adopted payout rules for DAFs. In their Fidelity Charitable Policy Guide, page 18, is a
section entitled “Minimum Giving Account” in which they state that after three years without giving from
an account, “Fidelity Charitable will make every effort to contact the Account Holder to encourage grant
recommendation(s) from the Giving Account. For every year thereafter in which no grants are recommended
by an Account Holder, Fidelity Charitable will make grants from the Giving Account to IRS-qualified public
charities approved by the Trustees of Fidelity Charitable.” While vague about how much will be forcibly
given from the account, they are clear about DAFs with longer times of inactivity, stating, “If a Giving
Account has entered its seventh year of inactivity (i.e., no grants recommended by an Account Holder),
Fidelity Charitable will consider the Giving Account to be abandoned and will grant the entire balance
of the Giving Account to one or more IRS-qualified public charities approved by the Trustees of Fidelity
Charitable.” If an investor holds another DAF at, for instance, Vanguard Charitable, and gave their entire
DAF holding at Fidelity to a DAF at Vanguard before the seven year limit, however, such a rule would be
easily avoided. In fact, there has been evidence that some foundations are meeting the letter of the 5% rule
by giving to DAFs rather that granting directly to charities, although it would not appear consistent with
the intention of the rule.


                                                     5
rose by 240% to a total of $22.26 billion per year. Grants from DAFs to charities rose by
a similar percent, to $14.5 billion. Year-end-assets—the unspent contributions—climbed to
$78.64 billion, a 255% increase. Over the same period, the number of DAF accounts grew
as well, but at a relatively slower pace of 178% to almost 270,000 accounts.

         $90                                                                                       300,000

         $80
                                                                                                   250,000
         $70

         $60                                                                                       200,000

         $50
                                                                                                   150,000
         $40

         $30                                                                                       100,000

         $20
                                                                                                   50,000
         $10

           $‐                                                                                      ‐
                 2007    2008     2009     2010      2011    2012   2013     2014     2015

                    Total Contributions to DAFs (billions)      Total Grants from DAF (billions)
                    Year‐End Assets in DAFS (billions)          Number of DAFS (right axis)


Figure 1: Increasing Contributions to and Assets Held in Donor Advised Funds. (Source:
National Philanthropic Trust, Donor Advised Fund Report, 2011-16.)


   How does an average DAF account holder compare to the average donor? Since no
individual level data is available on DAF accounts, I use the IRS Statistics of Income to see
what, on average, Americans claim as charitable contributions on their itemized tax returns.
Figure 2 provides the comparison. In 2014, for example, looking at only tax returns that took
a charitable deduction, the average charitable deduction was $6,089. In that same year, the
average DAF account received contributions of $82,429, while making grants that averaged
$51,240 per account. If, to be conservative, I assume that no one has more than one DAF
account, an assumption I know to be false, then depending on whether you choose grants or
contributions as the more appropriate comparison, the average DAF account donor is giving
between 8 and 14 times the average amount given by those who deduct the gifts on their
taxes.9
   9
    The 2017 Fidelity Giving Report says that only 54% of donors have just one giving account. 30% have
2 to 4 accounts, 9% have 5 to 9, 4% have 10 to 19, and 3% have over 20. Tallying these up at the low end of
each category indicates 2.6 accounts per donor. If Fidelity’s pattern holds true among other organizations


                                                         6
         90,000

         80,000

         70,000

         60,000

         50,000

         40,000

         30,000

         20,000

         10,000

              ‐
                    2007      2008      2009      2010      2011       2012        2013   2014

                                  Average Annual Contributions to a DAF
                                  Average Annual Grants from a DAF
                                  Average Charitable Deduction Claimed in the US


Figure 2: Annual Contributions and Grants per DAF Account, Compared to Average Char-
itable Deduction of all Taxable Returns with Charitable Deductions. (Source: National Philan-
thropic Trust, Donor Advised Fund Report, 2011-16; and IRS Statistics of
Income reports in individual income tax returns)


    Using the Statistics of Income to infer what income level is most likely to be associated
with these amounts of giving, I find that the gift of $6,089 is best predicted by an income
of $187,726.10 Using grants as the appropriate comparison to SOI deductions, our methods
suggest the average DAF donor has an income of $1,361,651 per year, while using contri-
butions as the appropriate number would project an average income of $2,159,230 per year.
Both of these figures could be much bigger if taxpayers have more than one DAF account
(Fidelity reports that their donors average over 2.5 accounts each, for instance). All this
underscores the main point: Donor Advised Funds are clearly a financial instrument that,
when measured by dollars that pass through them, are used primarily by people at the very
that provide DAFs, I would have to multiply the figures here by 2 or 3 for more accurate amounts.
  10
     Using the average total income and the average total charitable deduction from the 2014 SOI, I fit a
quadratic regression of income on donations and use this to predict the unknown variable.


                                                     7
tops of the wealth and income distributions.

Table 1: The Size and Scope of Donor Advised Funds from 2007 to 2015, in 1000’s of Nominal
US dollars

                            2007               2008       2009    2010      2011      2012      2013       2014
 Average per DAF (Thousands)
   Year-End Balance        203.2              187.0       160.4   182.2     198.4    218.0     257.2      290.0
   Annual Contributions to   61.3              53.2        37.3    50.7      53.9     68.1      77.3       82.4
   Annual Grants from        39.1              39.8        36.7    39.3      42.3     41.6      44.4       51.2

 Average per IRS Return with Taxable Charitable Deduction:
   Charitable Deduction        5.0     4.6      4.5    4.6                    4.8       5.6       5.1          6.1

 All DAF Contributions and        Grants as a percent of total IRS        Contributions:
   Contributions to DAFs           5.11% 5.45% 4.41% 6.14%                 6.45% 7.48% 9.46%            10.03%
   Grants from DAFs                3.26% 4.08% 4.34% 4.75%                 5.06% 4.57% 5.44%             6.23%
   Accelerated Deductions          1.85% 1.38% 0.07% 1.39%                 1.39% 2.92% 4.02%             3.79%
 Sources: National Philanthropic Trust, Donor Advised Fund Report, 2011-2016; IRS Statistic of Income,
   Table 2.1, 2007-2014; and author’s calculations.


    This point is illustrated clearly in Table 1. Here I show that the year-end balance in DAF
accounts averages $290,000 in 2014. Recently the US Census Bureau released its estimates
of the mean and median household wealth in the US. Looking only at liquid assets, that is,
those that can easily be transported to a DAF, the median value is $39,000, while the mean
is $195,000.11 These are both swamped by the average balance in the giving accounts, which
again shows that the population selecting DAFs is heavily skewed toward the wealthy.
    A final and striking presentation of this fact is shown in Figure 3. This plots the annual
DAF contributions as a percent of all charitable deductions reported to the IRS. The first
surprising result is that this has grown from around 5% to just over 10% of all deductions
claimed for charitable giving. The relatively flat line in this figure shows DAF donors as
a percent of all those tax filers who claim a charitable deduction. This number has stayed
below 1% for the entire sample period. In 2014, DAF donors made up 0.74% of all those
claiming a contributions deduction, yet were responsible for 10.02% of all charitable deduc-
tions. Moreover, these same people have already received tax deductions for another $269
billion that is yet to be productively employed in the charitable sector.
  11
     The report refers to 2013 balances. Three elements of the report were summed: Total assets at financial
institutions, Other interest earning assets, and Stocks and mutual fund shares. Left off were things like
equity in a business, automobile, home, other real estate, and preferred retirement savings accounts. Also
not counted were annuities, trusts, and life insurance.




                                                      8
         12%


         10%


          8%


          6%


          4%


          2%


          0%
                 2007      2008       2009       2010       2011        2012        2013       2014

                        DAF Contributions as % of all IRS Contribution Deductions
                        All DAF Holders at % of US Tax Returns with Contributions Deductions


Figure 3: DAF Account Holders are Taking a Bigger Share of Charitable Deduction Dollars.
(Sources: National Philanthropic Trust, Donor Advised Fund Report, 2011-16; and IRS Statistics of Income
reports in individual income tax returns)


2.4     Why are DAFs Predominantly Used by the Wealthy?
A quick look at the tax incentives to giving can indicate why DAFs are so much more popular
among extremely high income individuals. Table 2 shows the marginal income tax rates and
capital gains tax rates for income brackets stated in terms of 2013 incomes, which is near the
center of those years reported on below. Saving capital gains taxation, as has been shown,
is perhaps the main financial reason for using a DAF. Those who have no capital gains to
give, whose financial assets are tied up in IRAs or 401(k) savings, or who simply have AGI
too low to owe any capital gains taxes, will have much weaker reasons for a DAF.
    According to Table 2, a married couple would need over $72,500 in AGI to save taxes
by giving through a DAF, and that’s only true if they have capital-gains assets to donate.
The median household income in 2013 was $52,250 and the households with incomes up
to $80,000 have little or no financial assets. This means there is no opportunity to benefit
financially from DAFs for well over half of the US taxpaying population.
    The picture is complicated further when considering the fees and minimum deposit re-
quirements for DAFs. One can open a DAF at Fidelity Charitable for a minimum initial
deposit of $5,000, which will carry annual fees of about $126. If this minimum deposit rep-

                                                      9
resents about 5 years of giving, as it would for a household with income of $80,000 per year,
then the fees can reduce her giving by over 11%. By contrast, a person opening a DAF with
$500,000 which they grant out over five years will pay total fees of about 3.1%. This again
is greater discouragement to middle income households.
    Finally, suppose two families both give the same asset to charity. The asset has a 50%
capital gain. A household with AGI of $120,000 who gives $1000 will save $355, while the
household with a $450,000 AGI or above will save $510 with the same gift, a difference of
$190. Thus, among even those who could possibly afford a DAF, the incentives to both give
and use the DAF are much greater the richer people are.

Table 2: Federal Margin Income Tax Rate (MTR), Long Term Capital Gains (LTCG) and
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT) Rates, 2007-2015. Rates apply if taxable income exceeds
$250,000 for married couples and includes net investment income, such as realized capital
gains or passive business income.

 Example of corresponding
   AGI brackets for 2013.       MTR                                             LTCG
  For other years these are 2007 2013                      2007                     2013-
   adjusted for inflation.∗ -2012   on                    -2011    2012     LTCG NIIT               Total
        0 to 17,845          10%   10%                      5%      0%        0%   0%                0%
  17,845 to 72,500           15%   15%                      5%      0%        0%   0%                0%
  72,500 to 146,400          25%   25%                     15%     15%       15%   0%                15%
 146,400 to 223,050          28%   28%                     15%     15%       15%   0%                15%
 223,050 to 398,350          33%   33%                     15%     15%       15% 3.8%∗∗             18.8%
 398,350 & above             35%                           15%     15%       15%  3.8%              18.8%
 398,350 to 450,000                35%                     15%     15%       15%  3.8%              18.8%
 450,000 & above                  39.6%                    50%     15%       20%  3.8%              23.8%
 Source: IRS Tax Topic 409–Capital Gains and Losses, and Topic 559–Net Investment Income Tax
 ∗
    This tax bracket is for Married Couples Filing Jointly. For single filers the NIIT trigger is at $200,000.
 ∗∗
    Applies to incomes that exceed $250,000 within this bracket.


   Now that we know what DAFs are and have a picture of who uses them, I next ask why
and how they use them. Recall the defining feature of DAFs: Timing, convenience, and
commitment. I will explore how each of these affect those using DAFs.


3     How Donors Use Donor Advised Funds
This discussion is separated by the two main distinctions. Subsections 3.1 to 3.3 discuss the
uses of the special rules of DAFs to alter either one’s giving or finances in constructive ways.
The final subsection, 3.4, looks at how DAFs can be used for the sole purpose of reducing
one’s tax bill.

                                                     10
3.1     Giving Non-Cash Assets more Easily
In this subsection I provide more detailed explanations of how DAFs facilitate gifts of non-
cash assets.

What and When to Contribute to a DAF?

If a donor wishes to use a non-cash asset for a gift to charity, which asset should the donor
use, and when should be given DAF relative to the intended date of transfer of the funds to
the charity?
    In most cases, the donor wishing to maximize tax savings should give the stock she owns
with the highest fraction of capital gains.12 After the DAF contribution she can adjust her
investment and DAF portfolios to restore diversification, even repurchasing the stock she
contributed.
    When during the tax year should she fund the DAF? If she expects her portfolio to
be growing in value, she will gain the most tax savings if she makes the contribution as
late as possible. For example, imagine she owns a share that is sure to go up by 10% in
value. Funding the DAF with shares worth $1000 in January and granting them to charity
in December means that the charity gets $1100 and she gets a deduction of $1000. Had she
waited until December to fund the DAF at $1100, then everything would be the same, but
now she can claim an extra $100 tax deduction.
    By the same logic, if she feels confident that the stock she wants to donate will go down
in value, then she should fund the DAF today rather than wait. Since, in theory, stock prices
are unpredictable and, in general, rise in value, tax-minimizing would suggest making and
funding this year’s donation as close to the time of the donation to charity will allow for the
most tax-effective giving. 13


3.2     Smoothing
It is commonly assumed that consumption varies less than income. Here I describe how
DAFs can smooth charitable giving in the presence of variable incomes or tax rates.
  12
     The exception is when she might have realized capital losses, for which she may want to match with
some realized gains so as to avoid carrying a loss forward.
  13
     If assets have taxable distributions as well as capital gains, the picture becomes a bit more complicated.
However, if one follows the same advice as above but immediately donates any distributions directly to the
DAF when received, but donates the asset itself as late as possible, the tax consequences will be nearly the
same as if the asset retained earnings and built capital gains. The reason is that dividends and capital gains
are taxed at the same rate.




                                                      11
Variable Income

Many taxpayers, such as the self-employed, have incomes that often vary widely from year to
year. As a result, their marginal tax rates can also vary. These people would generally like
their spending to fluctuate less than their incomes, and this includes their giving. Despite
the desire for smoothing donations, it makes sense to claim more donations in years when
their marginal tax rates are higher and claim smaller deductions when tax rates are lower.
Without DAFs, these people face a trade-off between smooth giving and maximum tax
savings. DAFs eliminate the dilemma. Contributions into DAFs can fluctuate with income,
but grants out of DAFs can remain relatively steady. We have already seen evidence of this
effect. Figure 2 shows a line representing average annual contributions to DAFs taking a dip
in 2009 in the midst of the Great Recession, while average grants from DAFs kept nearly
constant from 2007 to 2012.

Pre-paying

When people enter retirement, they often switch from drawing a high salary to drawing down
capital investments to finance their living expenses. As a result, they can find themselves
in a lower tax bracket in retirement. People in this situation can gain by “pre-paying” their
expected contributions in retirement before they retire. As we saw above, if they want to do
this, the best time to do it is as late as they can, thus bunching up as many years of pre-paid
giving during their final years of work as possible.
    The IRS limits deductions to DAFs to 50% of adjusted gross income for gifts of cash but
only up to 30% of AGI for gifts of non-cash assets. This means that giving the maximum
for two or three years may be necessary to fully pre-pay one’s donations.14

Pre-pay or Carry Forward?

Another reason to pre-pay donations would be if a donor wishes to make a single large
donation in one year. This is common in today’s fund-raising world when charities are
competing for donors by offering legacy gifts that will carry the donor’s name, such as a
wing of a hospital, or a museum to house the donor’s massive art collection.
   Such large gifts will often surpass the IRS annual limit on the charitable deduction.
Standard tax law allows the excess to be carried forward for up to five years. But this means
delaying the full tax savings or, even worse, exceeding the deduction limits and failing to
  14
    Imagine a person with AGI of $500,000 who gives away $20,000 each year, is planning to maintain this
level of giving for 25 years in retirement. Assuming a 7% annual return, then she needs a balance of $233,000
in her DAF upon retirement. Her deduction limit, however, is $150,000/year, which means she needs at least
two years of savings to reach her goal.


                                                     12
maximize tax savings. A DAF can solve all of these problems. By front-loading the DAF
for several years before the big donation, the DAF will obtain the tax savings before, rather
than after, the gift, and will reduce the need to carry forward excess deductions.

Anticipating Statutory Tax Changes

As described in section 2.4 and Table 2, there were important tax changes that took effect
in 2013. These changes were part of the Affordable Care Act, which was signed into law by
President Obama on March 23, 2010. Thus, for the years leading up to 2013, individuals with
DAF savings should have spent that down and replenished it after 2013, when the deduction
will be more valuable. Thus, we could expect to see contributions fall and account balances
decline (at least relative to a trend) from 2010 to 2012 as a means of shifting charitable
deductions to take advantage of the greater savings under the higher marginal rates. Given
the anticipated increase in capital gains tax as well, the 2010 law might focus attention on the
benefits now and in the future from giving appreciated assets, which may lead to an increase
in DAF usage. However, while the increase in marginal rates will lower the cost of giving,
they will also lower after-tax income of the potential donors. Which effect will dominate is
unclear. Saez (2017) explores this question, but finds little evidence of anticipatory changes
in giving. I will revisit this question later.


3.3     Forced Sales, Lumpy Assets, and other Large Capital Gains
Mergers, take-overs, initial public offers, and other punctuated events often give shareholders
an anticipated but unavoidable realization of very large capital gains without the hope of
reducing these gains by matching them with realized losses.15 A potentially attractive option
is to give some of these shares to a DAF before the sale. Rather than face millions of dollars
in capital gains tax, a person could instead fund a lifetime of charitable giving. Indeed,
given our conversation on the value in delaying funding of DAFs, it is surprising to look at
an annual giving report from Fidelity Charitable, for example, and learn that 8% percent
of DAF accounts carry balances over $250,000. This balance in a DAF is hard to imagine
without inferring these belong to people who are avoiding capital gains tax that, in the
absence of DAFs would be more difficult to avoid.
    Other assets can also bring large capital gains, such as non-publicly traded shares in
  15
     Many shareholder agreements allow for either votes from the board of directors or from shareholders
themselves to force the sale of a fraction of shares from each shareholder at a fixed price. Typically this
follows a bid for a merger or takeover of the company and can involve the purchase of up to 100% of the
shares of the target firm. However, it is also typical that the forced sale price is a premium over the recent
market price of the firms, thus all shareholders stand to make a gain from the sale.



                                                     13
closely held corporations, original artwork or collectibles, real estate, and even homes.16
While some donations of such large properties clearly end up with significant public benefit,
others appear more motivated by tax considerations than by civic-mindedness.17


3.4     Tax Arbitrage
Tax arbitrage is the practice of shifting assets within one’s portfolio without appreciably
altering the real value of that portfolio, but nonetheless producing a savings in taxes. Tax
arbitrage is an issue with nearly every tax, but is especially problematic with taxation of
physical and financial assets. The rules around Donor Advised Funds are no exception.

Estate Giving

Since 2011, estates worth under $5 million have been exempt from estate taxes, a limit that
is indexed for inflation (in 2017 the limit stands at $5.49 million). A donor who wants to
include a gift in his estate, whether he will owe estate tax or not, can save money by giving
the donation to a DAF before dying. Either way the gift will avoid estate taxes, but if it is
put in a DAF while alive, the donor can also collect a reduction in income taxes while alive,
and advise the DAF to make the donation upon death.

Washing Out the Wash-Sale Rule

Suppose someone has an asset with a large capital gain and wants to avoid paying tax on it.
A way to do this is to realize the capital gain along with an equal capital loss to offset the
gains for tax purposes. After liquidating the two shares to neutralize the gains, the person
could simply buy both shares again and wash the taxable gain out of the portfolio.
  16
     The IRS forgives tax on up to $500,000 in capital gains on homes for married couples, as long as the
home is a primary residence. Gifts of artworks are also increasingly popular. For example, Audrey Irmas
recently donated artwork by Cy Twombly to a Foundation carrying her name, but it could have just as
easily been donated to a DAF. She originally paid $3.85 million for the painting, which was appraised before
auction at Sotheby’s for $70.5 million, giving her a deduction against income of $70.5 million and saving her
tax on a long term gain of $66 million (or $13 million per year for five years). Had she allowed the painting
to pass in her estate, she would have paid nearly $27 million in tax, or had she sold it as an individual
she would have owed almost $16 million in capital gains tax (See “How do you tell the difference between
philanthropy and a tax write-off?” by Jori Finkel, New York Times, November 4, 2015.)
  17
     Ms Irmas’ donation of the Twombly painting was sold within days of when it was officially donated,
with the proceeds fulfilling several pledges she had made to charitable organizations. She, nonetheless, made
the donation in the most tax advantaged way she could, and it is not clear whether she would have been
more or less generous without the federal subsidy. For more socially questionable gifts, see the discussion
of “private museums” that house a donor’s art collection, but which are difficult to access by the public in
the New York Times “Writing Off the Warhol Next Door: Art Collectors Gain Tax Benefits From Private
Museums,” by Patricia Cohen, Jan. 10, 2015, https://nyti.ms/1BZKYMf .



                                                     14
    This operation, however, is prohibited by the Internal Revenue Service under the “wash-
sale rule.” This rule states that an investor who sells a share for a loss cannot repurchase the
same or substantially similar shares for at least one month. The point is to curb investors
engaging in tax arbitrage.
    DAFs can help wash away capital gains tax as well, but in a way that does not violate
the wash-sale rule. Moreover, there is no need to balance the capital gain with a capital
loss. Imagine a person who every year gives $10,000 in cash to charity. Suppose this year
he decides to open a DAF. Rather than giving cash as he had planned, he opens his DAF
with a deposit of $10,000 worth of shares with the highest capital gain in his portfolio. He
then uses the cash to buy back the same shares. Inside the DAF, he advises the sponsor to
sell the shares and makes the donations. But notice, after he contributed the shares they
are technically the property of the sponsor of the DAF. In addition, the DAFs eliminate the
need to find a capital loss. Thus the DAF can accomplish the work of a wash-sale without
violating the wash-sale rule.

Appraisals of Hard-to-Value Assets

Gifts of non-cash assets that are not publicly traded—such shares in closely held corporations—
must be formally appraised. Only if one is claiming a “fair market value” of more than
$500,000 does one need a “qualified appraisal” of the asset, meaning a licensed or certified
appraiser giving an opinion as to the asset’s fair market value.
    The IRS has uncovered numerous cases of overblown appraisals for gifts that do not in-
clude DAFs. Although many brokerages are specializing in accepting such illiquid assets into
DAFs and encouraging such contributions, there is no evidence of any changes or increase
in over-valuations attributable to DAFs. It is also the case, however, that reporting require-
ments from DAF providers can make it difficult to detect any abuses (see Colinvaux (2013,
2017) for discussion of these issues). As a consequence, this potential will not be explored
here.


4    Benefits and Costs: Conceptual Issues
The logic behind a benefit-cost analysis of any tax policy is to ask how well the policy meets
its objectives, and did the benefits of reaching those objectives exceed the cost of doing
so. Importantly, however, the policy must also pass a second test, which is to ask whether
we could have achieved the same policy objectives at a lower cost through the best of the
alternative policies. In our case, the alternative policy may be not having DAFs at all, or


                                              15
perhaps more simply just letting the government use the money it would have spent on tax
breaks for DAFs for direct contributions to charity.
    Benefit-cost analysis requires that we look at the world from a distance. When we have
discretion, we also conduct calculations from options that we think are either too low or too
high, so as to capture the truth within upper and lower bounds.
    Before I can compare benefits and costs, each must be defined and explained. I do this
next.


4.1    What is a Benefit of Donor Advised Funds?
The obvious objective of DAFs is to encourage people to give more to charity. Indeed,
surveys done by Fidelity Charitable of their DAF clients suggest that people are increasingly
likely to think of DAFs as a means for giving more to charity, with 73% agreeing that this
is a consequence of DAFs. These additional contributions comprise the main benefit of the
DAF program.
    Givers report other benefits, such as the convenience of using a DAF to order payments
to charities and for budget purposes. Most of these same services can be provided by one’s
own bank, however, as well as from many brokerage houses. Thus, the service of simply
going online to send payments to charities is actually not, on net, a benefit as it largely
reproduces services already available without DAFs.
    The unique service DAFs do provide is, first, ease in allowing a tax deduction of appreci-
ated stock when making donations of all sizes, and second, the ability to save contributions
made today to fund donations in the future. Thus, the benefit of DAFs is the additional
charitable giving that is received because of the DAF.
    I can illustrate with four examples.
Example 1: Imagine a married couple frames their giving decisions this way: Before discov-
ering DAFs, this family had decided to give $20,000 per year to charity and will do so at
the least tax cost possible. DAFs helped them discover new ways to save tax payments, but
they did not revise their giving plan. Here we would say the DAF program got no benefits
from this household. They simply kept with the same giving plan, and were not induced to
give more.
Example 2: This family has separated their assets into two accounts. One account will
determine what they spend on themselves, and the other account will go to charity. Any tax
savings from DAFs go right back into the charitable account. Thus, each year the present
value of the benefits of DAFs exactly equals the tax savings of the gift.



                                             16
Example 3: Because of a sale of a company, the family earned a $2 million capital gain this
year. They decided to set it aside so that they could save up for a $4 million dollar gift to
their alma mater to fund a new biology lab, which they expect to have achieved in 5 years.
However, when they learned about DAFs, they gave their business interest to a DAF before
the shares were sold, saving them $476,000 in capital gains tax while reducing their state
and federal income taxes by $992,000. So a year later they find themselves with about $1.5
million more than they expected, meaning they have about 3.5 of the $4 million goal and
can make the gift in two years rather than five. This earlier receipt of the gift is a clear
benefit of the DAF.
Example 4: Suppose the family in the prior example learned that there was actually an
opportunity to give a $5 million endowment to an economics lab at their alma mater that
would support behavioral economics (the future of dismal science). Because the DAF allowed
them to save so much on the sale of their business, they decide to pay about an extra $300,000
net of taxes to fund the $5 million lab on the original schedule. Thus, the charity now gets
money at the same time but, because of the DAF, gets $1 million extra. This $1 million
extra is the benefit of DAFs.
   In sum, DAFs can have no benefits if all the taxpayer does is shift assets in order to save
taxes and gives no more to charity. The DAF can have benefits if i) donors give more money
on the dates they planned, ii) give what they planned but give it sooner, iii) give more in
present value terms than they had planned, or iv) any combination of the above.18


4.2       What are the Costs of Donor Advised Funds?
Notice that in the prior subsection, I did not list the reduction in taxes as a benefit of DAFs.
Recall that in this analysis we are not to take the position of the donor but of a citizen at
large. A tax policy generates $X of new giving to charity while paying out $Y in tax breaks
is surely better than a policy that gets the same $X in charity but pays out $Y × 2. Thus,
the more taxes an individual taxpayer saves under the new program, the greater the cost to
society overall.
    The next source of cost is a bit more subtle, but very important. If a person puts $1000
in a DAF and doesn’t give it out for a year, the money in the DAF will grow at a rate r.
Suppose r = 0.07, the long run rate of return in the stock market. So money in the DAF
could be thought of as having a return on investment, or ROI, of 7% per year. But charitable
giving also has features of an investment. Consider some examples.
Example 1. Economist James Heckman has estimated that money spent on early childhood
 18
      This assumes, of course, stable tax rates over the relevant period.


                                                       17
development programs for poor households has a social rate of return of return of 10%. He
notes that other similar programs have measured returns as high as 17%.19
Example 2. Donating $15 to the Nature Conservancy can fund an offset for 1 metric ton of
carbon. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that this saves the economy about
$62 in present value of the costs of pollution.20

Example 3. GiveDirectly is a charitable organization that is changing the way we help poor
people around the world. They use donors’ gifts to provide unconditional cash grants to poor
African families. The charity was founded by economists so, naturally, they commissioned
an independent, fully randomized, and rigorous evaluation of the return on investment of
these grants. What they found surprised many. People used the money to invest in things
that give long run returns—a new roof, a scooter to drive to work in the city, or a dowry for
a wife. They found a return on investment over 30%.21
Example 4. Often gifts to charities can have greater returns the more people give to them.
Vaccines are an excellent example. Vaccinating only one person will not stop an epidemic.
But, depending on how quickly a virus can spread, vaccinating between 85 to 90% of the
population (called the herd immunity threshold), can spare virtually the whole society. So
the return on investment to the first vaccine is nearly zero, but the return on investment of
the final vaccine that crosses the heard immunity threshold is, well, priceless.
    The point of these examples is to show that giving to charity has a return on investment
as well. While not all charities are high performing, those that survive in the competition
for donations are more likely to generate an ROI that is no less than that of the average
for-profit investment. In particular, if donors are rational, and the ROI on charities is below
the ROI on investments, the donor can do the most for charity by saving now to give later
when their investments aren’t growing so fast. In addition, most donors are likely to suffer
from the “free rider problem,” that is, not only will the direct recipients of the charity be
better off, but others who also care for the same cause will also be better off because of the
donation.22 These and other arguments suggest another potential cost of DAFs. If a donor
accepts a tax benefit from the government but then invests that in assets that yield an
inferior return to that which the government could have gotten by giving the same amount
directly to charity, then this should be reflected in the cost. I will return to this point in
  19
    See “Investment in early childhood development: Reduce deficits, strengthen the economy,” posted on
The Heckman Equation, www.heckmanequation.org
 20
    See https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/economics/scc.html for EPA estimates.
 21
    See Haushofer and Shapiro (2016).
 22
    See Andreoni (1998) for a discussion of increasing returns and the market for charitable giving. See also
Andreoni (2006) and Andreoni and Payne (2013) for reviews of the literature on charitable giving.



                                                     18
subsection 5.2 on discount rates.
   To summarize, DAFs will have costs if they reduce the revenues of the Treasury, or add
time between allowing the tax benefits and receiving the investment in charity.


4.3     Combining Benefits and Costs
If DAF policy is to be successful, it must encourage more in new donations than it costs in
new amounts of lost tax revenue and delayed investment in charity.
    I can broadly organize the effects of DAFs into three categories. Importantly, people can
be influenced by all three effects. The first I will call tax minimizing. DAF users who are
tax minimizing are concerned with reaching their giving goals with the greatest tax savings
they can uncover.
    Second is DAF saving. This is the use of DAFs to smooth giving, pre-pay before retire-
ment, or to stockpile future giving in years when one experiences a large capital gain. All
of these create a gap in time between when contributions claim a tax deduction and when
the contribution is put to work by some charity. There is typically a bigger social cost the
bigger this gap becomes.23
    The third kind of effect, which we can call inspiring generosity is that the increase
subsidies available to DAFs inspires people to give more. In the analysis, the average person
I will be modeling will have some of all three motives. Whether DAFs are an improvement
over the policy without DAFs will depend on the relative sizes of tax minimizing, DAF
saving, and those inspired to give more because of DAFs.


5      DAF Benefit Cost Analysis
Here I document how I select all of the variables needed to conduct the analysis. In doing
so, there is one essential thing to keep in mind; the analysis is to be created for the average
dollar donated, not the donations of the average donor. That is, the actions of a person with
a large accounts will be weighed much more than a small DAF giver. The easiest way to do
this is to look at the aggregate data as if it were generated by a single person with a single
DAF account, a single representative income tax rate, and a single representative capital
gains tax rate. This person makes the aggregate donation and waits the average amount of
  23
     To see this, imagine that the DAF policy creates $100 in new charity but only $90 more in lost tax revenue.
If both occur this year, then the policy is a net benefit: 100−90 = 10 > 0. But suppose it delays the giving by
a year, but not the tax deduction. With a discount rate of 7%, the margin between benefits and costs shrinks:
P V (1) = 100/(1.07) − 90 = 3.46. If the delay is two years, then P V (2) = 100/(1.07)2 − 90 = −2.65 < 0, a
loss.



                                                      19
time to start granting it out to charity, and grants it all out to charity at the average rate.
Thus we are modeling a mythical donor whose patterns of DAF transactions match those of
DAF tranactions in general.


5.1     The DAF Data
The primary data was obtained from the Chronicle of Philanthropy, which provided a list
of over 80 DAF sponsors from 2009 to 2014. This data lists the number of DAF funds under
management, annual contribution to DAFs, grants from DAFs, and total year-end balance
in all accounts. For each DAF provider, the data is in aggregate and is drawn directly from
each organization’s 990 forms.24
    The National Philanthropic Trust conveniently has the very same data, and has published
the aggregates for years 2007-2015. There are also publicly available reports from Fidelity
Charitable through their giving reports and donor/investor guides. They also publish the
results of periodic surveys of their account holders, both in Fidelity Investments and Fidelity
Charitable, which have been very informative.
    Some of our analysis will be concerned with a precise value for contributions of non-cash
assets. Unfortunately, community foundations collect contributions for DAFs and for the
community foundation directly, and do not treat gifts of non-cash assets consistently across
community foundations. For this reason, much of the analysis focuses on a subset of DAF-
only organizations, such as Fidelity Charitable, Vanguard Charitable, and the like. This was
augmented to include information from the 2015 IRS form 990 filings of each organization.
Of the 15 such organizations, sound financial statements were verified for 13 of them from
2008-2015.25 The means of relevant variables are reported in Table 3. While this represents
a large reduction in the number of organizations, going from 85 to 13, these 13 organizations
nonetheless represent nearly 60% of the total value of all organizations provided in the
Chronicle of Philanthropy data.
    A further source of information is the US Treasury’s annual tables that summarize the
tax returns of citizens. Line items are aggregated across returns and reported by category
of Adjusted Gross Income, as well as total income. This information is very helpful in
constructing our much needed counter-factual—what do people do generally, without the
benefits of DAFs?
   24
      IRS 990 forms are the tax returns that 501(c)(3) charities must file annually with the IRS, including
issuers of DAFs.
   25
      Due to inconsistencies in financial statements that could not be reconciled, I dropped Goldman Charitable
Gift Fund and Greater Horizons.




                                                      20
Table 3: Means for 13 organizations whose sole mission is to provide Donor Advised Funds.

                                                            Mean   Values
                               2008     2009     2010     2011      2012     2013     2014     2015
 Grants From DAFs($mil)        181.5    205.8    218.5    235.1     289.9   369.1    475.7     536.2
 Contributions to DAFs         209.0    261.6    322.1   456.6      640.0   664.8    874.7     812.6
 Non-Cash Contributions         85.7    156.8   177.4    299.0      344.5   443.1    533.0     518.4
 Publicly Traded Securities     80.2    152.6    167.5    285.1     309.0   258.0    371.7     198.8
 Other Non-Cash                 1.5      4.3      9.9     13.9       27.5    45.5     17.3     47.3
 Cash Contributions            123.3    104.8   144.7    157.6      295.5    221.    341.7     294.1
 End-of-Year Assets            739.4    851.3   1084.1   1305.8    1800.9   2326.0   2769.6   3032.9
 Average Account Size          0.263    0.249   0.267    0.270      0.303   0.334    0.381     0.359
 Number of Accounts            6280     6478     6777     7195      8154     9201    10752    12606
 Contributions/BYA                      0.299    0.387    0.355     0.465    0.376    0.482    0.358
 NonCash/BYA                            0.149   0.204    0.191      0.252   0.233    0.277     0.198



5.2     Choosing a Discount Rate
As we saw above, DAFs allow donors to separate the time of a tax deduction from the time
of a gift to charity. In order to compare benefits and costs that come at different times, we
need to put them in comparable units. This typically means posing the different flows in
present value by discounting future gains and losses at a common annual rate δ. The value
of δ used is critically important in determining the net costs or benefits of DAFs, so it is
worth taking a moment to discuss how δ is chosen.
    When the federal government calculates present value it often suggests the analyst con-
sider three values for δ, 3%, 7%, and 10%.26 They are naturally referred to as the consump-
tion discount rate, the financial discount rate, and the externality discount rate. Why does
the government use these three? The intuition can be seen by using the logic of opportunity
cost.
    In asking whether a particular investment is a good idea, the investor must first ask how
well he would do by investing in the best available alternative. It is the rate of return on the
next best alternative that determines the appropriate rate at which both the new investment
and the alternative should be discounted when deciding which is better.
    The government faces a similar task. To find the net benefit of DAFs, it has to ask what
it would do with the taxes it devotes to DAFs if it didn’t allow DAFs. One thing is to return
the money to taxpayers, which will add to their stream of consumption. Since long run real
economic growth is about 3%, this thinking could justify the consumption discount rate.
  26
     See the Office of Management and Budget Circular A-94, Whitehouse Circular A-4, and chapter six of
Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analysis prepared by the Environmental Protection Agency, download-
able at https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/guidelines-preparing-economic-analyses.


                                                  21
    However, DAF policy will encourage people to put money into financial investments for 3
to 4 years and then give it to charity. The alternative may be instead be to keep the money
invested in the stock market longer. This would justify using the financial discount rate of
7%. This is the historical long run real return on new capital investment.
    What’s the rationale for δ of 10%? Some investments have both private returns and
“external returns,” that is, benefits to society that the investor cannot capture. Examples
could be investing in a clean power plant that makes a fair profit but also pollutes less and
saves lives. Or perhaps, the investment results in new medical research that cures a chronic
illness. Maybe the investment is in preschool training to poor children that raises their
lifetime earnings by over 17%, which in turn reduces their odds of being on public assistance
or put in jail, which then has positive repercussions for their children and grandchildren.
These are investments that have very high benefits to those who are the objects of investment,
but also to society at large. These externalities, or public goods aspects of charitable giving,
can push its investment returns well above market rates of return, as I already discussed in
section 5.2. If the policy objective is to get at least as much new charity as it spends in
tax dollars on DAFs, the best alternative to DAFs could be to just give money directly to
charity, in which case the rate of return on charitable investments is the appropriate rate to
use for discounting DAFs. Since these returns are hard to measure, 10% is suggested as a
realistic and not tremendously outrageous discount rate.
    I will consider all three discount rates. Since the discount rates are in real terms, I must
also adjust our DAF balances for inflation. Using the past 25 years of annual data from
the Consumer Price Index, I estimate inflation to be about 2.4% annually, but only 1.8%
over our sample period.27 To compromise, I take inflation to be 2% in our analysis. This is
typically what the government assumes long run inflation is as well.
    Assumption 1: Analysis using three real discount rates, 3%, 7%, and 10%, will be
compared. Although 10% as most realistic but, to be conservative in support of DAFs, favor
7%.
    Assumption 2: Inflation is assumed to be 2% annual.


5.3     Shifting Contributions to Include more Non-cash Assets
An important aspect of DAFs is that they make it easier to use non-cash assets for everyday
giving. A common policy among charities, for instance, it to accept only non-cash gifts of
equities if the value exceeds a minimum set by the charity, often several thousand dollars.
So gifts over this would be unaffected by DAFs, while smaller gifts could be funded with
  27
     Regressing the log of the CPI on year yields a coefficient of 0.02432 (s.e. 0.00038), suggesting 2.4%
inflation for 1992-2015, and 0.017897 (s.e. 0.00165) for 2008-2014.


                                                   22
appreciated assets using DAFs, but not without. So the task here is to see how much
additional non-cash giving is done through DAFs.
   Our DAF data include the value of both cash and non-cash contributions. Lacking,
however, is knowledge of what mix of cash and non-cash contributions the DAF holders
would have contributed in the absence of DAFs.
                           SOI Incomes $500k+ vs. DAF Contributions
            90,000
            80,000
            70,000
            60,000
            50,000
            40,000
            30,000
            20,000
            10,000
                 ‐
                        2008      2009          2010         2011        2012       2013   2014

                                        Contributions SOI           Contributions DAFs
                                        Non‐cash SOI                Non‐cash DAFs
            (a) Average Total and Non-cash Contributions for SOI High Incomes vs. DAFs
                                Percent Non‐Cash Contributions
            70.0%

            60.0%

            50.0%

            40.0%

            30.0%

            20.0%

            10.0%

             0.0%
                       2008      2009          2010          2011       2012        2013   2014

                                               SOI High Income          DAFs
                     (b) Percent Non-cash Contributions SOI High Incomes vs. DAFs

Figure 4: How DAFs shift Non-cash Contributions. All Contributions and non-cash contri-
butions of DAF holders compared to a sample from the Statistics of Income of all tax filers
with incomes (current dollars) of $500,000 and above who also make itemized charitable
deductions.


    Figure 4 shows data gather from the Statistics of Income on tax filers with high incomes,
defined as AGI of $500k/year or more, for years 2008-2014. Let’s call these the SOI High
Income donors. I will come back to this comparison group often. The top panel shows that
the average contributions of DAF holders and SOI High Income donors track fairly closely,

                                                        23
especially in the later years of the sample. One can also see that the level of non-cash
donations is clearly higher for DAF donors. The bottom panel confirms this. It shows the
percent of all contributions that are non-cash. A more detailed look at these data show that
the best prediction of non-cash gifts as a percent of all contributions to DAFs is just over
65%, while the best estimate for the SOI data is that donations are less than 50% non-cash.28
So the first assumption will be that DAFs shift more giving to appreciated assets:
   Assumption 3: The behavioral consequence of DAFs is to shift giving from 50% non-cash
assets to 65%.


5.4      Fraction of Asset Value that is Capital Gains
Although the data list non-cash contributions, there is no way of knowing the basis for these
assets. There are, however, pieces of information that will help us. Knowing investors’
full portfolios is not essential, but just knowing highest gains-to-value of any asset in their
portfolio is enough, as this is the asset tax-minimizing donors will contribute. Second, it is
reported in the annual Giving Reports from Fidelity Charitable that a typical DAF donor
in 2017 is about 60 years old. An investor this age has likely been investing for 30 years.
Holding the S&P 500 index fund for 30 years would today be 88% capital gains. If at age 40,
in 1997, the person acquired Berkshire Hathaway, today those shares would be 86% capital
gains. Betting on Apple stock when at age 45 in 2002 would today mean holding a 98%
capital gain, and if he purchased Apple, Amazon, or Facebook even 10 years ago, the shares
would be 81 to 96% capital gains. And then there are investors who got in the ground floor
on start-ups with successful IPOs.29 Add to this the effects of people self-selecting into DAFs
and it is likely that high income people 60 years old are holding some shares with significant
capital gains.
    Another resource is a survey that Fidelity conducted of its investments customers. Look-
ing at their accounts, Fidelity could tell what shares they have that could most benefit the
client as sources for a DAF contributions for tax savings. They then ranked these savings
and reported the potential savings by decile—the largest 10% of potential gainers to the
lowest 10%. Fidelity goes on to report of potential DAF clients, only 3% in 2007 actually
  28
     More precisely, consider a simple regression yt = β0 +β1 t where yt is the log of the percent of contributions
that are non-cash in year t (letting t = 1 for 2008). For DAFs, the coefficients are β̂0 = −0.766(s.e. = 0.119)
and β̂1 = 0.050(s.e. = 0.027) which for 2014 predicts 66.1% non-cash assets in DAFs. So as not to overstate
the cost of DAFs, round this down to 65%. The Statistics of Income data is limited to all tax-filers with
incomes of $500,000 and above over the same years as our DAF sample. The regression coefficient estimate
for this group are β̂0 = −1.102(s.e. = 0.104) and β̂1 = 0.0438(s.e. = 0.023) which for 2014 predicts 45.2%
non-cash assets in DAFs. To give more benefit to DAFs, round this up to 50%.
  29
     See https://www.fool.com/investing/2017/07/01/best-ipos-of-all-time.aspx for a fascinating list of both
high and low profile IPOs that have created tremendous capital gains for early investors.


                                                        24
held DAFs.
    So of all the potential DAF holders that Fidelity identified, which of the deciles will the
elite 3% likely come from? It is natural to expect that those with the most to gain from a DAF
are the ones most likely to open one. So let’s focus on the top three deciles. These groups
have assets with 85%, 62%, and 47% capital gains respectively. An extreme assumption is
that all DAF adopters come from the top decile, giving us a high estimate. A conservative
assumption is they all come from the third group. A compromise is to form a weighted
average of the three groups relative to their possible gains, which results in approximately
75% of value being capital gains. This will be the favored value of capital gains available for
both DAF non-DAF donors. For balance, this will be paired with a conservative estimate of
50% gain-to-value, which is more favorable to DAFs.
    Assumption 4: Non-cash assets contributed contributed to DAFs and non-DAFS contain
75% capital gains in our favored assumption, and 50% capital gains in our conservative
assumption.


5.5    The Rate of Return on Assets Invested in DAFs
Let At be the assets held by a DAF at the end of year t. Contributions to and Grants
from the DAF to charity in period t are written Ct and Gt . It would be appropriate here
to weight Ct and Gt to reflect possibly different timing of flows into and out of the DAF
over the course of the year. This, however, is impossible with the data the public is allowed
to see. As an alternative, instead make the simplifying assumption that all contribution
and grants take place at the end of the year. Since this is done for both contributions and
grants, this should create little or no systematic bias, but it does allow us to easily calculate
how assets on deposit in DAFs grow. Since At includes both contributions and grants, in
calculating returns these must be reversed:

                       At + Gt − Ct − At−1 =rAt−1 − rφG Gt + rφC Ct

Dividing both sides by At−1 , we see

                      At + Gt − Ct − At−1    At−1 − φG Gt + φC Ct
                                          =r                      ≡ r̂
                             At−1                   At−1

where we define r̂ as the effective rate of return. For each year, construct r̂ and apply this
to all assets in the DAF that year.
    Table 4 reports the calculations derived above. In the final three columns are separate
calculations. The first is an ordinary mean across the values of r̂ estimated for each year

                                               25
                            Table 4: Rate of Return on Assets in DAFs

                       Billions of US Dollars                              Implied Return, r̂
              End of Year                                             Current Weighted       Last
                Assets      Contrib’s Grants Gains                     Year   by Assets       Half
       2008     9.712         2.733    2.383
       2009     11.479        3.818    2.785  0.734                   0.076        0.005
       2010     14.568        4.459    3.061  1.690                   0.147        0.012
       2011     17.372        6.010    3.209  0.003                   0.000        0.000
       2012     23.831        8.486    3.924  1.897                   0.109        0.015        0.109
       2013     30.639        8.784    4.973  2.997                   0.126        0.022        0.126
       2014     36.419       11.531    6.326  0.575                    0.019       0.004         0.019
       2015     39.341       10.790    7.221 −0.647                   −0.018       −0.004       −0.018

  Average         24.807          7.697       4.500                    0.066        0.054        0.059
                                                                       high          low        medium


in our sample. This gives an average return of r̂ = 0.066. Weighting the annual returns by
assets yields and estimate of r̂ = 0.054. Finally, avoiding the unusual years surrounding the
2008 financial crisis, the last column give an estimate of r̂ = 0.059. Which is the best rate?
For instance, looking at the rate of return on the S&P 500 index over the past 25 years,
I estimate nominal growth rate of 5.7%, which is most similar to the 5.9% found above,
suggesting this as the most representative growth rate to adopt.30
    Assumption 5: Assets retained in a DAF account will experience a nominal increase in
value of 5.9% annually.


5.6      Finding the Shelf-life of a DAF Contribution.
In their annual giving reports, Fidelity boasts that over 95% of of individual deposits into
DAF accounts are fully paid out within 10 years. While not unimportant, individual accounts
may be the wrong place to focus when determining benefits and costs of DAFs as tax policy.
    A better approach for policy purposes is to take the view that, as taxpayers and consumers
of charity, the dollars subsidized for charitable giving do, in some sense, belong to the public.
As a result, we should all think of ourselves as holding all DAF accounts together as if they
collectively belonged to the public. From this point of view, it makes most sense to envision
an inventory of donations the way an accountant might. We would then measure the flows of
cash in DAFs in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) inventory accounting method. We can envision
this application to DAFs this way: This year’s contributions to DAFs go into an investment
  30
    In the analysis to follow, it turns out to make little to no difference to our results which of these we
choose, so to adopt the central value of 5.9% will not be misleading


                                                      26
account named “2017.” It sits alongside other accounts named “2016,” “2015,” and so on.
Each investment account holds different numbers of shares of the same mutual fund. At
the end of each year, all grants to charity are paid by starting at the oldest account. If an
account reaches a zero balance, the account is closed and we move to the oldest remaining
account, and so on. Perhaps years from now, we will start to dip into the 2017 account,
which we hope has grown with the stock market. Eventually, after a bit more than a year
of grant making, the 2017 account will be closed.
    Continuing with this analogy, we need to find these pieces of information: For the account
opened in 2017, at what year do we begin making grants from this account? How many grant
dollars go out of the account each year? When is the account closed? And what is the 2017
present value of the donations from this account?
                                           70


                                                              Total Inflows
                                           60                 Total Outflows
                                                              2008 Balance
                                                              2009 Balance
                                           50
                                                              2010 Balance
          Billions of Current US Dollars




                                                              2011 Balance

                                           40                 2012 Balance




                                           30



                                           20



                                           10



                                            0
                                                2008   2009   2010        2011      2012   2013   2014   2015

Figure 5: Inventory of DAF Dollars paid out on a FIFO basis. Inventory of DAF Dollars
paid out on a FIFO basis. When a Blue line goes from the Red Line (total contributions to
DAFs) to the Black Line (total grants from DAFs) that year’s contributions are fully out of
the inventory of DAF funds.

   The answer to these questions are shown graphically in Figure 5. This figure uses the data
from our 13 DAF-only organizations. The red line indicates all the money in DAF accounts

                                                                               27
that, as seen through the lens of tax policy, is owed to charity. Each year this grows for two
reasons. First, are the new contributions to DAFs, and second, are the investment returns
earned on the DAF holdings. Begin at the year-end of 2008. The height of the red line at
2008 is its year-end balance. This is the total amount of money (plus investment returns)
that needs to be given away before any contributions from 2009 will be eligible to be given
away. Isolate this money from any new donations, and affix to it a growth rate as described
in the prior subsection. This means that as we move out to 2009, 2010 and so on, the light
blue line that starts in 2008 tells us how much money needs to be granted out of DAFs before
all the money on hand at the end of 2008, including any earnings, is fully paid out. The
black line keeps track of the total money granted out as donations. Thus, when the blue line
from 2008 touches the black line, all of 2008 is “off the shelf,” and we begin spending the
2009 contributions. Now our attention can turn to the slightly darker blue line originating in
2009. When this line hits the black line, the 2009 money is fully spent, and spending begins
coming from 2010 contributions, and so on.

Table 5: FIFO inventory accounting for contribution to DAFs and eventual granting from
DAFs.

                                                    Year of Contribution∗
                                                    2009 2010      2011            Average
               a. All DAFs
                      Year 0     Contributions      3.818 4.459       6.010          4.762
                      Year 3     Grants             1.130 0.360       1.020          0.837
                      Year 4     Grants             4.613 5.306       6.511          5.476

               PV of grants      7% discount        3.765    4.342    5.800          4.636

               Year 3 grants as a percent
               of Year 0 contribution               30%       8%       17%           18%
               * 2008 not included since beginning of year assets are not known.


   We can see from the above figure, it takes about 4 years for the new additions to the
DAF inventory to fully make it out to charities.
   Table 5 shows the start and end dates for payments of each year’s contribution, as well as
the first payout as a fraction of the nominal initial contribution, performed for the DAF-only
organizations. As can be seen, the average DAF pays out most of its contributions in year
4. Measured as a percent of the initial contribution, the average is about 18% in the first
year and the remainder in the fourth year.31 This gives us the next assumption:
  31
    A separate calculation done for Fidelity Charitable shows that they actually get contributions out of
inventory more quickly than the average, with about half of the initial dollars contributed paid out in year


                                                    28
    Assumption 6: Any contribution to a DAF will begin coming out of inventory in the
third and fourth years. In the third year after the contribution, 20% of the contributed amount
will be paid as a grant, with the remaining balance paid in the fourth year.


6    The Benefit-Cost Calculation
We now have nearly all of the pieces in place to ask how easily a DAF might meet benefit-
cost standards for tax policy. Assumptions 1 through 6 were derived in the prior sections,
and are summarized in Table 6. We also add two additional assumptions. It is important to
keep in mind that these assumptions were derived to describe the average dollar contributed
to and granted from DAFs. It averages the behavior of both big and small investors, but
weights the choices of the big investors more heavily.
    For ease of exposition, assumption 7 states the analysis will concern $1000 contribution
to a DAF. Since the average dollar in DAFs surely comes from high income households,
assumption 8 states our representative DAF holder pays the top marginal tax rates for both
earned income and capital gains. While these may not be the average tax rates that apply
to DAF accounts, when I average tax rates by the dollars subject to each statutory tax rate,
the analysis indicates they are likely to be very close to the maximum tax rates.
    In addition to the economic parameters assumed in panel (a) of the Table, panel (b) de-
scribes the two polar counterfactuals cases. For ease of exposition, I refer to the comparison
policy of no DAF as having Homemade DAFs. Imagine a segregated (if only in one’s imag-
ination) brokerage account that is invested like the DAF and is used to fund the non-cash
portion of non-DAF donations at the identical timing and total amount as DAF grants.
    Since there are no direct measures on the behavioral responses to DAFs, I follow standard
practice by setting benchmarks by which to evaluate the likely benefits and costs. Case 1 first
sets a pessimistic benchmark by assuming the only behavioral effect of DAFs is to rearrange
financing to save taxes. DAFs, in other words, produce no benefits over Homemade DAFs
giving, only costs. Note that this pessimistic case is not the worst case for DAFs as it
is conceivable, but highly unlikely, that DAFs could result in less giving overall, but an
assumption of no net increase in giving is a useful and realistic benchmark.
    Case 2 in Table 6 sets a minimum best-case benchmark. For DAFs to pass the benefit-
cost test they must be motivating people to give more than they would have without DAFs.
As we will see, Case 1 illustrates how simply altering the composition of giving to contain
more non-cash assets will automatically create a substantial cost of DAFs before donors
have a chance to decide if they would like to increase their donations. The analysis in case
3.


                                              29
                       Table 6: Benefit-Cost Assumptions.


                               a. Economic Parameters
1. Real discount rates will be 3%, 7%, and 10%. Preferred is 7%.
2. Inflation is 2% per year.
3. Non-DAFs gifts are 50% non-cash, and DAFs are 65% non-cash.
4. Non-cash assets contributed contributed to DAFs and non-DAFS contain 75%
   capital gains in our favored assumption, and 50% capital gains in our
   conservative assumption.
5. Assets in DAFs will increase in value by 5.9% annually.
6. DAFs will have a ”shelf life” of 4 years. 20% of the initial contribution.
   is paid in year 3, and the rest in year 4.
7. $1000 is Contributed to a DAF at the end of Year 0. This represent the average
   dollar donated rather than the dollars of the average donor.
8. Marginal income tax rate is 39.6%. Capital gains tax rate is 23.8%.

                                 b. Counterfactuals
Case 1: Assume DAFs do not increase giving. This assumes DAFs only allow
        prior granting plans to be carried out while generating no new giving.
        This case sets a likely maximum loss due to the DAF policy.
Case 2: Here we presume DAFs do have a net benefit by creating new
        charitable giving, and ask how much of the DAF contributions we see
        must represent new giving in order to meet benefit-cost criteria.




                                       30
2 assumes that DAF grants do indeed increase and ask how much the increase would need
to be for the new donations to exceed the new costs generated by using a DAF. That is,
what is the minimum portion of the observed DAF grants that must be “new giving” that
would be allow observed DAF giving to have benefits that exceed costs.32 We can then ask
ourselves whether we think the extra tax savings awarded to DAFs can generate the required
response.
    It should be mentioned that some things are left out of our eventual cost-benefit com-
putations. Primary among these are costs associated with escaping the estate tax. To the
extent that DAF giving is new giving over the lifetime of the taxpayer, it represents money
that, in all likelihood, will now result in a smaller estate upon death. The problem for anal-
ysis is that we don’t know how much smaller the estate will be, how much it will be taxed, if
at all, and when those taxes will be paid. While the effects could be significant if our DAF
donors are older, there is not sufficient evidence to attach an extra cost for estate taxation.
We must keep in mind, therefore, that the estimates presented understated costs by some
unknown amount.
    The analysis also does not include the potential value of some hard-to-calculate benefits.
For instance, those with variable incomes who use DAFs to contribute when their tax rates
are high but smooth their giving, are practicing a kind of leveling of their tax burden across
the ups and downs of income. This leveling used to be explicitly allowed though a policy of
four-year income averaging. Although economists think this kind of policy is more equitable,
it was eliminated in 1986 to simplify the tax code. There are other benefits that many DAF
holders also feel, such as the ease of online giving or the joy of bringing families together
to decide on giving, which we explicitly do not include. The reason is that these benefits
are not unique to the tax status of DAF giving and are easily be reproduced with existing
technologies, such as automatic bill paying by banks, and by new phone applications that
search for charities, and record charitable giving, and keep receipts for tax time. Others
claim anonymous giving is a benefit of DAFs. While this is surely true, according to the
Fidelity Giving Report 2016 (page 17) only 3% of DAF donors choose to give anonymously.
    With these caveats, the benefit-cost analysis is presented in Table 7. Here we simulate
a contribution of $1000 to a DAF that follows all the assumptions enumerated in Table
6. As can be seen, there are very different conclusions depending on the discount factors
used. Under the assumptions most favorable to DAFs–column (1)—they have virtually no
economic impact, while at the assumptions that are the least favorable—column (6), the
  32
     In particular, let D stand for the present value of DAF grants, H stand for the present value of homemade
DAF grants, and N stand for the new donations caused by DAFs: D = H + N . Likewise, let ηd and ηh stand
for the net benefits of each dollar invested at time 0 in DAFs and homemade DAFs respectively. Then the net
benefits of DAFs is positive if Dηd − Hηh > 0. Rearrange this to find that this holds if N/H > (ηh − ηd )/ηd .


                                                     31
  Table 7: Benefit-Cost Analysis. Favored Assumptions in Column (4).

                               (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)
            Discount rate     3%       3%       7%     7%       10%      10%
      Capital Gain/Value      50%     75%      50%     75%      50%      75%

                    Case 1: No New Giving with DAFs
A. DAF: $1000 Contribution today to DAF:
           PV of Grants 1031          1031     891      891      802      802
                Tax Cost 473           512     473      512      473      512
   Net Benefit per Dollar 0.558       0.519   0.418    0.379    0.329    0.290
B. Homemade DAF: $1000 Invested today:†
        PV of Donation 1031           1031     891      891      802      802
                Tax Cost 470           500     406      432      365      389
  Net Benefits per Dollar 0.561       0.531   0.485    0.459    0.437    0.413
C. DAFs vs. Homemade DAFs
Increase in cost per $1000      4      12       67      80      108      123
     Percent cost increase    0.8%    2.4%    16.6%   18.4%    29.6%    31.6%

             Case 2: New Giving with DAFs & Benefit = Cost
      Percent Increase in
 Giving Caused by DAFs        0.7%    2.3%    16.1%   21.0%    32.9%    42.3%
† A Homemade DAF is a imagined non-DAF account invested identically to DAFs
  and used for the non-cash portions of non-DAF donations.




                                      32
costs are quite high. Under the favored parameters in column (4), case 1 shows that a $1000
gift to DAFs would cost the government $80 more in lost taxes. If DAFs produce no new
giving, it is as if 8% of all investment through DAFs are burned up along the way. Another
way to interpret this number is that, compared to giving with no DAF, DAFs raise the costs
by 18.4% before any increase in giving has a chance to start moving benefits above costs.
    The bottom row of Table 7, case 2, tells us just how big that increase has to be before the
benefits of DAFs start exceeding the costs. Again under column 4, the challenge seems fairly
steep. DAFs giving would need to include 21% new donations that can be credited directly
to tax policy toward DAFs. In other words, for each $1000 contribution made through a
homemade DAF, without the compositional shift from 50% to 65% non-cash assets, a donor
to a DAF must contribute $1210.
    One may fairly ask, why are the costs in columns (1) and (2) so much smaller, and why
don’t I favor a 3% discount rate? Letting r stand for the real rate of return on investments
in DAF accounts, and let δ be the discount rate. Imagine, to simplify the argument, that the
$1000 is invested for four years then given to charity in its entirety. Since tax deduction is
taken immediately, its present value does not depend on either r or δ, but the present value of
the benefits do. In four years, the contribution to the DAF will have grown to $1000(1 + r)4 .
Converting this to present value means adjusting the benefits to $1000(1 + r)4 /(1 + δ)4 =
$1000[(1 + r)/(1 + δ)]4 . When r > δ, as it is in columns 1 and 2, the benefit grows as it is
delayed (see the top row of the table, showing the $1000 contribution has a present value of
grants that is greater than $1000). This then helps explain why I interpret the GAO and
OMB guidelines as favoring a discount rate tied to financial investing rather than consumer
purchases, as discussed in section 5.2. In short, DAFs revolve around returns to investments
in financial markets, so opportunity costs are best measured by this return on investment.
    To sum up, under the favored conditions, DAFs would need to increase the present value
of lifetime giving by between 16% and 21% (columns 3 and 4) over giving without DAFs.
Depending on how strongly one feels that returns to charitable investing exceed the returns
to private investing, the fraction of representing new dollars would need to be 30% or more
(columns 5 and 6) in order to meet cost-benefit benchmarks. This leads to the natural
question, how do we know what is a reasonable estimate of new giving caused by DAFs?
    Lacking access to individual DAF account data, there will never be a precise answer to this
question. Nonetheless, there are insights into how DAFs might inspire giving as opposed to
pure tax-minimizing behavior by examining periods when tax laws affecting DAFs change.33
  33
    For more complete discussions and analyses of how tax changes can be used to identify policy effects,
especially as related to DAFs, see Randolph (1995), Auten, Sieg, and Clotfelter (2002), Auten and Clotfelter
(1982), and Auten, Clotfelter, and Schmalbeck (2000)



                                                    33
Fortunately, a change in tax policy over our sample period may help may provide important
clues on how people use DAFs. I examine this next.


7      Tax Policy Changes over the Sample Period
As we recall from Table 2, a tax change was passed into law in 2010 and took effect in
2013 that had direct consequences on charitable giving in general, but especially for giving
through a Donor Advised Fund (see Saez (2017) for a similar analysis). First, the top
marginal income tax rate moved from 35% to 39.6%. Second, the top tax rate on long term
capital gains went from 15% to 23.8%. These increases in tax rates will have both income
and substitution effects. Because people are paying more tax, they feel they have less to give
to charity. At the same time, since their marginal tax savings from giving is higher, the cost
of giving to charity relative to other spending has gone down, which should encourage more
giving. The capital gains tax increase has a particular role to play in DAFs. This should
encourage donors who have unrealized capital gains to choose DAFs in order to mitigate the
higher rate. This means we could see a shift in demand for DAFs as well as an increase in the
fraction of giving in the form of non-cash assets. Because of the opposite pressures of income
and substitution effects, however, it is unclear whether these tax changes will encourage or
discourage giving overall.34
    Since changes to both the income and capital gains tax rates took place in the same year,
it will be impossible to separate the two effects. For this reason, focus attention to the years
before and after the 2013 tax change to look for patterns in the data that may indicate an
impact on DAF giving relative to non-DAF giving.
    First, consider Figure 6. This shows year-over-year changes to the real values of three
key policy variables. First, consider the change in the contributions to DAFs, the orange
bars. If increasing the tax subsidy to giving is anticipated, giving should shift from before
2013 to after it, as people will want to give more when the price is lower. Those with DAF
savings can do this easily with less impact on their annual grants to charity. Looking to the
Figure, we see the effect is the opposite. If anything, giving appears to remain robust before
the tax increase and to fall after it. In fact, the three smallest percentage changes in giving
happen in the three years of our sample that include the higher tax rates.
    Next, look at the blue bars in Figure 6. These show year-over-year percent increases in
the number of DAF accounts. These show a clear pattern; in 2012, the year before the new
tax rates, the the rate of growth of DAF accounts rose sharply and stayed high through
  34
     See Bakija and Heim (2011) for a general analysis of taxes on giving, Goolsbee (2000) for a discussion
of taxing high income earners, and Auerbach and Poterba (1988) for a discussion of capital gains taxation.


                                                    34
                    Percent Changes in Number of DAF Accounts,
                             Contributions, and Grants
          0.35
           0.3
          0.25
           0.2
          0.15
           0.1
          0.05
            0
                  2009       2010         2011       2012        2013         2014         2015
         ‐0.05
          ‐0.1
         ‐0.15
          ‐0.2

                     Change in Accounts      Change in Contributions    Change in Grants

Figure 6: Percent Changes in Number of DAF Accounts, Contributions per accounts, and
Grants per account, before and after 2013 tax change.


2015. In fact, the three years with the lowest growth rates of DAFs appear in 2009, 2010,
and 2011, all years before the tax changes took effect.
    Finally the gray bars in Figure 6 show percent changes in DAF grants. These numbers
are relatively consistent across the years. One can interpret the difference between DAF
contributions and DAF grants similarly to how one compares income to consumption. Income
will tend to respond to external conditions more extremely than consumption. Consumption,
therefore, evens out the ups and downs and therefore becomes a more reliable measure of
true or anticipated income than income itself. The same could be true about contributions to
DAFs, which respond to opportunistic moments for tax minimizing, and grants from DAFs
which present a better picture of one’s expectations for stable giving into the future.
    In this vein, consider Figure 7. The two highest lines of this figure are the real (in 2015
dollars) contributions of the SOI High Income donors with incomes over $500,000 (in blue)
and the average contribution to DAFs across all DAF accounts in our data (in orange). The
solid gray line below this is the average grants per DAF account. As can easily be seen,
while total contributions to DAFs have been going up steadily, the granting from DAFs have
been going up much more slowly. Let’s imagine that a DAF donor in 2008 was a typical
SOI High Income donor and had made the same donation in 2008 as he would have without
the DAF. Assuming year-to-year fluctuations in giving that follow those of the average SOI
donor captured in the blue line in this same figure, then it follows that the average DAF

                                                  35
                      Average DAF Grants vs SOI Charitable Deductions
         90,000

         80,000

         70,000

         60,000

         50,000

         40,000

         30,000

         20,000

         10,000

             ‐
                      2008     2009          2010         2011         2012          2013     2014

                                SOI Contributions                DAF Contributions
                                DAF Grants                       DAF Grants at SOI Growth

Figure 7: Average DAF Contributions and Grants vs. SOI High Income Charitable Deduc-
tions.

donor would continue giving according to the black dashed line that seen lying nearly on
top of the gray line. This, of course, indicates that the SOI pattern of changes in giving
without a DAF nearly perfectly predicts changes in actual charitable giving with a DAF.
This suggests that, while taxes may indeed affect the timing of the contributions to DAFs
and the amount of future donations saved in DAFs, DAFs may not have much, if any, effect
on the actual donations eventually given to charity by the average DAF account holder.
                        Contributions of DAFs vs SOI High Incomes
         90000
         80000
         70000
         60000
         50000
         40000
         30000
         20000
         10000
                 0
                             DAF Contribution                              SOI Contribution

                                                2011‐12     2013‐14

                 Figure 8: 2013 Tax changes and Levels of Giving: DAFs vs SOI.

   What matters, of course, is not simply the absolute performance of DAFs, but how they
change relative to non-DAF donors. Since the SOI High Income data are available until

                                                     36
2014, it is possible to compare giving in the two years that include the new tax changes,
2013 and 2014, to the prior two years where the new taxes were anticipated but not yet
enacted. Those motivated to save taxes would shift giving to years of higher tax rates, thus
suppressing contributions in 2011 and 2012 and raising them in 2013 and 2014. Figure 8
shows the DAF and SOI giving both before (the orange bars) and after (gray bars) the tax
change. This shows that in proximity of the tax increase, giving was actually up in DAFs
by 4.1% and in SOI gifts by 2.9%, a 1.3 point difference favoring DAFs.
    Figure 9 looks at the change in relative costs. This show the percent of contributions that
are non-cash contributions and are thus escaping capital gains taxation. This percentage
goes up in DAFs by 4.7 percentage points, while for SOI donors it actually goes down
by 3.8 percentage points, thus widening the gap by 8.5 percentage points. Assuming SOI
contributions are 50% capital gains, this shift to more non-cash giving raises the cost of DAF
giving by about 1% of the initial contributed amount.35 In addition, the 1.3 percentage point
differential increase in giving through DAFs is also generating a higher cost of lost income
tax revenue of 0.5%.36 In sum, DAFs gain 1.3 percentage points in new giving at a cost of
1 point in capital gains and 0.5 points in income tax losses, netting an economic loss of 0.2
                       Non‐Cash at Percent of all Contributions.
percentage points.
                                   DAFs vs SOI High Incomes
           70%
           60%
           50%
           40%
           30%
           20%
           10%
            0%
                        DAF % Non‐cash Contribution             SOI % Non‐cash Contribution

                                               2011‐12     2013‐14

Figure 9: 2013 Tax changes and Percent of Contributions that are Non-cash: DAFs vs SOI.

    What this section shows is that we there is little evidence that DAFs are encouraging
significantly more giving over a policy of no DAFs. Instead, the data seems to have the
fingerprints of donors whose charitable giving is largely unresponsive to the subsidy implied
by the charitable deduction, or the avoidance of capital gains tax. In fact, in the 2013 tax
  35
     On every $1000 contributed, $85 more are non-cash, of which $42.5 are capital gains. This now escapes
23.8% capital gains tax, which comes to $10, or 1% of the DAF contribution.
  36
     The deduction saves 39.6% of 1.3% or 0.5%.



                                                      37
change the price of giving fell by a minimum of 7%, yet giving rose by at most 4%. By
contrast, there is clear evidence of a surge of demand for DAF accounts when there is a
greater value to escaping capital gains taxation. While the data is lacking the detail to state
these observations with precision, the general observation is that the representative donor
(who, recall, is modeled to capture the aggregate patterns) is using DAFs more heavily for
tax arbitrage than as a means for behaving more charitably, although both behaviors are
likely present. Further, if DAFs indeed contain 16% to 21% new giving, there is no hint of
such a positive response to the recent tax changes.


8    Conclusion
In this paper I discussed tax policy toward charitable giving in general, and described how
Donor Advised Funds fits into this policy landscape. I discussed how DAFs allow convenience
to givers who would like to use capital-gains assets to make their everyday charitable gifts.
I also discussed how tax arbitrage is an enticing use of this donation innovation.
    Examining the data, I determined the return we can expect DAF accounts to earn, and
that the the average DAF dollar remains in “inventory” for about 4 years before it is paid
out.
    I also discovered a compositional effect of DAFs. Since DAFs make it easier to avoid
capital gains taxes, DAF givers contribute about 15% more capital gains assets relative to
non-DAF givers. For the same gift, this creates a bigger tax loss for the government.
    These elements of the costs and benefits of DAFs are combined by constructing an imag-
inary DAF account that represents all the qualities of DAFs on average. The account earns
a tax benefit immediately and accumulates investment income for 3 to 4 years before the
balance of money in the account is taken from inventory and invested in a charity. The exer-
cise is then to bound the costs and benefits by considering optimistic and pessimistic cases.
We can think of the bounds as considering the two effects of DAFs separately. First, on
the cost side, we focus solely the compositional effect of giving the same amount as without
DAFs, but doing so with more non-cash gifts. This bounds the potential loss from DAFs.
Second, we focus solely on the benefits side by assuming that policy does indeed stimulate
more giving when people switch to using DAFs. We then bound the gains by finding the
level of giving that DAFs would need to inspire in order for the new giving to exceed the
new tax costs (on both the original level of giving and the policy-induced new giving).
    This exercise showed that, at a preferred discount rate of 7%, every $1000 dollars given
through DAFs cost the government about $80 more in lost tax revenue, an 18.4% increase
over non-DAF giving. If the discount rate is adjusted to 10% to account for the likely case

                                              38
that charitable investments have greater social returns than average capital investments, the
estimated added costs of DAFs rises to $123, a nearly 32% increase. Turning to the minimum
bound on the benefits of DAFs, under the 7% discount rate, the analysis indicates a 16% to
21% increase in giving would be required by DAF donors for the benefits of increased giving
to exceed the cost of foregone tax revenues.
    To get a sense of how attainable these changes in giving might be, I explored how DAF
giving responded to the 2013 tax changes. Did it show a considerable increase in dollars
donated, or did it encourage more use of DAFs for minimizing taxes? The data indicate
that the level of giving was only mildly affected by the tax change. By contrast, there
was a significant shift toward more non-cash giving among DAF account holders. This was
compounded by a doubling or tripling of the rate at which new DAF accounts were opened.
These point to tax minimizing rather than increasing giving as the primary consequence of
the usage of Donor Advised Funds.
    The predominance of the evidence, therefore, suggests that Donor Advised Funds are
unlikely to stimulate more new giving than they cost in foregone tax revenues. Policies
that might increase the net benefits of DAFs include limiting the tax advantage of giving
of non-cash assets, requiring non-cash contributions to DAFs be paired with additional cash
contributions, and decreasing the shelf-life of DAF donations.




                                             39
References
Andreoni, J. (1998). Toward a theory of charitable fund-raising. Journal of Political Econ-
      omy, 106 (6), 1186–1213.
Andreoni, J. (2006). Philanthropy. Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and
      Reciprocity, 2 , 1201–1269.
Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2013). Charitable giving. Handbook of Public Economics, 5 ,
      1–50.
Auerbach, A. J., & Poterba, J. (1988). Capital gains taxation in the united states: Re-
      alizations, revenue, and rhetoric. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988 (2),
      595–637.
Auerbach, A. J., & Slemrod, J. (1997). The economic effects of the tax reform act of 1986.
      Journal of Economic Literature, 35 (2), 589–632.
Auten, G. E., & Clotfelter, C. T. (1982). Permanent versus transitory tax effects and the
      realization of capital gains. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97 (4), 613–632.
Auten, G. E., Clotfelter, C. T., & Schmalbeck, R. L. (2000). Taxes and philanthropy among
      the wealthy. Does atlas shrug, 392–424.
Auten, G. E., Sieg, H., & Clotfelter, C. T. (2002). Charitable giving, income, and taxes: An
      analysis of panel data. The American Economic Review , 92 (1), 371–382.
Bakija, J., & Heim, B. T. (2011). How does charitable giving respond to incentives and
      income? new estimates from panel data. National Tax Journal , 64 (2), 615.
Clotfelter, C. T. (1985). Federal tax policy and charitable giving. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.
Colinvaux, R. (2013). Charitable contributions of property: A broken system reimagined.
      Harv. J. on Legis., 50 , 263–329.
Colinvaux, R. (2017). Donor advised funds: Charitable spending vehicles for 21st century
      philanthropy. Wash. L. Rev., 92 , 39.
Goolsbee, A. (2000). What happens when you tax the rich? evidence from executive
      compensation. Journal of Political Economy, 108 (2), 352–378.
Gruber, J., & Saez, E. (2002). The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and implications.
      Journal of public Economics, 84 (1), 1–32.
Haushofer, J., & Shapiro, J. (2016). The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers
      to the poor: Experimental evidence from kenya. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      131 (4), 1973–2042.
Perez Cavazos, G., & Silva, A. M. (2015). Tax-minded executives and corporate tax strate-
      gies: evidence from the 2013 tax hikes. Harvard Business School Working Paper, No.


                                            40
      16-034 .
Randolph, W. C. (1995). Dynamic income, progressive taxes, and the timing of charitable
      contributions. Journal of Political Economy, 103 (4), 709–738.
Saez, E. (2017). Taxing the rich more: Preliminary evidence from the 2013 tax increase.
      Tax Policy and the Economy, 31 (1), 71–120.
Sherlock, M. F., & Gravelle, J. G. (2012). An analysis of charitable giving and donor advised
      funds. Congressional Research Service, July 11 (R4259).




                                             41
