                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FINANCING CONSTRAINTS
                             AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT




                                  Steven Fazzari
                                 R. Glenn Hubbard

                                Bruce C. Petersen



                              Working Paper No. 2387




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1987




We are grateful to Joseph Altonji, Ben Bernanke, Olivier Blanchard, William Brainard,
Charles Calomiris, Robert Chirinko, Jean Crockett, Ian Domowitz, Robert Eisner,
Benjamin Friedman, Mark Gertler, Roger Gordon, Fumio Hayashi, Yolanda Henderson,
Jeff Mackie—Mason, Robert McDonald, John Meyer, Frederic Mishkin, Steven Strongin,
and participants in the Money and Public Finance Workshops at the University of
Michigan, the Industrial Organization Workshop at Northwestern University, the
Research Seminar at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Business Analysis
Committee Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and
1987 NBER Summer Institute Conferences on Credit Market Failures and Financial
Fragility, Financial Markets and Monetary Economics, Analysis of Firm Behavior,
and Mergers and Acquisitions for comments and suggestions. Financial support
from the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and St. Louis is acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Taxation and
Finanical Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #2387
                                              September 1987



            Financing Constraints and Corporate Investment




                               ABSTRACT


Most empirical models of investment rely on the assumption that firms
are able to respond to prices set in centralized securities markets
(through the "cost of capital" or "q"). An alternative approach
emphasizes the importance of cash flow as a determinant of investment
spending, because of a "financing hierarchy," in which internal finance
has important cost advantages over external finance. We build on recent
research concerning imperfections in markets for equity and debt. This
work suggests that some firms do not have sufficient access to external
capital markets to enable them to respond to changes in the cost of
capital, asset prices, or tax—based investment incentives. To the
extent that firms are constrained in their ability to raise funds
externally, investment spending may be sensitive to the availability of
internal finance. That is, investment may display "excess sensitivity"
to movements in cash flow.

En this paper, we work within the q theory of investment, and examine
the importance of a financing hierarchy created by capital—market
imperfections. Using panel data on individual manufacturing firms, we
compare the investment behavior of rapidly growing firms that exhaust
all of their internal finance with that of mature firms paying
dividends. We find that q values remain very high for significant
periods of time for firms paying no dividends, relative to those for
mature firms. We also find that investment is more sensitive to cash
flow for the group of firms that our model implies is most likely to
face external finance constraints. These results are consistent with
the augmented model we propose, which takes into account different
financing regimes for different groups of firms. Some extensions and
implications for public policy are discussed at the end.




Steven Fazzari          R. Glenn Hubbard          Bruce C. Petersen
Campus Box 1208         NBER                      Department of Economics
Washington University   1050 Massachusetts Ave.   Northwestern University
One Brookings Drive     Cambridge, MA 02138       2003 Sheridan Road
St. Louis, MO 63130     (617) 868—3900            Evanston, IL 60201
(314) 889—5693                                    (312) 491—8226
                            I •   INTRODUCTION

     Studies of business investment and the impact of public policy on

investment have figured prominently in economic research since the

Keynesian revolution.1 Empirical models of investment generally rely on

the assumption that all firms respond similarly to prices set in

centralized securities markets (through the cost of capital or q).

Another line of inquiry, however, emphasizes the importance of cash flow

as a determinant of investment spending,2 because of a "financing

hierarchy" in which internal finance has cost advantages over external

finance.3 Recent research on imperfections in markets for equity and

debt emphasizes that all firms do not have the same access to external

capital markets. Thus, firms will not respond to changes in the cost of

capital, asset prices, or tax—based investment incentives in the same

way. For firms that face constraints in their ability to raise funds

externally, movements in cash flow may be important determinants of

capital spending.

     In this paper, we work within the q theory of investment, which has

been used extensively in empirical studies and for tax policy

evaluation. Empirical implementation of the model relies on the cost—

of—adjustment approach;4 previous results have not been uniformly

convincing.5 Recently, Abel and Blanchard (1986) find important roles

for profits and output in aggregate investment equations relying on q,

suggesting problems of aggregation or that firms do not face perfect

capital markets. We address both of these points. Our emphasis is on

the importance of using micro data to consider issues of firm

heterogeneity in capital markets; the model developed here shows that
                                   2




capital—market imperfections can, ljmit the availability of external

finance to particular types of firms.

     To test the effects of financing constraints on q and investment,

careful attention must be paid to sectoral detail and firm heterogeneity

(see, for example, Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock, 1986). Thus, we use

data on manufacturing firms from the Value Line data base. Our strategy

is to identify differences in q, financing behavior, and investment

across firms classified by their retention behavior.    We are

particularly interested in rapidly growing firms with current investment

demands that exceed their current cash flow. If the cost disadvantage

of external finance is slight, then retention behavior should contain

little or no information about q or investment——firms will simply use

external finance to smooth investment when internal finance

fluctuates. On the other hand, if there is a pronounced financing

hierarchy, then firms retaining all of their income may effectively be

at a corner solution, where investment is limited by available internal

cash flow. In this case, there are two predictions of our theoretical

model that are the focus of our empirical work. Pirst, firms with high

retention ratios may have no low—cost marginal source of finance for

investment to drive q down to its conventional equilibrium level.

Second, the investment behavior of firms paying no dividends should be

driven by fluctuations in cash flow; in the limit, contractions in cash

flow will reduce their investment dollar for dollar.6

      The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews models based

on imperfect information that explain why some firms face restrictions

on issuing new shares or borrowing. In section III, we develop a model
                                    3




of investment and financial decisions f or firms in different financing

regimes. Theoretical equilibrium values of marginal q can differ

markedly between firms exhausting all internal finance and mature firms

with high payout rates. En section IV, we present evidence on the

differences in Tobin's q for dividend—paying and non—dividend—paying

firms. We also estimate an augmented q investment equation that

incorporates the effect of cash flow. As our model predicts, the

investment of constrained firms is more sensitive to fluctuations in

cash flow than that of mature firms, and fluctuations in cash flow

account for economically important movements in investment for

constrained firms. The last section of the paper considers some of the

cyclical and policy implications of our findings.



       II. CAP ITAL—KARIET IMPERFECTIONS, FINANCIAL (X)NSTRAINTS,
                             AND fli VESTMENT



Asyintric Inforaation and External Finance

     Under perfect capital markets and no taxes, there is no cost

differential between internal and external finance. The existence of

transaction costs gives some advantage to internal finance, but these

costs appear to be small. When firms and potential investors have

asymmetric information about firms' prospects, however, it is possible

that some sources of external finance may have higher costs or even be

completely unavailable to certain categories of firms.

    We consider first the case of tradeoffs between internal and

external equity finance. Important recent papers by Myers and Majluf

(1984) and Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984) explain why asymmetric
                                   4



information either eliminates any reliance on external equity finance in

the market or causes suppliers of new equity to demand a large

premium.7 These results are referred to as either "pecking order"

theories of finance (Myers, 1984) or as "financing hierarchy" theories.

     Myers and Majluf consider a situation in which managers (or current

owners) are better informed than potential shareholders about the true

value of both the firmts investment opportunities and the existing

assets in place. The true value of the firm will eventually be

revealed, but new shares must be issued before this date, or the

investment opportunity is lost——a realistic assumption for new firing in

industries experiencing rapid technological advancement.   En addition,

managers are assumed to act in the interest of existing shareholders,

and potential new investors are aware of this.

     Myers and Majluf show that firms will turn down some investment

projects with positive net present values rather than issue new shares

under the circumstances. The basic argument applies Akerlof's (1970)

market for "lemons" model, but with a more complicated structure.

Appendix A illustrates the lemons discount demanded by potential new

shareholders (see also Petersen, 1987); we summarize the argument below.

     Suppose there are two types of firms in a new industry, "good"

firms and "lemons." The value of assets in place is higher for good

firms, and only good firms have positive net—present—value investment

opportunities. Under these conditions, "lemons" are overvalued, and

they will always try to issue new shares——they can always invest the

funds in a zero net—present—value investment such as treasury bills. As

a result, new shareholders will demand a higher return from good firms
                                    5




to cover the losses incurred from inadvertently funding lemons (we work

this out in Appendix A). If this premium exceeds the share of the value

of a new project going to existing shareholders, new shares will not be

issued. For young firms with short track records, the probability of

purchasing shares of a lemon is undoubtedly high. As firms mature,

information asymmetries diminish and the lemons discount falls.

     Debt considerations can be easily incorporated. In general, the

cost of debt will increase with the extent of borrowing.8 The precise

relationship between the quantity and shadow price of credit is likely

to vary across firms according to information imperfections. For

example, asymmetric information between borrowers and lenders can lead

to "credit rationing" to some categories of borrowers. In the model of

Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), borrowers have private information about the

riskiness of their project returns, and lenders cannot necessarily

distinguish "good borrowers" from "bad borrowers." Under these

circumstances, higher loan interest rates lead to adverse selection of

borrowers with a high probability of default. Lenders may maximize

their profits by quantity rationing in competitive equilibrium.

Calomiris and Hubbard (1986) also show that when multiple credit markets

exist side by side——with some borrowers able to obtain funds in bond and

commercial paper markets and others restricted to bank markets—

aggregate shocks to collateral value or cash flow (e.g,, because of

business cycle downturns) make credit restrictions more likely to

borrowers that rely only on bank markets. In addition, the importance

of borrower net worth for obtaining external finance is stressed in

Leland and Pyle (1977), Myers and Majluf (1984), Calomiris and Hubbard

(1986), and Bernanke and Gertler (1987).
                                       6




     These results imply that firms constrained by asymmetric

information in equity markets cannot easily substitute debt for new

share issues, absent substantial available internal finance and current

assets. The more severe the information asymmetry, the more likely that

external finance will be either very costly or unavailable.9

Information asymmetries are more pronounced for new firms and for small

firms whose stock is traded (if it is traded at all) in markets far less

organized than, say, the New York Stock Exchange. For mature

corporations, analysts specialize in gathering information for potential

investors about their prospects. Such information is expensive and is

provided only for firms with a large clientele of investors.


Empirical Evidence on   Cost   Differentials Between Internal
and External Finance

     Many case studies have suggested that small firms have more limited
access   to external finance than large firms (see for example the

literature beginning with Butters and Lintner, 1945).10 Using data from

a variety of sources, Srini Vasan (1986, Chapter 3) has examined

differences in corporate financing behavior across firms of various

sizes. He finds striking differences in the reliance on internal and

external finance across firms. Small and medium—sized manufacturing

corporations (those with assets less than $100 million) are very

dependent on internal finance; this source accounted for over 85

percent of their total finance over the period from 1960 to 1980. These

corporations raised only about 3 percent of their total finance from

bonds and 2 percent from new share issues, with the balance coming from

bank loans. While large firms account for 74 percent of total
                                    7




manufacturing assets over the period, they issue 99 percent of all new

shares and 92 percent of all new corporate bonds. In addition,

retention ratios are substantially higher in the small and medium—sized

categories; many firms pay no dividends at all for substantial periods

of time.

     This evidence indicates that most large firms, when faced with a

reduction in current earnings, can substitute either external finance or

reduce dividends. For smaller firms, however, any contraction in

earnings reduces their total finance. Srini Vasan also finds that

internal finance exhibits greater volatility over the business cycle in

small and medium—sized corporations than in large corporations.

Moreover, during downturns, large firms have greater relative access to

short—ten and long—tern debt markets. Hence, business recessions and

changes in corporate tax policy that affect internal finance will likely

have a much greater effect on the growth rates and investment behavior

of small, immature enterprises.

     Some recent studies have tested for implied cost differences

between internal and external equity finance. McDonald and Soderstrom

(1986) examined financing behavior in a panel of 423 corporations listed

in the Compustat Industrial data file. Their results support the

existence of a financing hierarchy——where new equity issues are

undertaken only as a last resort. They also find evidence that

dividends provide marginal finance for firms when cash flow is high

relative to investment, while equity issues serve as the marginal source

of finance for firms that retain all of their earnings. Related work by

Kalay and Shimrat (1985) finds that almost one—third •of unregulated
                                     8




firms issuing new shares were paying no dividends, while the remainder

had, on average, very low payout ratios. Finally, Kalay and Shimrat

(1986) study the movement of stock and bond prices following the

announcement of a new share issue. Their evidence of a significant drop

in both bond and stock prices supports the "market—for—lemons" argument.



    LII.   FINANCLAL CONSTRAINTS, FINANCING DECISIONS, AND INVESTMENT


InvestuEnt and Financing Decisions of the Firm
     The central feature of our argument is that for firms facing
asymmetric information in capital markets, q can fluctuate over a
substantial   range in excess of unity with little or no response of

investment, while investment can be "excessively sensitive" to cash flow

fluctuations. We demonstrate this result by modifying a simple model of

firm financial and investment decisions developed in the public finance

literature (see for example, Auerbach, 1984; Poterba and Summers, 1983,

1985). In tax—based models, there are differences in the costs of

internal and external finance because of the differential taxation of

capital gains and dividends at the personal level.'2 We first consider

decisions about corporate finance and investment in "full—information"

firms, that do not face financing constraints due to asymmetric

information. We then model the financing and investment decisions of

constrained firms.

     In any period t, an existing shareholder's after—tax return Rt

the sum of a dividend return (taxed at rate e) and a capital gain (taxed

at rate c). The capital gain tax rate is an accrual—equivalent

effective tax rate, as in King (1977). That is,
                                             9




(1)       R — (1—e)D ÷ (1_c)(V÷i— v)
           t_                     Vt


where Dt represents the dividend payment by the firm, Vt is the value of

the firm's equity, and                 is the value in period t+1 of shares

outstanding in period t, which we assume is known with certainty. In

period t+1, the total value of the firm is



(2)       V1 =             +



where V represents net new share issues.

       In equilibrium, owners of equity earn their required return p, so

that




(3)
          Rt=P


Theref ore,




(4)       pV =    (1—6)D       — (1_c)VN + (1_c)V÷i —      (l—c)V,


and the value of the firm evolves according to



                                            —
(5)        Vt÷l   (i +-) Vt                      cL!3 Dt

so that



                                                     —
(6)        Vt io 1 ÷E_) [(43J
                                          10




That is, the total value of the firm is the present value of the post—

tax dividend stream adjusted for the present value of new share issues

which would have to be bought by current equity holders to maintain

their proportional claim on the firm. The firm maximizes its market

value, subject to a set of constraints.

       The capital accumulation constraint is



(7)        Kt =    (1ó )K +


where Kt is the capital stock at the beginning of period t,     I   represents

investment, and 6 represents a constant rate of depreciation. Sources

of funds for the firm include post—tax profits, (1—r)1r(K) where T

is the corporate income tax rate, new share issues (V), and net

borrowing. The firm issues one—period debt         at the beginning of each

period, paying an interest rate of i at the end of the period, where

i =   i(B/K),      > O. Uses of funds include dividend payments, debt

service, and investment. In general, the effective price of investment

will depend on the value of investment tax credits and the current value

of depreciation tax deductions. We ignore these considerations for

the moment, though we incorporate them in our empirical work. Thus, the

constraint that sources equal uses of funds yields



(8)        (1—r)n(K) +       ÷   B— B_1        (1—i) i1B1 +


       There    are also implicit constraints on dividend payments and new

share issues. First, dividends cannot be negative, so that
                                                      11




(9)               )       0.



Second, new share issues are assumed to be bounded from below by some
                                                14
minimal (negative) level,



(10)




        In summary, the firm chooses I, K, V, and                         to maximize Vt

subject to the constraints described above. That is, the firm acts to



(11)        max
                               (i +q__)—t{{(4i_)D_ V'] — AtfK— (1—d)K1_ I}l


                      —
                          at[(1-.r )ir (K ) +
                                                            —
                                                     + Bt       Bi— D —   1— (1_r )ijB 1


                      —   8(V — VN)      —




where
        At ' and                      are the Lagrange multipliers associated with

the constraints.

        The solution to this full—information problem is familiar (see

Auerbach, 1979, for example), and we do not repeat it here. We first

consider the case analyzed by Auerbach, in which firms are mature——cash

flow exceeds investment—and they pay dividends. Two basic results

emerge. First, if the dividend tax rate exceeds the capital gains tax

rate (0 > c), it is never optimal to issue new shares and pay dividends

at the same time: Vt can be increased by an equal decrease in

  and V. Second, abstracting for the moment from corporate tax and
                                     12




debt considerations, for firms paying dividends, the equilibrium shadow

value of an additional unit of capital——marginal q——is equal

to (1—0)1(1—c). This is the q value at which shareholders are

indifferent between a dollar of retentions reinvested in the firm and

taxed at rate c, and a dollar of dividends taxed at rate 0.         Thus,

firms neither pay dividends nor issue new shares over a range——

    < q < 1.      If marginal q is below one it is not optimal to issue new

shares, but firms will reinvest earnings rather than pay dividends as

long as q > (1—0)1(1—c), because of favorable capital gains taxation.

     Thus, taxation alone leads to a financing hierarchy with a

discontinuity between the effective costs of internal and external

finance. Such a hierarchy is shown in Figure 1 (see also Aaerbach,

1983b, 1984). When investment demand is low      (as   in the D schedule in

the figure), capital spending can be financed from internally generated

funds, at the expense of extra dividends, and marginal q is still equal

to (1—0)/Cl—c) in equilibrium. When marginal q exceeds unity and the

demand for investment is very high (as in the D3 schedule), firms will

issue new shares to restore marginal q to its equilibrium value of

unity. For intermediate levels of investment demand (as in the

schedule), debt finance will be used to bridge the gap between internal

and external equity finance. If 0 = 0.30 and c = 0.05, these bounds

would be 0.74 and 1; the tax—induced range of q values over which firms

 pay no dividends and issue no shares is, thus, probably small.


 Capital—Market   Imperfections, Corporate Finance, and Investment
      We now consider   rapidly growing firms   that have investment demand

 that exceeds internal finance and that face restrictions on their
                      FIGURE 1

      q AND FINANCING DECISIONS IN NATURE FIRMS




q




1




                                                           03
1—c




                      D




                Retentions                  Additions to
                Exhausted                   Equity
                                         '3




ability to raise funds externally.15 Two features of financing

constraints are incorporated in a simple modification of the model.

First, we assume that firms face a maximum debt to capital ratio of b

dictated by lenders, as in the models discussed in section II; that is,

increases in debt can be obtained only with an increase in internal

equity.'6 Second, to take into account the "lemons premium" (see

Appendix A), we reduce       in equation (6) by an amount          per dollar of

new equity issued.

     The discount 1 represents the additional value that new investors

demand from "good" firms to compensate them for losses they incur from

inadvertently funding lemons.'7 The discount S can be readily connected

to the previous literature on new share issues and the "lemons

premium." Let the q value of good firms and lemons be denoted by qG and

qL, respectively, and the percentage of good firms be p. Because of

asymmetric information, all firms are initially valued at a weighted—

average value,      = pqG + (1p)qL.       It is shown in Appendix A that the

breakeven q value of a dollar of new investment financed by share issues

is given by q      q0/    1 +   &.
     Under perfect information, good firms are valued at q0, and the
threshold q value for new share issues is unity. When good firms cannot

initially be distinguished from lemons, marginal q will exceed unity by

an amount that depends on the percentage of lemons and the difference

between the value of good firms and lemons. The ratio qG/q indicates

how much dilution occurs when good firms issue new shares; the lemons

premium, c,   is   equal to (qG/) — 1.        For example, suppose qG =   5 and   q

2, then fl is 1,5, and a new project must have a q of at least 2.5 before

managers will seek external equity finance.
                                                    14




        Incorporating the lemons premium, equation (6) becomes:



(12)
            Vt ;L
                      " P)i           [(19)            Dt÷i —   (1t)
        We can now express the value maximization problem in equation (11) as:



                          P
(13)       max t0 (1+         )—t{[(l---O) D _(1IQ)V} —                A   [K —(1—o)Ki— ij


                                                   —
            —u1(1-r)ir(Kt) +            — Di:
                                                       (l_b)I — (1—r)itBi}
                    —         — iD

The first—order necessary conditions for the optimal investment program

include:



                                      = 0
(14a) I : At +          a(l_b)

(14b) K:_A+(1+ .E__)(1-.s) A1 — a (l—r)w'(K) +                                 (1 +   12__Y'(1_r)i   b2 =0



(14c)      VN: —1 —      —        —         = 0.


(14d)                    a    —        = 0.
           D: 1—c +


The range of q values for which firms neither pay dividends nor issue

new shares can be derived as follows. When firms are not paying

dividends and internal finance is exhausted, we know that S = 0 and
                                     15




(15)          =   —1—




With the lemons discount present, constrained firms will choose to issue

shares only when



(16)          > (1 +
                        2)(l — b)

so that the supply—of—funds schedule facing the firm has a discontinuity

at the point where retentions are exhausted, as depicted in Figure 2.

       New shares are issued only when internal finance is exhausted and

the marginal q on additional projects exceeds 1 +          —
                                                    2t(l       be),   as

illustrated by the U3 demand schedule in the figure. (The last term

accounts for the fact that new equity capital can be leveraged.) The

higher the value of Q, the greater the likelihood that a firm's

investment will be constrained by internal finance, as illustrated by

the U2 demand schedule in Figure 2. Of course, S2 can vary both across

firms and over time for the same firm.    [f information asymmetries

become less severe over time, the top horizontal schedule in Figure 2

will shift downward toward unity.

       The model has several direct empirical implications. First,

observed q values will differ across firms with different information

characteristics. For firms facing asymmetric information, the observed

q value will be the weighted average q discussed above. This may be

well above one because these firms have no low—cost marginal source of

finance to undertake the investment necessary to push q to its full—

information equilibrium. The model also predicts that q must be
                          FIGURE 2

        q MID FINMICING DECISION IN CONSTRAINED FIRMS




    q




1   +


                                                               p3




    1




1-6
1—c




                                 0



                    Retentions                  Additions to
                    Exhausted                   Equity
                                      16




substantially higher to induce a new share issue for limited—information

firms, than for full—Information firms, but the true marginal q is

unobservable. We can, however, observe q and its relationship to new

share issues. For "good" full—information firms, qG and q are the same,

so we expect no systematic link between observable q values and new

share issues. On the other hand,       can move independently from qG for

limited—information firms. For example, the market may reappraise the

underlying probability that a firm is a lemon. If the asymmetric

information problem is important empirically, observed q values should

rise prior to new share issues for limitedinforination firms.

        Finally, internal finance constrains investment spending for firms

that do not pay dividends and face an investment demand schedule like

in Figure 2. When q is sufficiently high, new shares are issued, and

movements in q will lead to movements in investment. Otherwise,

movements in investment are limited by changes in internal finance

(supplemented by allowed leverage of collateral). That is, variations

in the length of the retention segment in Figure 2 should cause matching

variation in investment. More specifically, investment__I(A)—— would

be determined according to



(17)
           At max[(1-+t)(1_bt), -


where      =   ')   7r(K)(1+b) . That is, investment is sometimes
restricted by the availability of internal finance. We test these

implications in our empirical work.
                                           17




       In this formulation, the required rate of return does not depend on

the payout ratio. The basic model is in the spirit of the "new view" of

dividends (see e.g. Axierbach, 1979; Bradford, 1981; and King, 1977).

Given our emphasis on a financing hierarchy generated primarily by

capital—market imperfections, we can be agnostic as to motivations for

paying dividends. Cash flow would be an even more important determinant

of investment than our theoretical results suggest if firms face

signalling consequences of cutting dividends (see, for example,

Bhattacharya, 1979).18

       To make the derivations presented above operational, we work within

the q—theory approach to investment (see Brainard and Tobin, 1968;

Tobin, 1969; and the subsequent advances in Mussa, 1977; Abel, 1979;

Hayashi, 1982; and Abel and Blanchard, 1986). In the basic version of

the model, the ratio of investment to the capital stock is a function of

q. We follow Summers (1981) in specifying a cost of adjustment per unit

of investment, 0(1/K), where adjustment costs are assumed to be expensed

for tax purposes. We can then rewrite equation (14a) for a firm i in

period t   (ignoring   time subscripts on the tax variables) as



(18)
           Ait +ai(l_b1 +     0(1-i)   +   Ø'(1—r)it)   0

                                                 Kit

       In the absence of the financing constraints addressed here, Hayashi

(1982) and Summers (1981) link the shadow price to the market value of

existing capital.19 In that approach, under quadratic adjustment costs

(assumed to be constant across firms),2° equation (18) can be written as
                                                18




(19)       iit =        p1
                             +         + uit,

where I represents investment during the period, K is the replacement
value of the capital stock at the beginning of the period, p is the

normal value of (I/K)1, and Uit is white noise. Q represents the value

of Tobin's q at the beginning of the period (defined as the sum of the

value of equity and debt less the value of inventories divided by the

replacement cost of the capital stock), adjusted for corporate and

personal tax considerations (see Appendix B).

        An alternative model is required to describe the investment

behavior of constrained firms, who are unable to respond to variations

in Q. In the simplest alternative, investment is constrained by

available cash flow (CF) in firms that retain all earnings, but which

have little or no access to external finance (beyond that obtained by

allowed leverage of internal finance), so that



                    —        1CF1
'20'1
"
            tKJit            L   Kit

In practice, in any group of firms across time, financing constraints

will be binding for some of the firms and not for others. We estimate a

model that combines equations (19) and (20) so that both Q and cash flow

influence investment:



             I                              CF       CF
                    =            +
(21)                    p1               21 Kit +     Kit—1 + it
                                   19




We expect, however, that the estimated coefficients on cash flow viii be

larger in classes of firms that are more likely to face financing

constraints, a priori. The inclusion of cash flow measures in

investment equations is not novel; we integrate them formally here.



     • ECONOMETRIC EVIDENCZ (it FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS AND INVESTMENT


The Data

    We use Value Line data to examine the importance of financing

constraints in explaining investment. The detailed definitions of our

empirical measures are discussed in Appendix B. The firms in this data

base are typically large, and their stock is publicly traded. Evidence

that some of these firms face financing constraints should indicate that

the phenomenon is widespread.

    We limit our attention to firms within the manufacturing sector

(SIC codes between 2000 and 3999). The selection of the time period is

very important to our study. We need enough years to obtain adequate

time—series variation; however, we also need to identify a set of firms

that may face financing constraints. Too long a time period would

permit constrained firms to mature, reducing the importance of

information—related financing constraints. With the above

considerations in mind, and taking into account the data availability,

we selected the period from 1970 to 1984.21 We also analyze

subintervals within this period.

    The sample of fins was obtained as follows. We deleted

observations from the sample that had missing or inconsistent data. We
                                      20




also deleted firms with major mergers because mergers could cause

inconsistencies when constructing lags. This paper studies financial

constraints resulting from asymmetric information in capital markets,

not financial distress due to poor market performance. Therefore, only

those firms that had positive sales growth from 1969 to 1984 were

included in the sample. These restrictions still left us with a

substantial sample of 421 manufacturing firms.

     We use a single criterion to identify firms that may face financing

constraints—firms' retention behavior over the sample period.22 The

model in section III implies that if information problems in capital

markets lead to financing constraints, they should bind on firms that

retain most of their income. [f, on the other hand, the cost

disadvantage of external finance is slight (e.g., only issue costs),

then retention behavior should contain little or no information about

investment behavior of the firm or its q value. Firms would simply use

external finance to smooth investment when internal finance fluctuates.

     The classification scheme divides firms into four groups as

follows:
             Dividends     < 0.1 for at least 10 years;
Class 1:
             Income


             Dividends     < 0.2 for at least 10 years, but not in class 1;
Class 2:
             Income


             Dividends
Class   3:
             Income
                           C 0.4 for at least 10 years, but not in class 1 or 2;



Class 4:     All others.
                                  21




This approach limits the sensitivity of the classification to outliers

of the dividend—income ratio. In a particular year, this ratio could be

very high due to abnormally low income, even though the firm generally

retains most of its earnings. Thus, our approach is more robust than

classifying firms according to their average retention ratio.

     Several summary statistics for the firms in each class are

presented in Table 1. Our class 1 firms—those that we hypothesize will

generally face binding financial constraints—retained an average of 95

percent of their income, and paid a dividend on average in only 35

percent of the years. The typical class 1 firm paid no dividends for

the first seven to ten years and a small dividend in the remaining

years. In fact, 21 firms in class 1 never paid a dividend over the

entire time period, although these firms are profitable, as the average

rate of return figures indicate. Going across classes, there is a

pronounced increase in the percentage of time that a positive dividend

is paid and a corresponding decrease in the retention ratio.

     The classes are effectively sorted by firm size as well, as the

capital stock figures show. Class 1 firms experienced much more rapid

growth in the fixed capital stock than the mature firms in class 4.

Mean values of the capital stock are, of course, influenced by extreme

values. The pattern across the four classes for the median values of

the capital stock is similarly striking. While class 1 firms are small

relative to firms in class 4, they are still large relative to U.S.

manufacturing corporations in general; 85 percent of manufacturing

corporations had smaller capital stocks in 1970 than the average class 1

firm——the beginning of our sample period (based on information provided
                                 TABLE 1

   Suanary Statistics: Sample of Manufacturing Firms, 1969—1984

                                           Category of Firm
                         Class 1      Class 2       Class 3    Class 4
Number of
  firms                     51               39        188       143

Average
  retention ratio          0.95             0.85       0.68     0.34

Percent of years
  with positive
  dividends                35%              83%        98%      99%

Average capital
  stock—1970 (millions
  of 1982 dollars)         97.3            314.6     648.4     2094.4

Median capital stock—
  1970 (millions of
  1982 dollars)            27.1             54.2      148.1     655.1

Average capital
  stock—1984 (millions
  of 1982 dollars)        347.4            577.3     934.3     2778.4

Median capital stock—
  1984 (millions of
  1982 dollars)            94.9            192.5     266.8      694.7

                                                                         .
Average real
  sales growth             13.5%             9.0%       5.7%       3.4%

Average rate of return
  on market value of
  common stock             14.6%            16.3%      14.3%      11.8%


Source: Authors' calculations based on samples selected from the
         Value Line database.
                                  22




by the Quarterly Financial Reports of the Securities and Exchange

Commission).

     Though we deal with fairly large firms even in class 1, we note

that for the manufacturing sector as a whole, firms with assets of less

than $50 million in 1970 (or a little over $100 million in 1982 dollars)

accounted for almost 20 percent of the assets of manufacturing firms.

We show later that class 1 firms have both a higher itan rate of

investment and higher volatility of capital spending, so that potential

financial constraints on this kind of firm will be important for

aggregate manufacturing investment.

     The data in Table 2 present information on new share issues, debt

finance, and Tobin's q for firms in the various classes.23 Ceteris

paribus, one would expect firms in class 1 to rely more heavily on new

share issues than firms in the remaining classes. The typical firm in

class 1 has an investment demand schedule like D2 or 03 in Figure 2.

The typical firm in classes 3 or 4 has a demand schedule like      and

should not simultaneously pay dividends and issue new shares——given the

taxation of corporate income. As the model in section (II predicts,

firms in class 1 issue new shares more frequently—approximately one

year in every four——than do firms in the other three classes. Firms in

the first class also raise a greater proportion of total finance from

new shares. Even for class 1, however, the amount of finance raised

from new share issues is small compared to funds generated from internal

cash flows.

     The last two lines of Table 2 provide information on debt

utilization. Although one would expect the mature firms in classes 3
                              TABLE 2

      New   Share Issues and Tobin's q in Manufacturing Fins

                          Class 1    Class 2     Class 3   Class 4


Average percent of
  years with new
  share issues               26%          19%       12%          8%

Average value of share
  issue as a percentage
  of cash flow               23%           9%        5%          4%

Average q values
  for all years             3.9          2.5       1.8         1.6
                           (0.4)        (0.2)     (0.1)     (0.1)

Median q values for
  all years                 1.6          1.4       1.0         0.7

Average difference in
  q values between
  periods of new share      1.6          0.9      0.4          0.0
  issues and periods of    (0.8)        (0.4)     (0.2)     (0.1)
  no new share issues

Average ratio of debt
  to capital stock          0.59         0.52     0.39         0.28
                           (0.05)       (0.05)    (0.02)    (0.02)

Average ratio of
  interest payments
  to (interest payments     0.23         0.18     0.16       0.15
  plus cash flows)         (0.14)       (0.09)    (0.10)    (0.09)


Source: Authors' calculations based on samples selected from the
         Value Line database. The standard error of the mean appears
         in parentheses below the average q values.
                                  23




and 4 to have higher debt capacities, the debt—to—capital ratios are

much higher for classes 1 and 2. These results are consistent with the

existence of a financing hierarchy and support the assumption in our

model that constrained firms borrow up to their debt capacity.24 It is

also noteworthy that the correlation between net borrowing and cash flow

is positive and more than three times greater in class 1 than class 4,

suggesting that class 1 firms are unable to smooth fluctuations in

internal finance with debt.

     Table 2 also reports conventional Tobin's q measures for all four

classes of firms.25 The averages for classes I and 2 are significantly

greater than the averages for classes 3 and 4. The asymptotic t

statistic for the null hypothesis that the class 1 mean equals the class

4 mean is 5.8.26 This result also holds for, every year in the sample

individually. Similar patterns hold for median q values.

     One might interpret the high q values observed in class 1 as the

result of high expected growth rates for these rapidly expanding

firms. As Table 1 shows, the class 1 firms did indeed grow very quickly

over our sample period. Their high q values, however, beg the question

of why these firms did not invest even more. As an alternative to

financing constraints, high adjustment costs could slow convergence of q

to a full—information equilibrium. Then, one would expect no systematic

relation between q and new share issues. Firms would invest at an

optimal pace to push q uniformly toward equilibrium, and new shares

would be issued as necessary to finance capital spending.27

     The statistics in Table 2, however, strongly contradict this

view. We calculate the differences in q values in years with and
                                       24



without new share issues on a firm by firm basis and then compute an

average of differences.28 As noted in the table, for classes 1 through

4, this procedure yields differences of, respectively, 1.6, 0.9, 0.4 and

0.0. These results are consistent with the existence of a financing

hierarchy arising because of a "lemons premium." As already noted (see

Appendix A), firms will issue only if marginal q > qG/q, where qc is the

true q value for good firms and q is the observable weighted—average

value of q for good firms and lemons. When asymmetric information

problems are severe and the percentage of lemons is large, however, the

ratio of qG to q can be very large; that is, good firms may be

considerably undervalued. Observed q can vary independently of the true

qG for good firms. As lemons are revealed,        rises, and the lemons

premium falls. At some point, at sufficiently high stock prices, good

firms will issue new shares. Our sample, of course, consists of

companies that ex post are good firms.


Financing   Constraints,   Cash Flow, and Investment

     The evidence on financing patterns presented to this point is

consistent with the view that information asymmetries generate

significant financial constraints, One implication of the model in

section III is that firms facing these financial constraints will

exhaust their cash flow to finance desired capital spending. The

summary statistics presented in Table 3 confirm this prediction for the

firms in our sample. The cash—flow—to—capital and investment—to—capital

ratios are roughly equivalent in class 1. Firms in classes 3 and 4

spend a much lower proportion of their cash flow on investment. The
                                TABLE 3

         Cash Flow and Investment    in   Manufacturing   Firms

                        Class 1       Class 2        Class 3      Class 4


I/K                      0.26             0.20        0.14         0.09


CF/K                     0.29             0.28        0.23         0.18

Correlation of CF                           .


  with I (deviations
  from trend)            0.92             0.82        0.38         0.20

Average of firm
  standard deviations
  of I/K                 0.18             0.10        0.06         0.04

                                                .
Average of firm
  standard deviations
  of CF/K                0,20             0.10        0.07         0.05


Source: Authors' calculations based on samples selected from the
         Value Line database.
                                   25




last two rows of Table 3 demonstrate the pronounced differences in the

volatility of both cash flow and investment in class 1 firms relative to

mature, dividend—paying firms.

     The correlation results in Table 3 are especially striking. Both

investment and cash flow have pronounced upward trends in all classes.

The theory predicts, however, that the deviations from trend for cash

flow should be more closely linked with deviations of investment from

trend in classes 1 and 2 than in classes 3 and 4. Table 3 presents the

correlations of deviations in cash flow and investment from exponential

trends estimated from aggregate time—series data for each class from

1970 to 1984. For classes 1 and 2, aggregate deviations from the

investment trend are highly correlated with aggregate deviations from

the cash flow trend. The correlation drops off substantially, however,

for classes 3 and 4. Again, these results are consistent with the view

that capital—market imperfections prevent some groups of firms from

smoothing fluctuations in internal finance with external funds.

     Our strategy is to estimate the contribution of cash flow toward

explaining investment (over and above movements in tax—adjusted Q). In

Table 4, we begin by reporting coefficient estimates for the basic Q

model described in equation (19), and estimates for the cash flow model

from equation (20) with only current and lagged CF/K included as

explanatory variables. In both cases, fixed firm29 and year effects are

included, and the equations are estimated for each of the four

classes. We report results using tax—adjusted Q only; results using the

unadjusted measure are very similar.
                                           TABLE 4

                Effects of Q or Cash Flow Individually on Investint

Dependent   Variable: (I/K)j
                Class 1            Class 2             Class 3           Class 4
              0.0046 ——          0.0073 —            0.0055 —          0.0031 —
             (0.0004)           (0.0009)             (0.0004)          (0.0003)


(CF/K)jt
              ——        0.412    — 0.346              — 0.166           — 0.136
                     (0.032)            (0.041)             (0.015)           (0.022)



(CFJK)j_i
               — 0.108           — 0.133              — 0.157           — 0.213
                     (0.027)            (0.036)             (0.015)           (0.022)


2             0.18      0.38     0.18      0.29      0.13       0.22   0.11       0.23


Note:       The models estimated include fixed firm and year effects (not
            reported). Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                      26




        Three findings in Table 4 are of interest. First, positive and

precisely estimated coefficients of tax—adjusted Q are obtained in all

classes. The cash flow model, however, explains more of the variation

in investment in all classes than does Q.     In addition, the pattern of

coefficients on current cash flow suggests a much greater sensitivity of

investment to contemporaneous fluctuations in cash flow for firms in

class 1 than for firms in the other classes.

        The most convincing results come from estimates of the model in

which both Q and cash flow variables are included. We report these

results in Table 5. The fifteen years covered by our sample may be too

long a period over which to classify fins; that is, some firms may have

"matured" over the period. To address this possibility, we report

estimates over two time periods——1970—1977 and the full sample, 1970—

1984.

        The estimate of positive coefficients on the cash flow variables

(i.e., an apparent "excess sensitivity" of investment to cash flow) need

not imply that capital—market imperfections are important. Our data

measure average Q, and the theory pertains, of course, to marginal Q.

Cash flow could contain information about movements in marginal Q not

captured in average Q.30 Indeed, estimated coefficients on lagged cash

flow are positive, statistically significant, and of comparable

magnitude for all classes, suggesting that, for whatever reason, cash

flow contributes to explaining investment over and above Q.3' This is

not surprising, given the estimates for aggregate time—series in

manufacturing from Abel and Blanchard (1986).
                                             TABLE 5

                          Effects of Q and Cash Flow on Investiwnt

Dependent Variable: (I/K) it

                     Class 1              Class 2               Class 3           Class 4

             1970—77     1970—84   1970—77    1970—84 1970—77       1970—84 1970—77    1970—84

             —0.0002     0.0004    0.0053     0.0040   0.0022       0.0001 -0.0004
                                                                    0.0019
             (0.0004) (0.0006) (0.0013) (0.0009) (0.0005) (0.0004) (0.0005) (0.0003)
(CF/K) it     0.554      0.418     0.288      0.317     0.130       0.153     0.137    0.142
             (0.036) (0.034)       (0.064) (0.041)     (0.020)     (0.015)   (0.032) (0.023)
(CF/K) it1    0.166      0.122     0.055      0.089     0.110       0.135     0.168    0.220
             (0.032)    (0.033)    (0.048)   (0.037)   (0.021) (0.015)       (0.031) (0.023)
              0.56       0.38      0.20       0.31     0.15         0.23      0.14     0.23

Note: The models were estimated using fixed firm       and year    effects (not reported).
       Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                  27




     The theory presented here does suggest, however, that there should

be economically important differences in the effects of cash flow on

investment across our classes of firms. In this respect, we focus on

the coefficient on current cash flow. With quarterly data, lagged cash

flow would not be a bad proxy for a constrained firm's ability to

undertake investment, but a year is a substantial period of time.32 The

pattern of the coefficients on current cash flow across classes is quite

striking. For the early period, they range from about 0.54 in class 1

to 0.18 in class 4. Again, it is the differences in the magnitudes of

the estimated coefficients that we stress; that all of the coefficients

are different from zero is not surprising given the limitations of the Q

model. The fact that the addition of cash flow reduces the estimated

coefficient on Q to zero in class 4 suggests the collinearity of cash

flow and Q for those firms.

     The economic importance of these results is reinforced by the

higher variability of cash flow in class 1. The results in Tables 3 and

5 imply that investment is roughly three times more sensitive to cash

flow variations in class 1 relative to classes 3 and 4, while the

underlying cash flow variations are about four times larger in class

     As an example of the implications of these observations, consider

the predictions of the model for the investment expansion that occurred

between 1975 and 1979. The average cash flow to investment ratio for

class 4 rose by 0.005 over this period. The model estimated over the

full sample predicts that this would cause an increase of 0.001 in the

class 4 investment to capital ratio, a small change equal to only one

percent of the class 4 sample average. For class 1, however, the cash
                                         28



  flow to capital ratio increased by 0.082 over the same period. The

 model implies that this would cause an increase in the investment to

 capital ratio of 0.035. This is 35 times larger than the change

 predicted for class 4; it is over 13 times larger as a percentage of the

 sample average investment to capital ratio.        Similar differences can be
 obtained for other periods.34 Effects of this size have clear economic

 consequences for constrained firms. Moreover, even if constrained firms
 do   not undertake the   majority of aggregate investment, their potential
 investment   variation is   so large that it   is likely significant for the
 explanation of aggregate investment cycles.
      We also considered two alternative models in which cash flow might
 appear   important for investment,   even given the inclusion of the
                     in the model—(i) movements in cash flow reflect
 beginning—of—period Q

news about market fundamentals not captured in the beginning—of—period
Q; or (ii) cash flow and sales
                              are highly correlated, and        "accelerator"
mechanisms are responsible for the results.35
       We pursued two tests   of the first alternative. First, we estimated

the models reported in Table 5 using only Q and current cash flow and an
instrumental—variables procedure (with firm dummies, time dummies, and
lagged values of Q and CF/K as instrumental variables). Those results
are similarly striking; for the early subperiod, the coefficient on CF/K
in class 1 is not significantly different from unity, while the esti-
mated coefficient for class 4 is roughly the same as the sum of the
coefficients on current and lagged CF/K in the OLS regressions. Second,
adding Q dated at the end of the current period, that includes      all
                                     29



                                                                      in
news arriving in the current period, produced no important difference

the cash—flow coefficients.
                                                explanation, we added
     With respect to the second alternative

                                     by K) to the investment equation.
current and lagged gales (deflated

Estimated coefficients on sales differed little across classes. The
                                           flow across the four classes for
coefficients on contemporaneous cash

the full sample fell to 0.289, 0.091, —0.004, and 0.027, respectively.
                                                                   at
Only the estimate for class 1 is significantly different from zero
                                                                Table
the five—percent level. These results extend those presented in
                                           with the Q model, there may be
5. That is, given potential problems

reasons for variables other than Q to influence investment. Important
                                                however, only in firms
 effects of cash flow on investment appear,

 ideatif led a priori as facing financing constraints.

      In summary, the results in Table 5 suggest important impacts of
                                          internal finance on investment.
 fluctuations in the availability of
                                  the fact that cash flow is highly var-
 These effects are magnified by
                                          in class 1, while mature firms in
 iable for the rapidly growing firms
                                              in cash flow. Internal funds
 class 4 experience very small variation
                                          in all classes—even for firms that
 contribute to explaining investment

 have much more cash flow than investment—most likely indicating the
                               in empirical studies. For our purposes,
 pitfalls in using average Q

  however, the fundamental result is the substantial difference across
                                                                      are
  classes in the impact of cash flow on investment. These differences
                                            between internal and external
  consistent with the cost differential
                                    model, and the differences in q values
  equity finance predicted by our

  across classes.
                                     30




     Finally, it is important to stress that the firms we examine——even

the rapidly growing smaller firms in class 1——are manufacturing

corporations which are large by economy—wide standards. The

significance of capital—market imperfections in dictating the importance

of internal finance for capital spending is no doubt of still greater

concern for smaller companies, which have more difficult access (or no

access) to centralized securities markets.



                  V. CONCLUSIONS   AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

     Standard   models of business fixed investment—working either from

the price effects of changes in the cost of capital or induced effects

of changes in asset valuations——typically rely on perfect capital

markets. To the extent that firms do not face a cost of capital on the

margin set in centralized securities markets, or there are constraints

on firms' ability to participate in particular markets for external

finance, standard models may yield misleading predictions about the

impact of public policies on investment. In this paper, we work within

the framework of the q—theory of investment, and show that imperfect

information can create "financing hierarchies" over the use of internal

and external finance which accentuate hierarchies created solely from

tax considerations.36 The clear implication is that for many firms—

particularly developing firms in rapidly growing industries—there may

be a significant range of q values over which no dividends are paid and

external finance is very costly to obtain. Large variations in q may

have little effect on investment. Rather, investment is constrained by

current cash flow. Our empirical evidence for U.S. manufacturing firms

in the Value Line data base suggests that such patterns are important.
                                     31




      These results suggest several areas for future research. First,

the presence of constrained firms complicates the analysis of the

effects of tax reform on investment. The most obvious example relates

to changes in the corporate profit tax rate. For example, Summers

(1981) concludes that the short—run impact on investment of an increase

in the corporate tax rate is ambiguous—because benefits from expensing

investment adjustment costs and the increased value of the tax deduction

for   depreciation may offset the effect of increased taxes in reducing
dividends. For firms that face financing constraints, increases in
corporate   taxes can crowd out investment significantly through the

additional channel of reduced internal cash flow (see also Greenwald and

Stiglitz, l987). The Tax Reform Act of 1986, for example, is widely

believed to have increased the marginal corporate cost of capital. On

the other hand, tax reform substantially reduced the tax rate on

marginal as well as inframarginal corporate profit. For financially

constrained firms, this latter effect may be much more important for

investment than the increased cost of capital. Because constrained

firms probably constitute the most dynamic, progressive sector of the

economy, the effect of public policy on their investment and growth

deserves particular emphasis.38'39

       The result that financial constraints are important even for

relatively large manufacturing firms also suggests some empirical

promise for recent information—based models of procyclical investment

(see, for example, Bernanke and Gertler, 1987; Greenwald and Stiglitz,

1986; and Calomiris and Hubbard, 1986). In these models, aggregate

shocks can have strong effects on the allocation of external finance for

investment across different categories of firms. Such models present a
                                   32



challenge to conventional analyses of the effects of fiscal and monetary

policies on investment that focus primarily on price effects through the

cost of capital.

     Finally, the existence of financing constraints has many impli-

cations for research in industrial organization. Many mergers appear to

match corporations that face different costs of capital on the margin

because of different earnings and growth prospects. Such combinations

would permit reallocations of capital that bypass external capital

markets. Large differentials in the cost of internal and external

finance can also rationalize such strategies as predatory pricing and

limit pricing. For example, Judd and Petersen (1986) show that dynamic

limit pricing is a profit—maximizing strategy for a dominant firm facing

a financially constrained fringe, while Petersen (1987) argues that an

"absolute capital requirement" entry barrier is a logical outcome of a

financing hierarchy. The results presented in this paper provide

empirical support for the existence of imperfect capital markets and

financing constraints that underlie these theoretical results.
                                  33




                                 NOTES


     'Much debate has centered on the effects of tax policy on capital
spending in "flexible accelerator" models (e.g., Eisner, 1978),
"neoclassical" investment models (e.g., Hall and Jorgenson, 1967; Eisner
and Nadiri, 1968; and Bischoff, 1971), and "q" models (e.g., Summers,
1981; Salinger and Summers, 1983). Also see the review in Clark (1979).

     2Meyer and Kuh (1957, chapter 10) emphasized the importance of
internal liquidity for investment in general, and for small firms, in
particular. Another early statement of this view can be found in
Duesenberry (1958); it has been extended by Minsky (1975) and tested
empirically by Fazzari and Mott (1986). Kuh and Meyer (1963) examined
the influence of internal liquidity on investment, finding that the
timing of investment spending is linked closely to the availability of
funds over most of the business cycle. Similar results are obtained in
Coen (1971) using aggregate data. Eisner (1978) found that the timing
of investment in small firms is more responsive to profits than in large
firms for some specifications. Chirinko (1987) finds an important role
for liquidity in explaining investment in aggregate data, though the
effect is not robust to changes in estimation technique. Pazzari and
Athey (1987) present supporting evidence for the role of cash flow in
investment functions estimated from micro data.

     In a careful study of Japanese firms, Hayashi and Inoue (1987) find
that profits enter importantly in a Q model of investment. They point
out, however, that when shocks to firm cash flow are correlated with
shocks to the adjustment cost function, a positive coefficient on cash
flow could just reflect a bias in the estimate of the Q coefficient.

     3The notion of a hierarchy, in which internal funds are cheaper
than external funds, has been explained in the absence of financing
constraints in the public finance literature (e.g., Auerbach, 1979,
1984), because of the differential tax treatment of dividends and
capital gains. Earlier studies emphasized a hierarchy arising from
transactions costs; see for example Baumol, Heim, Malkiel, and Quandt
(1970).

     4'rhe q theory linked to the cost—of—adjustment paradigm permits
segregation of expectation lags (captured in q) and delivery or
adjustment lags (captured in the adjustment cost function). See Eisner
and Strotz (1963), Lucas (1967a, 1967b), Gould (1968), and Treadway
(1969).

     5Empirical investment studies relying on q have not always been
found a significant role for q. In addition, the unexplained movement
in investment displays serial correlation, which is inconsistent with
the theory. See for example von Furstenberg (1977), Clark (1979),
Blanchard and Wyplosz (1981), and Summers (1981).
                                    34




     6Firuis have relied heavily on internal finance for growth and
development in U.S. manufacturing since at least the end of the
nineteenth century (see the discussion in Hansen, 1941). It is quite
striking that the automobile industry——today a classic mature industry——
developed largely from retentions. Even by the 1920s, only three of the
eight major automobile manufacturers (General Motors, Packard, and
Studebaker) maintained any noticeable reliance on external equity
capital. By 1926, retained earings were more than fifty percent of net
worth even in these large companies (Seltzer, 1928).

     7Other general discussions of the negative effects of external
financing on the value of claims of existing shareholders can be found
in Huberman (1984) and Miller and Rock (1985).

     8Several studies have found that the capacity to use debt may be
limited, in the sense that the required rates of return on debt and
equity increase with leverage (see, for example, Baumol and Malkiel,
1967; Auerbach, 1979; and Feldstein, Green, and Sheshinski, 1978;
Gordon, 1982). See also Kim (1978) and Hayashi (1985a) for a derivation
of the optimal debt—capital ratio in the presence of bankruptcy costs.

     9A natural question, of course, is why financially constrained
firms are not acquired by mature, cash—rich firms. At least three
factors limit such a process: (i) managerial diseconomies in
conglomerates, (ii) asymmetric information—an acquiring firm finds
itself in a situation qualitatively similar to the providers of external
finance in the models discussed in the text, and (iii) some degree of
individual specificity of project endowments.

     10Butters and Lintner (1945) cite numerous studies reporting
constraints on external finance during the Depression for otherwise
profitable small, growing firms. Small firms actually increased their
average retention ratios during the early 1930s, while the largest firms
paid out more than their current earnings in some periods.

      11Similar patterns were noted in early studies for the 1930s; that
is, profitable small firms maintained consistently higher retention
ratios than did large corporations (see for example Crum, 1939).
     '2Poterba and Summers (1985) note that under the "tax irrelevance"
view of dividend taxation advanced by Miller and Scholes (1978, 1982),
share prices are determined by investors for whom the marginal tax rates
on dividends and capital gains are equal, so that marginal q will be
unity in either case. The "new view" assumes that dividends are the
primary vehicle for transferring money out of the corporate sector. To
the extent that corporate takeovers or share repurchases are important,
(see Shoven, 1987), the approach may have limitations for explaining
financing behavior, even in mature firms.
                                  35




     '3We have in mind full—information" firms here, so that i'> 0
reflects the market's assessment of marginal changes in the probability
of default.

     14While share repurchases are not prohibited in the U.S., they may
be treated as dividends by the IRS. See the discussion in Auerbach
(1979).

     15Hayashi (1985a) also develops a model within the q—theory
framework in which there are three financing regimes——internal finance,
debt finance, and external equity finance.

     '6The debt capacity constraint is assumed to binding; a proportion
(1—b) of funds required for investment must be financed from cash flow
and new share issues. This approach follows Summers (1981).

     '71t will certainly be the case that 2 will vary across firms; we
address this in our empirical work in section IV.

     '8"Signalling" explanations of dividend payments fail to explain
why small developing firms (presumably facing substantially imperfect
markets for external finance) generally pay little or none of their
earnings in dividends, while mature companies have relatively high
payout ratios. The agency explanation suggested by Easterbrook (1984)
and Jensen (1986)—that shareholders prefer managers to face the
discipline of and monitoring provided by external capital markets for
debt and equity—is probably more promising for mature firms. Within
the framework suggested here, one can imagine that firms face a
tradeoff, as they develop, between the shadow value of the "agency
benefit" from paying a dividend of one dollar and shadow value of a
dollar's worth of investment. If the latter is very high for firms
facing severe external capital constraints, developing firms in rapidly
growing markets will pay no dividends initially. The "traditional" view
of dividends (see the discussion in Poterba and Summers, 1985) may well
be correct for large mature firms, but empirical work must be careful to
distinguish firms according to their financial hierarchies.

     191t is important, of course, to specify conditions under which the
stock market provides a proxy for marginal q (see for example Hayashi,
1982). The following restrictive assumptions are required: Ci) capital
is homogeneous and malleable; and (ii) firms produce with constant
returns to scale (Lindenberg and Ross, 1981, and Salinger, 1984, derive
an expression for q in the presence of monopoly rents.). While these
assumptions may call into question the general applicability of the q
approach, they apply as well to most versions of the standard flexible
accelerator approach. Wildasin (1984) notes also that average q may be
a poor proxy when there are many types of capital goods. In any event,
our interest lies principally in comparing the performance of the model
across various groups of firms.
                                                      36



     It is not obvious that distinctions between marginal and average q
lie at the heart of empirical difficulties. Abel and Blanchard (1986)
estimate a series for marginal q for aggregate U.S. manufacturing. They
note (p. 250): "Since our findings are so similar to the results
obtained relating investment to average q, we find little support for
the view that the low explanatory power of average q is due to the fact
that average q is a poor proxy for the theoretically more appealing
marginal q•fl

        20That is, we assume that adjustment costs A follow

                       1       tit                     2
           Alt             (         —u         ui) Kitl if (
                                                                      lit   —
                                                                                p.)   0;
                   vj-                                                Kit
           Alt = 0, otherwise.

Hence,

             C
                  it
                 Kit       1it
                                      1

                                     2j21
                                            C
                                                it
                                                Kit
                                                      —
                                                           p      2
                                                               u1) Kit

     21Manufacturing firms were included in the sample only if they had
data observations from 1969 to 1984. The 1969 data were used for
constructing lags. We choose 1969 as the starting point because the
number of firms and data items available on Value Line increased
substantially in 1969. The number of firms that had observations on the
necessary variables dropped significantly after 1984. We found 675
firms with some data from 1969 to 1984. The sample was reduced to 421
firms for reasons discussed in the text.

     22Under perfect capital markets, of course, dividend and investment
decisions are independent (the Modigliani—Miller theorem). Previous
studies have attempted to estimate dividend and investment functions
jointly (see, for example, Dhrymes and Kurz, 1967; and the criticism in
Fama, 1974), but none has tried to group firms so as to permit a test of
financing hierarchies applying to some firms and not others.

     Our scheme for grouping firms according to differences in dividend
behavior is similar to tests for the presence of liquidity constraints
on consumption, in which households were grouped into "high—wealth" and
"low—wealth" categories (see for example klayashi, 1985b; and Zeldes,
1985).

     23Some firms reported frequent, but very small new share issues
that were probably associated with executive stock option plans. We
counted positive common finance as a substantive new share issue only if
the funds raised exceeded 10 percent of the firm's cash flow in the same
year.
                                    37




     24The pattern of debt leverage across classes also holds for debt—
equity ratios measured as the book value of debt divided by the book
value of common equity. The effect on investment of debt service
measures that emphasize interest expense relative to cash flow are
discussed by Minsky (1975), Eckstein and Sinai (1986), and Fazzari and
Athey (1987).

     25We also performed a similar exercise for two measures of tax—
adjusted Q (see the definition in Appendix B), and the patterns were
even more dramatic.

     26The t test for equality of means is valid only asymptotically
because the variances of the q measures are clearly different across
classes -

     27An alternative explanation of the high Tobin's q values in class
1 is the relative importance of "intangibles" for such firms. It is
difficult, however, to link that story to the large differences in q
values between periods in which new shares are issued and periods in
which no new shares are issued.

     28The average difference reported in Table 2 is computed as
follows. We first compute the average difference on a firm—by—firm
basis for all firms that issued shares in at least one of our sample
years. These statistics are then averaged across firms in each class to
obtain the results in Table 2. Thus, differences in average q levels
between firms that issue shares and firms that do not issue would not
affect the reported statistics.

     29problems of high values of average Q stemming from monopoly rents
not captured in our formulation (see the discussion in Lindenberg and
Ross, 1981, and Salinger, 1984) will be eliminated by using fixed—
effects methods as long as the markup of price over marginal cost is
constant over the period.

     30Another explanation is that the stock market is excessively
volatile, so that information about fundamentals is better conveyed
through cash flow than q. To be consistent with the pattern of results
in Table 5, an "excess volatility" story would have to explain why q is
a poorer signal in growing firms paying out little or none of their
profits as dividends.

     31Hayashi (1985a) notes that it is possible that an increase In
current cash flow (with no expected effect on future cash flows) could
increase current investment just by placing the firm in different
financing regimes.

     32Abel and Blanchard (1986) consider three (quarterly) lags of
profits in a q model for investment using aggregate data for the manu-
facturing sector. This time period would fit within our contemporaneous
annual observation; Abel and Blanchard found only the coefficient on the
first lag of profits to be statistically different from zero.
                                   38




     33For the period 1970—1984, the total sum of squares for the four
classes are, respectively, 37.84, 5.80, 14.06 and 5.29, while the number
of observations are 725, 560, 2788, and 2140, respectively.

     34mese differences would be even larger if the model estimates for
the first half of the sample were used (when the constraints on class 1
firms were likely the most severe. Larger quantitative effects could
also be obtained if the variation explained by cyclical effects captured
in the annual intercepts were included.

     35Results are not reported here, but are available from the authors
upon request.

     36lndeed, as a result of recent tax reform, the wedge between taxes
on dividends and capital gains that leads to a financing hierarchy has
been virtually eliminated.

     37A related concern is that to the extent that small, immature
firms are probably more likely to have negative earnings in a given
year, they are less likely to realize the benefits of the investment tax
credit. Our point is that, even with positive earnings, the tax rate
relevant for a firm constrained in both equity and debt markets is the
average tax rate.

     38Analogously, Hubbard and Judd (1986, 1987) demonstrate the
importance of the distribution of tax changes for consumption in the
presence of borrowing restrictions ("Internal finance constraints").

     39Calomiris and Hubbard (1986) suggest a role for differential
taxation of corporate income according to information imperfections
faced in credit markets. One possibility here Is a reduction in the
corporate tax financed by an increase in the dividend tax. If the
Auerbach (1979)—Bradford (1981)—King (1977) view of dividends (as a
residual) is correct, such a policy might well raise investment
substantially. Such a reform would be more costly if dividend payments
were important as a signal of the firm's health (as in Bhattacharya,
1979) or to restrict managerial discretion (as in Jensen and Heckling,
1976; or Jensen, 1986).
                                  39




                              REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew B. Investment and the Value of Capital. New York: Garland
    Publishing Company, 1979.

Abel, Andrew B. and Blanchard, Olivier J. "The Present Value of Profits
    and Cyclical Movements in Investment." Econometrica 54 (March
    1986): 249—273.

Akerlof, George A. "The Market for 'Lemons': Qualitative Uncertainty
    and the Market Mechanism." Quarterly Journal of Economics 84
    (August 1970): 488—500.

Auerbach, Alan J. "Corporate Taxation in the United States." Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 2:1983a: 451—505.

Auerbach, Alan J.  "Taxation, Corporate Finance, and the Cost of
    Capital." Journal of Economic Literature 21 (september 1983):
    905—940.

Auerbach, Alan J. "Taxes, Firm Financial Policy, and the Cost of
    Capital: An Empirical Analysis." Journal of Public Economics 23
    (March 1984): 27—57.

Auerbach, Alan J. "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital.
    "Quarterly Journal of Economics 93 (August 1979): 433—446.

Baumol, William, Heim, Peggy, Malkiel, Burton, and Quandt, Richard.
    "Earnings Retention, New Capital, and the Growth of the Firm."
    Review of Economics and Statistics 52 (1970): 345—355.

Baumol, William J. and Malkiel, Burton C. "The Firm's Optimal Debt—
    Equity Ratio and the Cost of Capital." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 81 (November 1967): 547—578.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Gertler, Mark. "Financial Fragility and Economic
    Performance." Mimeograph, Princeton University, 1987.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto. "Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and th
    'Bird in the Hand' Fallacy." Bell Journal of Economics 10 (Spring
    1979): 259—270.

Bischoff, Charles W. "Business Investment in the 1970s: A Comparison of
    Models." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1971:1: 13—58.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Wyplosz, Charles. "An Empirical structural
    Model of Aggregate Demand." Journal of Monetary Economics 7 (1981):
    1—28.
                                   40



Bradford, David. "Tax Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on
    Corporate Distributions." Journal of Public Economics 15 (April
    1981): 1—22.

Brainard, William C., Shoven, John B., and Weiss, Laurence. "The
    Financial Valuation of the Return to Capital." Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity 2:1980: 453—511.

Brainard, William C. and Tobin, James. "Pitfalls in Financial Model
    Building." American Economic Review 58 (May 1968): 99—122.

Butters, J. Keith and Lintner, John V. Effects of Federal Taxes on
    Crowing Enterprises. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press, 1945.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Hubbard, R. Glenn. "Multiple Loan Markets,
    Collateral, and Credit Rationing." Mimeograph, Northwestern
    University, 1986.

Calomiris, Charles W., Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Stock, James H. "The Farm
    Debt Crisis and Public Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity 1986:2: 441—479.

Chirinko, Robert S. "Tobin's Q and Financial Policy." Journal of
    Monetary Economics 19 (1987): 69—87.

Clark, Peter K. "Investment in the 1970s: Theory, Performance, and
    Prediction." Brookings Papers and Economic Activity 1979:1: 73—113,

Coen, Robert M.  "The Effect of Cash Flow on the Speed of Adjustment.'
    In Gary Fromm (ed.), Tax Incentives and Capital Spending.
    Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1971.

Crum, W.L. Corporate Size and Earning Power. Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press, 1939.

Dhrymes, Phoebus and lCurz, Mordecai. "Investment, Dividends, and
    External Finance Behavior in Firms." In R. Ferber (ed.),
    Determinants of Investment Behavior. New York: National Bureau of
    Economic Research, 1967.

Duesenberry, James S. Business Cycles and Economic Growth. New York:
    McGraw—Hill, 1958.

Easterbrook, Frank H.  "Two Agency—Cost Explanations of Dividends."
    American Economic Review 74 (September 1984): 650—659.

Eckstein, Otto and Sinai, Allen. "The Mechanisms of the Business Cycle
    in the Postwar Era." In Robert J. Gordon (ed.), The American
    Business Cycle: Continuity and Change. Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 1986.
                                  41



Eisner, Robert. Factors in Business Investment. Cambridge: Ballinger,
    1978.

Eisner, Robert and Nadiri, M. tshaq. "investment Behavior and
    Neoclassical Theory." Review of Economics and Statistics 50 (August
    1968): 369—382.

Eisner, Robert and Strotz, Robert H. "Determinants of Business
    Investment." In Commission on Money and Credit Impacts of Monetary
    Policy. Englewood Cliff s, New Jersey: Prentice—Hall, 1963.

Fama, Eugene F. "The Empirical Relationships Between the Dividend and
    Investment Decisions of Firms." American Economic Review 64 (June
    1974): 304—318.

Fazzari, Steven and Athey, Michael. "Asymmetric Information, Financing
    Constraints, and Investment." Review of Economics and Statistics,
    forthcoming, 1987.

Fazzari, Steven and Mott, Tracy. "The Investment Theories of Kalecki
    and Keynes: An Empirical Study of Firm Data, 1970—1982." Journal
    of Post Keynesian Economics 9 (winter 1986—87): 171—187.

Feldstein, Martin, Green, Jerry, and Sheshinski, Eytan. "Inflation and
    Taxes in a Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance." Journal
    of Political Economy 86 (April 1978): 553—570.

Feldstein, Martin and Jun, Joosung. "The Effects of Tax Rules on
    Nonresidential Fixed Investment: Some Preliminary Evidence from the
    1980s." Working Paper No. 1857, National Bureau of Economic
    Research, 1986.

Gordon, Roger H. "Interest Rates, Inflation, and Corporate Financial
    Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1982:2: 461—491.

Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Financial Structure and the
    Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax." Mimeograph, Princeton
    University, March 1987.

Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Information, Finance
    Constraints, and Business Fluctuations.' Mimeograph, Princeton
    University, February 1986.

Greenwald, Bruce, Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Weiss, Andrew. "Information
    Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic
    Fluctuations." American Economic Review 74 (May 1984): 194—199.

Hall, Robert E. and Jorgenson, Dale W.  "Tax Policy and Investment
    Behavior." American Economic Review 57 (June 1967): 391—414.
                                    42



Hansen, Alvin H.    Fiscal Policy and Business Cycles. New York: Norton,
    1941.

Hayashi, Fumlo. "Corporate Finance Side of the Q Theory of Investment."
    Journal of Public Economics 27 (19&5a): 261—280.

Hayashi, Fumio. "The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A
    Cross—Sectional Analysis." Quarterly Journal of Economics 100
    (February   1985b): 183—206.

Hayashi, Fumio. "Tobints Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
    Interpretation." Econometrica 50 (January 1982): 213—224.

Hayashi, Fumio and Inoue, Tohru. "Implementing the Q Theory of
    Investment in Micro Data: Japanese Manufacturing, 1977—1985."
    Mimeograph, Osaka University, June 1987.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Judd, Kenneth L. "Finite Horizons, Borrowing
    Constraints, and Short—Run Fiscal Policy." Working Paper No. 2158,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, February 1987.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Judd, Kenneth L. "Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal
    Policy, and Consumption." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
    1986:1: 1—51.

Huberman, Gur. "External Financing and Liquidity." Journal of Finance
    39 (July 1984): 895—908.

Jensen, Michael D. "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance,
    and Takeovers." American Economic Review 76 (May 1986): 323—329.

Jensen, Michael and Meckling, William. "Theory of the Firm: Managerial
    Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure." Journal of
    Financial EconomIcs 3 (October 1976): 305—360.

Judd, Kenneth L. and Petersen, Bruce C. "Dynamic Limit Pricing and
    Internal Finance." Journal of Economic Theory 39 (August 1986):
    368—399.

Kalay, A. and Shimrat, A. "Firm Value and Seasoned Equity—Issues: Price
    Pressure, Wealth Distribution, or Negative Information," Working
    Paper No. 894/86, New York University, March 1986.

Kalay, A. and Shimrat, A. "On the Payment of Equity—Financed
    Dividends." Mimeograph, New York University, December 1985,

Kim, E. Han. "A Mean—Variance Theory of Optimal Capital Structure and
    Corporate Debt Capacity." Journal of Finance 33 (March 1978): 45—63.

King, Mervyn A. Public Policy and the Corporation. London: Chapman and
    Hall, 1977.
                                  43




King, Mervyn A. and Fullerton, Don (eds.) The Taxation of Income from
    Capital: A Comparative Study of the U.S., U.K., Sweden, and West
    Germany. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Kuh, Edwin and Meyer, John R. "Investment, Liquidity, and Monetary
    Policy." In Commission on Money and Credit: Impacts of Monetary
    Policy. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1963.

Leland, Hayne and Pyle, David. "Informational Asymmetries, Financial
    Structure, and Financial Intermediation." Journal of Finance 32
    (May 1977): 371—387.

Lindenberg, Eric B. and Ross, Stephen A. "Tobin's q Ratio and
    Industrial Organization.' Journal of Business 54 (January 1981):
    1—32.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr.  "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply."
    Journal of Political Economy 75 (1967): 321—334.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Optimal Investment Policy and the Flexible
    Accelerator." International Economic Review 8 (1967): 78—85.

McDonald, Robert and Soderstrom, Naomi. "Dividend and Share Changes:
    Is There a Financing Hierarchy?" Working Paper No. 2029, National
    Bureau of Economic Research, September 1986.

Meyer, John R. and Kuh, Edwin. The Investment Decision. Cambridge:
    Harvard University Press, 1957.

Miller, Merton H. "Debt and Taxes." Journal of Finance 32 (May 1977):
    26 1—275.

Miller, Merton H. and Rock, Kevin. "Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric
    Information." Journal of Finance 40 (September 1985): 1031—1051.

Miller, Merton H. and Scholes, Myron. "Dividends and Taxes." Journal of
    Financial Economics 6 (December 1978): 333—364.

Miller, Merton H. and Scholes, Myron. "Dividends and Taxes: Some
    Empirical Evidence." Journal of Political Economy .90 (December
    1982): 1118—1141.

Minsky, Byman. John Maynard Keynes. New York: Columbia University
    Press, 1975.

Modigliani, Franco and Miller, Merton H. "The Cost of Capital,
    Corporation Finance, and the Theory of Investment." American
    Economic Review 48 (June 1958): 261—297.

Mussa, Michael. "External and Internal Adjustment Costs and the Theory
    of Aggregate and Firm Investment." Economica 44 (1977): 163—178.
                                    44




Myers, Stewart C. "The Capital Structure Puzzle." Journal of Finance
    39 (May 1984): 575—592.

Myers, Stewart C. and Majiuf, Nicholas S. "Corporate Financing
    Decisions When Firms Have Investment Information That Investors Do
    Not." Journal of Financial Economics 13 (June 1984): 187—220.

Petersen, Bruce C. "Internal Versus External Finance and the Capital
    Requirement Barrier to Entry." Mimeograph, Northwestern University,
    February 1987.

Poterba, James N. and Summers, Lawrence H. "Dividend Taxes, Corporate
    Investment, and 'Q'." Journal of Public Economics 22 (1983): 135—167.

Poterba, James N. and Summers, Lawrence H. "The Economic Effects of
    Dividend Taxation." In E. Altman and M. Subrahmanyam (eds.), Recent
    Advances in Corporate Finance. Homewood, Illinois: Richard D.
    Irwin, 1985.

Protopapadakis, Aris. "Some Indirect Evidence on Effective Capital
    Gains Tax Rates." Journal of Business 56 (March 1983): 127—138.

Salinger, Michael A. "Tobin's q, Unionization, and the Concentration—
    Profits Relationship." Rand Journal of Economics 15 (Summer 1984):
    159—170.

Salinger, Michael A. and Summers, Lawrence H. "Tax Reform and Corporate
    Investment: A Microeconomic Simulation Study." In Martin Feldstein
    (ed.), Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Seltzer, L,H. A Financial History of the American Automobile Industry.
    Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1928.

Shoven, John B.  "Tax Consequences of Share Repurchases." En Lawrence H.
    Summers (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987.

Srini Vasan, Philip Vijay. Credit Rationing and Corporate Investment.
    Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University, October 1986.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Weiss, Andrew. "Credit Rationing in Markets
    with Imperfect Information." American Economic Review 71 (June
    1981): 393—410.

Summers, Lawrence H.  "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q—Theory
    Approach." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1981: 1: 67—127.

Tobin, James. "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory."
    Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 1 (February 1969): 15—29.
                                  45




Treadway, Arthur B. "On Rational Enterpreneurial Behavior and the
    Demand for Investment." Review of Economic Studies 36 (1969):
    227—239.

von Purstenberg, George N. "Corporate Investment: Does Market
    Valuation Matter in the Aggregate?" Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity 1977:2: 341—397.

Wildasin, David E. "The q Theory of Investment With Many Capital
    Goods." American Economic Review 74 (March 1984): 203—210.

Zeldes, Stephen P. "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
    Investigation." Working Paper No. 24—85, Rodney L. White Center for
    Research, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, November 1985.
                                APPENDIX A


            Asyinetric Information and the Differential Cost of
                   Internal and External Equity Finance
     To motivate the lemons discount described in the   text, consider the
following   example adapted from Myers and Majluf (1984). Suppose a new

industry has two types of firms, "good" firms (type C) and "lemons"

(type L). Let good firms account for a fraction p of the firms, with

the fraction i—p being lemons. Gross returns from assets in place are

given by G and L' respectively, while gross returns from new

investment opportunities are given by Y and
                                              L' respectively.       The net

return on new investment by lemons must clearly be bounded from below by

the risk—free return, because managers of lemons can always invest new

funds in riskiess assets.

     Managers of lemons will always attempt to issue new shares.

Managers of good firms, however, will issue shares and undertake the new

investment project only under certain conditions. Provided that the

market for new share issues does not collapse completely because of the

lemons problem, the market value of either firm type would equal



       =
           'G +      +         +


Good firms are undervalued here, because V is less than     +
                                                                Y,   their

ultimate value if they make the new investment. However, managers know

that Y will be lost unless new shares are issued.
                                           A2



       When    will   good firms issue new shares? The division of market

value between old (V0) and new (7N) shareholders can be expressed as



        V0 =   (v/(v+I))       ÷ Y), and



        vN =   (I/(V+I))       +



respectively,         where I is the dollar value contributed by new equity

holders to finance the new project.

        While undertaking the project raises the market value of the fin

ex   post, the division of market value will be in the interest of

existing shareholders, only if



(Al)           (V/(V+Ifl(YG +        >     , or   (t/(v+I)) G C   (V/(V+I))   Y

That is, making the new investment is in the interest of existing

shareholders only if the share of existing assets going to new

shareholders is less than or equal to the share of the value of the new

 investment going to existing shareholders.

        Expression (Al) can be rewritten as the "breakeven" marginal q

 value required by new projects. Algebraic manipulation of (Al) yields:



 (A2)           Y/I ) YGIV
                                         A3


The left—hand side of (A2) is the fir&s marginal q on a new

 investment. If I is small relative to V, the right—hand side of (A2) is

approximately:




       YG/V     qG/q


where qC is the true value of good firms and         is the weighted average

value of good firms and lemons. The lemons premium——cl——is equal to

(qG/ ) — 1.

       A simple example may help to clarify the issues.        Suppose that p =
1/4,   (1 —   p) = 3/4, Y = $500,   h   = $50 and the replacement cost of the

capital stock equals $100. (This implies a Tobin's q of 5 for good

firms and 1/2 for lemons.) In addition, suppose that a new investment

opportunity will yield         $100 and       = $50 and that I =
                                                                   $50; that
is, for good firing, marginal q is 2.

       If good firms undertake the new investment opportunity, V will

increase from $500 to $600. However, this will not be in the best

interest of existing shareholders, because V°         $490 and     = $110.

That is, new investors demand a lemons premium of ($110—$50)/$50 = 1.2

This is the value denoted by Q in the text. The investment will not be

undertaken because its marginal q is less than 1412.
                               APPENDIX B


                    Variables Used   in    Ejipirical Work

                                                                      1969
We use annual data from Value Line sources covering the period from
to 1984.



Market Value of Equity (V). The value of common stock at the beginning

of the year is the average price over the last fiscal quarter of the

previous year times the number of shares outstanding at the end of the

previous fiscal year. For the preferred stock, we compute the market

value by dividing preferred dividends by the preferred stock yield from

Standard and Poor's.



Market Value of Debt (B). We use the book value of debt. For

discussion of conversions of book value to market value, see Brainard,

Shoven, and Weiss (1980) and Salinger and Summers (1983).



Replacement Value of the Capital Stock (K). Kt represents the capital

stock at the beginning of period t. The replacement value of property,

plant, and equipment is estimated from book values using a method

similar to Salinger and Summers (1983). We set the initial value of K

 to the book value of gross plant for the first year the firm appers on

 the Value Line database. The capital stock is then defined iteratively

 as



                                      B1
                                            112




           {I ÷                    Kt_ij x (1—1/LIFE).



where P is the implicit price deflator for fixed non—residential

 investment, 1 is the firm's capital spending, and LIFE is the average

 service life implicit in the firm's book depreciation costs (see

Salinger and Summers, 1983). The final term is based on the assumption

that economic depreciation is single—declining balance.   Our results

were not changed substantially when we assumed double—declining balance

economic depreciation or when the initial value of K was set equal too

the firm's net plant. For mature firms, the starting point for this

procedure generally stretched back to the late 1950g. For newer firms,

the initial book value of their capital stock probably is a good

estimate of its replacement cost. Thus, the capital stock estimates

should exhibit little inflationary bias for our sample that begins in

1969.




Tax Parameters for Q. As in Salinger and Summers (1983), we estimate

values for X1 and z, assuming that Ci) tax policy parameters are assumed

to remain constant, and (ii) the sum of the required rates of return on

investment and expected inflation is equivalent to the nominal BAA bond

rate plus 0.06.

That is.



            =   r      1-6
                    z [-j--—) Kt
                                              83


                                                                          of
where 71   represents inflation and Kt is the nominal replacement value
the capital stock, and



            tz =r(
                             1—c




Tax depreciation is assumed to be double—declining balance at rate

6 =   2/LIFE.    The average effective tax rate on dividends (0) is taken

from Feldstein and Jun (1986). We assume that the effective tax rate

applicable to non—dividend cash flows over the period was 5 percent (see

Protopapadakis, 1983; and Shoven, 1986). The corporate tax rate T was

set at the statutory maximum marginal rate.



Market value of inventories (N). Since inventories are included in the

market valuation of the firm, but not in the replacement cost of the

 fixed capital stock, we subtract N from the market value of the firm.

 There was no substantial difference in the results when N was instead

 added to the replacement cost of the firm's capital stock.     Inventories

 for each firm are converted from book value to market value using the

 procedure outlined in Salinger and Summers (1983) and Value Line data

 concerning whether the firm uses LIFO or FIFO methods of inventory

 accounting.
                                       B4


Investint Tax Credit (k). Information on legislated values of the

investment tax credit was taken from the Washington University Macro

Model.   Information on the mix    between   equipment and structures was
taken from aggregate data.



Cash flow (cr).    Our cash flow variable is taken from the Value Line

database.




Q Definitions. Using these components, we have constructed three Q

measures:



Tobin's q = (V+B—N)/K;



                               V   +         — N
Tax—Adjusted        (1ftY1 [                       —
                                       K               (1—krz)J   ; and
(No Dividends)



Tax—Adjusted Q =    (1-r     11c (.!j) +           — (1—k—rz)}
(Dividends Paid)
