NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF TRADE ON INEQUALITY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Nina Pavcnik
Working Paper 23878
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23878

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

This paper was presented at “Fostering a Dynamic Global Economy,” a symposium sponsored by
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, on August 24-26, 2017. I
thank Eric Edmonds, Penny Goldberg, Doug Irwin, Brian McCaig, and Bob Staiger for comments
and collaboration on these topics. I thank Brian Kovak and Rafael Dix-Carneiro for comments
and data for several figures. I thank my discussant David Dorn and conference participants for
comments on my presentation. Christine Dong, James Adams, and Hung Nguyen provided
excellent research assistance. Address: Department of Economics, Dartmouth College, 6106
Rockefeller Hall, Hanover, NH 03755. Email: nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Trade on Inequality in Developing Countries
Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 23878
September 2017
JEL No. F1,F13,F14,F16,J2,J46,O17,O24
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses the current state of evidence on how international trade shapes inequality and
poverty through its influence on earnings and employment opportunities. While the focus is
mainly on developing countries, in part because we have more evidence in that context, the
discussion draws parallels to the empirical evidence from developed countries. The paper also
discusses perceptions about international trade in over 40 countries at different levels of
development, including perceptions on trade’s overall benefits for the economy, trade’s effect on
the livelihood of workers through wages and jobs, and trade’s contribution to inequality. The
paper concludes with a survey of evidence on several policies that could mitigate the adverse
effects of import competition.

Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu

I. Introduction
“There is a real invasion of imported products, most of them coming from China. The
consequence is that we are transferring thousands of jobs abroad.”
Such quotes pervade the discussion of international trade in the United States. Yet this
particular quote continues: “Jobs that should be offered to Brazilians are being delivered on a tray to
the Chinese, Koreans, Indians, etc ...” It was voiced by the President of the association of Brazilian
capital goods producers. 1
Over the past four decades, developing countries have implemented large scale trade
liberalizations and become integrated into the global trade system, now accounting for over 40
percent of world trade (WTO 2016). Increased international trade has been widely presumed to
make households in developing countries better off; and much of the reduction in poverty in
developing countries, especially India and China, has been attributed (sometimes loosely) to their
more rapid growth as a result of trade.
When set against the stagnant real income growth and rising inequality in developed
countries, the contrast has led to the perception, at least in developed countries, that developing
countries are on “the winning side” of trade. This belief has fueled the current backlash against
international trade in the United States and parts of Europe. 2 This view has some basis in fact:
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016) have established that import
competition from China contributed to substantial job loss in U.S. manufacturing in the 1990s and
2000s, jobs once considered the entry ticket to the U.S. middle class. This has given credibility to the
charge that increased trade has been a zero-sum game: developing countries are winners and
developed countries are losers, and the higher incomes earned by workers in developing countries
have come at the expense of workers in the advanced economies.
And yet discussions about “winners” in the developing countries and “losers” in the
developed countries miss the point that international trade generates winners and losers within both
sets of countries alike, at least in the short term. Indeed, as the quote from the Brazilian capital
goods association illustrates, similar claims about losing from trade are made by developing
countries as well.
http://www.abimaq.org.br/site.aspx/Imprensa-Palavra-Presidente.
This sentiment, for example, surrounds the discussion of an influential 2016 book by Branko Milanovic, which
documented the large income gains of individuals in countries like China and India––and the relative declines in real
income for individuals in the middle classes of advanced economies––between 1988 and 2008.

1
2

2

This should not come as a surprise. Most economic models of international trade, even the
ones without any frictions in labor or credit markets such as the Hecksher-Ohlin model, predict that
changes in income distribution come with changes in prices brought about by trade. International
trade, just like technological progress, domestic competition and shifts in consumer tastes,
reallocates resources within a country, and both destroys and creates jobs, with implications for
income distribution. Although the aggregate benefits of trade for a country are often stressed, trade
economists also emphasize that governments can design compensation schemes so that the winners
compensate those hurt by trade and everybody can be made better off. Over the long run, we hope
that international trade fuels aggregate growth and that the benefits of growth are shared with the
less fortunate within the society. Of course, compensating the losers does not always happen in
practice.
The dramatic trade liberalizations implemented by developing countries or by their trading
partners since the 1980s have provided an unprecedented opportunity to learn about the effects of
trade on growth, inequality, and poverty in developing countries (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007a,
2016). Over the past 25 years, economists have accumulated substantial evidence on the effects of
trade in developing countries by looking at the key mechanisms through which international trade
shapes earnings and employment opportunities in a country. Guided by predictions of economic
theory, these studies analyzed detailed micro survey data of firms, individuals, and households from
before, during, and after the abovementioned international trade shocks to uncover the channels
through which trade influenced individual earnings and employment. Policy changes ranged from
import liberalization to increased access to export markets, providing settings to study how
increased trade —through exporting and importing—has shaped earnings and employment in
developing countries.
This paper assesses the current state of this evidence and highlights its implications. While
the focus is mainly on developing countries, in part because we have more evidence in that context,
the discussion draws parallels to developed countries. Some key findings emerge across several
developing countries, and some of these are also seen in developed countries.
Frictions that impede workers from moving across industries, firms, or locations are a
continuing theme in the developing country context, shaping trade’s unequal impact. Consequently,
trade influences worker earnings through several factors: industry affiliation, firm affiliation, and
location of residence all play a role in shaping trade’s impact on inequality. Individual demographic

3

characteristics––especially age and education––also play a role, in part because younger and more
educated individuals tend to more easily adjust to changes in trade.
Effects of trade on earnings are geographically concentrated and unequal within a country,
depending on the region’s exposure to import and export shocks. Why are the effects of trade
concentrated in local labor markets? Part of the answer is low and imperfect inter-regional worker
mobility, especially in the short run after large adverse trade shocks.
Overall, the effects of trade on poverty and earnings inequality, through earning and
employment, are context specific. They depend on the nature of trade policy changes or trade
patterns and the mechanisms involved; on the mobility of workers and capital across firms,
industries, and geographic locations; and the position of affected individuals in the income
distribution of a country. As the reforms in India, Vietnam, China, and Brazil illustrate, focusing on
how workers are affected by trade beyond formal manufacturing—including in agriculture, services,
and the informal sector—is key in this assessment for developing countries.
Over the long run, the negative local effects are presumed to dissipate over time, as workers
adjust to the trade shock. But how long does this adjustment take? Evidence is just starting to
emerge. In Brazil, the unequal adverse effects of trade on local labor markets persist, and are
magnified in the long run, up to 20 years after import liberalization. Lack of inter-regional mobility,
local agglomeration forces, and slow adjustment of capital explain why negative regional effects on
earnings are amplified in the long-term trends (Dix-Carneiro and Kovak forthcoming). The evidence
for workers affected by China’s import competition in the U.S. also points to long-run persistence of
shocks (Autor, Dorn, Hanson, Song 2014).
Overall, while trade contributes to earnings inequality within a country, the academic
literature has concluded that it is not its main driver (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007a, Helpman 2016).
In general, changes in a country’s earnings inequality are likely not driven by a single factor, and in
developing countries the relationship between trade and technology is highly intertwined. However,
trade’s adverse effects appear to be highly geographically concentrated and long-lasting in
developing and developed countries alike.
The concentrated adverse effects of trade on adult local labor markets spill over into worse
educational outcomes for children in affected families, increased crime rates and worse health
outcomes in affected communities, and lower provision of local public goods. While there are few
studies of the effectiveness of the social safety net and other policies aimed at mitigating such
adverse effects, the existing evidence is not encouraging.
4

The paper proceeds as follows. Section II documents increased international integration of
developing countries over the past four decades, noting that large-scale trade policy changes
implemented by these countries and their trading partners take a variety of forms. Some focused on
reductions in import barriers, while others lowered costs of accessing export markets, improving our
understanding of how importing and exporting shapes earnings and employment opportunities in
developing countries. Against this background, most recent studies in developed countries focus on
importing shocks. This needs to be kept in mind when assessing the evidence.
Section III focuses on perceptions about international trade across countries. Using a survey
of more than 40 countries, I show that the majority of the public in low- and high-income countries
accept that trade has overall benefits for the economy, even though people in low-income countries
view trade as more beneficial for their livelihoods in their own country (in terms of higher wages and
job creation) than do people in high-income countries. Yet, the perceptions of trade’s benefits for
wages and job creation in one’s own country also vary across developing countries, with trade being
perceived as more beneficial for workers in countries such as Vietnam and China compared to those
in Colombia and Brazil.
I focus on the effects of trade through earnings and employment opportunities because they
are likely the most relevant for majority of individuals in developing (and developed countries) alike,
especially those living below or close to the poverty line. Section IV sketches out how our thinking
on trade and inequality has evolved and discusses the unequal effects of trade on income and
employment through industry and firm affiliation. The discussion highlights the challenges of
examining trade’s effects on poverty and inequality in a developing country context using only data
from formal manufacturing. Section V focuses on the effects of trade on local labor markets and
shows that the effects of trade on earnings are geographically concentrated, in part due to low and
imperfect inter-regional worker mobility. Reasons behind low mobility are explored. These findings
suggest that the effects of trade on poverty and inequality are context specific.
Section VI examines the persistence of adverse local labor market effects up to 20 years after
the onset of a trade shock, highlighting the experience of Brazil and the U.S. It also shows that
trade’s impact on the local labor market can have longer-lasting effects through children’s schooling.
Section VII discusses several policies that could at least in principle help mitigate the unequal effects
of trade, including active labor market policies, and concludes.

5

II. Setting the Stage: Four Decades of Global Integration
During the past four decades, developing countries became increasingly integrated into the
global economy, accounting for an increasing share of global trade. Figure 1 plots the share of the
world’s exports of goods and services that is accounted for by low-income, lower middle-income,
upper middle-income, and high-income countries in 1985, 1995, 2005, and 2015, based on data from
World Development Indicators. Each country is classified into a time-invariant income grouping
based on its income classification by the World Bank in 1987. 3 The low-income group includes
countries such as China, India, Nepal, Vietnam, and Kenya. The lower middle-income group
includes Chile, Colombia, and Mexico. The upper middle-income group includes countries such as
Argentina, Brazil, and Korea. The figure then tracks the share of world’s exports by these groups
over time.
Overall, the share of world exports accounted for by non-high-income countries nearly
doubled, rising from 20 percent in 1985 to 39 percent in 2015. Much of this increase was driven by
the increasing share of the world exports represented by low- and lower middle-countries, which
together accounted for 12 percent of world exports in 1985, 14 percent in 1995, 21 percent in 2005,
and 29 percent in 2015. Of this increase, low-income countries, which included China and India,
experienced the largest gains: from 3.8 percent in 1985 to 17 percent in 2015––the majority of which
is accounted for by China. China’s share of the world exports grew from 1.3 percent in 1985, to 2.2
percent in 1995, 6.2 percent in 2005, and 12 percent in 2015.
Not only do developing countries account for a larger share of the world trade, but they are
also more dependent on international trade than they were before, as demonstrated by the share of
imports or exports in a country’s GDP (Hanson 2012). For example, between 1985 and 2015,
India’s exports as a share of its GDP increased from 5 to 20 percent, and its import share increased
from 8 to 22 percent. 4 China’s export share rose from 8 to 22 percent and import share from 12 to
18 percent. Mexico’s exports as a share of its GDP increased from 15 percent to 35 percent, and the
See the data appendix for variable definitions and the list of countries classified in each category. The exact shares
depend on the income classification. An alternative classification that compares trade shares of OECD to non-OECD
members, based on membership definition in 1980, suggest that the share of world exports accounted by countries that
were not OECD member in 1980 rose from 25% to 47% between 1985 and 2015. An alternative classification starts in
1992 and yield similar trends (see Hanson 2012).
4 Source: World Development Indicators.
3

6

share of its imports climbed from 10 percent to 37 percent. During the same period, the rise in
trade’s share in Brazil was tamer. The share of Brazil’s exports in its GDP was about 12 percent in
both time periods, and its imports increased from 7 percent to 14 percent. Of course, focusing on
the end points obscures the fluctuations in trade’s share of GDP during these four decades,
especially the decline in the past decade. But the message is clear: developing countries are more
globally integrated today than they were in early 1980s.
II.A. Trade Liberalizations
Income growth, declines in transportation costs, and declines in trade policy barriers all
contribute to growth in international trade (Baier and Bergstrand 2001). As discussed in detail in
Goldberg and Pavcnik (2016), most high-income countries, including the United States, the United
Kingdom, other countries in Western Europe, and Japan, reduced their trade barriers through their
participation in the GATT and WTO negotiations from 1947 to 1994. These negotiations reduced
average import tariffs in these countries from about 22 percent before 1947 to 3.1 percent in 1999
(Bown and Crowley 2016). By the 1980s, when developing countries started entering world markets,
average import tariffs were relatively low in developed countries––less than 5 percent. 5
High-income countries at times replaced lower import tariffs with non-tariff barriers to
trade, most notably in textiles and apparel through the Multi-Fibre Arrangement and relied on
subsidies in agriculture. They also participated in preferential trade arrangements. However, from the
perspective of developed countries, many of these trade agreements led to very small changes in
import tariffs, in part because tariffs were reduced in earlier WTO rounds and focused on reductions
in non-tariff barriers or behind the border measures, which are substantially more difficult to
measure, at least with aggregate or economy-wide data. In some cases, these trade agreements
reduced the uncertainty about trade policy (Handley 2014, Handley and Limao 2014, Pierce and
Schott 2016). Lower uncertainty about trade policy might help explain why trade agreements such as
the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) and the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) that did not substantially change trade policy levels might nonetheless have
large effects on economic outcomes in high-income countries.
Juxtapose this with the experience of developing countries, which did not lower their
barriers in the earlier rounds of GATT or WTO negotiations. Many of these countries implemented
Bown and Crowley (2016) provide detailed discussion of trade policy landscape in high and low income countries since
the mid-1940s.

5

7

large-scale, economy-wide unilateral trade liberalization episodes, which reduced barriers on imports.
They included Chile in the 1970s, several other countries in Latin America, including Colombia and
Brazil in the 1980s and early 1990s, and India’s drastic trade liberalization initiated in 1991. Others,
like Mexico in 1986, joined the GATT. These reforms led to reductions in import tariffs and
declines in non-tariff barriers to trade. For example, India’s reform reduced average import tariffs
from over 80 percent in 1987 to about 30 percent in 1997 and eliminated many import licenses.
Probably the most noted trade policy event in the past two decades was China’s entry into the World
Trade Organization in 2001. As a result, average import tariffs are now substantially lower in a large
set of developing countries than they were in early 1990s (Bown and Crowley 2016).
Developing countries also created preferential regional agreements among each other such as
the MERCOSUR. Most recently, developing countries also gained market access to high-income
countries––for example, via the dismantling of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement after the completion of
the Uruguay Round, accession to the European Union, or bilateral trade agreements such as the
U.S.–Vietnam bilateral trade agreement in 2001.
Many of these reforms in developing countries provided excellent settings from which to
learn about the channels through which international trade shapes growth, inequality, and poverty in
a country. The large magnitudes and other features of policy changes help identify the effects of
trade policy from other factors influencing growth, poverty, and inequality (see Goldberg and
Pavcnik 2016 for in depth discussion). In addition, the nature of trade policy changes varied across
these reforms. Some reforms focused on reduction in domestic import tariffs (which exposed
domestic producers to import competition and gave them access to cheaper and a greater variety of
production inputs). Other reforms primarily lowered costs of accessing export markets, in high and
lower income trading partners (which provided domestic producers with new export opportunities).
Yet others simultaneously lowered import tariffs in domestic and foreign markets. This has helped
us understand how importing and exporting shapes inequality and poverty in developing countries.
The role of international trade was more difficult to separate from the role of technology
and other factors shaping employment, inequality and polarization of labor markets in advanced
countries, in part because trade barriers (at least the ones that we can measure well) were already
low. The emergence of China has therefore provided, in the words of Autor, Dorn, and Hanson
(2016) “a rare opportunity for studying the impact of a large trade shock on labor markets in
developed economies.” Discussion of Figure 1 illustrates that China accounts for the majority of the
growth in the share of world exports from low-income countries from 1985 to 2015. Studies
8

attribute much of the increased exports of China to China’s internal policy reforms that unleashed
its comparative advantage in manufacturing and increased its productivity (Autor, Dorn, and
Hanson 2016). From the perspective of the U.S., China’s joining of the WTO in 2001 also reduced
uncertainty about trade policy, at least vis-à-vis the United States (Handley and Limao forthcoming,
Pierce and Schott 2016). Most of this evidence relies on the effects that operate through import
competition (or input-output linkages) rather than exporting. This needs to be kept in mind when
assessing the evidence.
China’s rise has also influenced international trade and the domestic economies of
developing countries. For example, China’s domestic growth has increased the demand for
commodities, influencing international trade in many commodity rich developing countries,
including Brazil (Hanson 2012, Costa, Garred, Pessoa 2016). At the same time, China’s
manufacturing products increased import competition for products made by other developing
countries, including Mexico, Brazil and Peru, both in outside markets such as the U.S. and in their
own domestic markets (Schott 2003, Utar and Ruiz 2013, Medina 2017, Costa, Garred, Pessoa
2016). Consequently, China’s rise also provides an opportunity to study the distributional
consequences of trade among developing countries.
III. Perceptions about the Consequences of International Trade Vary across Countries
The backlash against international trade has recently received much public attention in highincome economies such as the U.S. and U.K. One of the key developments over the past four
decades is that many developing countries are substantially more integrated into the global economy
(Figure 1). This raises the question of how public support for international trade––and the public
perception of its effects––varies across countries at different levels of development. I use data from
the PEW Global Attitudes survey to more systematically document perceptions of individuals about
the impact of trade on a country as a whole, and on earnings and employment opportunities across
countries at various stages of development over the past 15 years. The survey includes more than 40
countries with incomes per capita ranging from $1,000 to $50,000 (PPP, constant 2011$) and
includes more detailed questions about international trade in 2002 and 2014. 6

Pew conducts these surveys at least annually since 2001. See data appendix for details. Surveys in 2002, 2007/08, and
2014 contain more detailed questions about international trade. The analysis focuses on years outside of the 2007-08
crisis.

6

9

The majority of individuals in most countries accept that trade has overall benefits for the
economy, and the perceptions of trade’s benefits do not appear to vary systematically with a
country’s income level. The survey asked a general question: “What do you think about the growing
trade and business ties between (survey country) and other countries––do you think it is a very good
thing, somewhat good, somewhat bad or a very bad thing for our country?” Figure 2 plots the
percent of individuals that say trade is very good or somewhat good (labeled as “good”) for a
country against a country’s income per capita and the best fit line. 7 Panels A and B of the figure
focus on responses in 2002 and 2014, respectively. The figures single out the responses for a handful
of countries that will be the focus of more a detailed discussion later on in the paper.
More than half of the individuals in all surveyed countries said that trade was good. These
responses are in line with economists’ view that trade is in general beneficial for a country. There
does not appear to be a strong relationship between income per capita and trade favorability. 8
Another trend that emerges from Figure 2 is that between 2002 and 2014, the world has become
more critical of trade, with the share of individuals perceiving trade as good in an average country
dropping. There were fewer lower-income countries where trade was viewed favorably by more than
90 percent of individuals in 2014. We also observe a notable drop in the perception of trade’s
favorability in the U.S.: while almost 80 percent of Americans said trade was good for the U.S. in
2002, less than 70 percent thought so in 2014. But there are also countries, such as Argentina, where
trade was perceived as more beneficial in 2014 than in 2002. Overall, the responses to the Pew
survey suggest that despite the current backlash against trade, the majority of the public in low- and
high-income countries do not doubt trade’s overall benefits to the economy.
The perceptions about the benefits and costs of trade vary more widely across high- and
low-income countries when it comes to trade’s effects on the livelihoods of workers through wages
and jobs. The public believes trade has an impact on worker livelihood through wages and jobs, but
these beliefs vary across countries at different levels of income. Individuals in lower-income
countries tend to view international trade as more beneficial for job creation and wages than those in
higher income countries. The survey asks the question “Does trade with other countries lead to an
increase in the wages of (survey country) workers, a decrease in wages, or does it not make a
7The

questionnaire also allows a “don’t know/refused” option for respondents. However, the relationship between
percent of individuals that say trade is bad for a country against a country’s income per capita yields findings consistent
with those reported in Figure 2. I therefore focus the discussion only on responses about “trade is good.”
8 However, there are some clear outliers in 2002 among lower income countries, most notably Egypt, Jordan, and
Argentina, where the effects of trade on the country in question are perceived unfavorably. Argentina, for example,
experienced a crisis in 2001.

10

difference?” Along the same line, the survey asks the question “Does trade with other countries lead
to job creation in (survey country), job losses, or does it not make a difference?”
Figure 3 includes two parts. The top part plots the percentage that believes that trade
decreases domestic wages (left panel) and increases domestic wages (right panel) against a country’s
income. Perceptions that trade lowers wages increase with a country’s income, while perceptions
that trade increases wages decline with a country’s income. The bottom part of the figure plots the
percentage of individuals in a country answering that trade destroys jobs (left panel) and creates jobs
(right panel) against a country’s income per capita. The responses across countries for jobs are
consistent with the responses about wages. Individuals in low-income countries are less likely to say
that trade destroys jobs than individuals in high-income countries, and more likely to say that trade
creates jobs than individuals in high-income countries. 9
These perceptions are related to trade’s distributional consequences, and these beliefs
influence the backlash against international trade. The China-U.S. comparisons yield one of the
more extreme differences in perceptions. Only 12 percent of individuals in China believe that trade
decreases wages and more than 61 percent believe that it increases wages; 11 percent believe that
trade destroys jobs, whereas 67 percent believe that it creates jobs. Juxtapose this with perceptions
of individuals in the U.S., where 45 percent believe that trade lowers wages and 17 percent of
individuals believe trade increases wages; while 50 percent say it destroys jobs and 20 percent say
that it creates jobs.
Large differences in perceptions between high- and low-income countries aside, the
perceptions of trade’s benefits for domestic wages and job creation also vary across developing
countries, with trade being perceived as more beneficial for workers in countries such as Vietnam
and China relative to workers in Colombia and Brazil. This illustrates heterogeneity in perceptions
about the impact of trade on worker livelihood among the developing countries. How has
international trade influenced the livelihoods of individuals in developing countries?
IV. The Effects of Trade on Employment and Earnings: Old Ideas and New Evidence
The common belief among academic economists and policy makers is that international
trade can best affect poverty via its impact on economic growth. Growth has lifted many individuals
Individuals in high-income countries are more likely to say that trade does not have an impact on wages and jobs than
individuals in low-income countries.

9

11

out of extreme poverty, and has contributed to the growing middle class in countries such as China
and India over the past four decades. But the effects of international trade on poverty and inequality
relative to other domestic reforms and developments that have boosted growth are harder to pin
down, and continue to be debated. 10 I will return to this issue in section V. The academic literature
has been more successful in uncovering the impact of international trade on inequality through its
impact on the relative prices of goods vis à vis the employment and earnings of workers, and on
their consumption patterns.
The discussion of the effects of international trade on inequality initially focused on the
mechanisms that operate in a simple version of the workhorse model of international trade, the
Hecksher-Ohlin Model, based on comparative advantage. As Krugman (1995) noted in his
discussion of the effects of growing international trade between the U.S. and low-wage countries:
“there is a way to think systematically about the effects of growing world trade: it is called general
equilibrium trade theory. Indeed, the hot current topic of newly-industrializing economies’ (NIE)
trade in manufactures is almost tailor-made for analysis using the techniques developed decades
ago…These are textbook models whose time has come.” Indeed, the discussion of trade patterns in
section II illustrated that the traditional models of comparative advantage have been useful for
explaining recent changes in trade patterns between developing and advanced economies and among
developing countries (Hanson 2012).
In a simple version of this textbook model, increased global integration of low-income
economies was expected not only to increase aggregate welfare through the usual gains from trade,
but also to reduce poverty and inequality in developing countries. Trade theory would suggest that
the effects of international trade when resources are fully mobile across industries depend on
workers’ characteristics such as education. Relative to richer economies, poor countries tend to be
relatively abundant in less-educated workers. With international integration, these countries become
more specialized in unskilled-labor-intensive industries, increasing the relative demand for less
educated workers. Trade is therefore predicted to increase the wages of less educated workers and
lower the real wage of educated workers in developing countries. These model-based predictions
were influential in the policy debates about liberalizing trade in developing countries in academia and
in institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

See Feyrer (2009), Estevaderodal and Taylor (2013) for evidence that trade increases aggregate income and growth.
The question then arises whether trade-induced growth is pro-poor.
10

12

When confronted with the data, these predictions found little support in developing
countries. Counter to the prediction, the earnings of better educated workers actually increased
relative to less educated workers in several developing countries that implemented large-scale trade
liberalizations during the late 1980s and early 1990s (see Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007a for a detailed
discussion of this literature). 11 In addition, the above framework assumes perfect mobility of
workers across industries. However, the evidence pointed to lack of mobility of workers across
industries in response to large trade shocks in developing countries, at least during the short and
medium run after trade reforms (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007a).
Indeed, frictions that impede workers from moving across industries, firms, or locations (see
section V) are a continuing theme in the developing country context, shaping trade’s unequal impact.
There are no easy answers to the questions “Is trade good for the poor?” and “Does trade increase
inequality?.” The answers are nuanced and context specific. They depend on the nature of trade
policy changes (or trade patterns) as well as the mechanisms involved; on the mobility of workers
and capital across firms, industries, and geographic locations; and on the position of affected
individuals in the income distribution of a country.
IV. A: Worker Industry Affiliation Plays a Role
The traditional production gains from trade occur when international trade reallocates
resources toward industries with comparative advantage, so that workers relocate from importcompeting to export-oriented industries. If workers cannot easily move across industries in response
to trade policy shocks because of the need for industry-specific skills or rigid labor markets, in the
short or medium run, industry affiliation can influence the effects of trade on workers’ earnings.
In fact, a large body of literature points to a lack of labor reallocation across industries in the
short-run aftermath of large-scale trade reforms in developing countries (see Goldberg and Pavcnik
2007a for a review). 12 In some cases, the responses to lower import tariffs then occurred through
relative wage adjustment. The loss of earnings could also be attributed to declines in rents shared
with workers in imperfectly competitive industries. In the case of Colombia, for example, earnings
losses due to lower industry wage premiums negatively affected less skilled workers in particular,
11 They study the effects of trade liberalizations in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong (the impact of
China’s opening), India, and Mexico.
12 This includes studies for Mexico (Revenga 1997, Hanson and Harrison 1999, and Feliciano 2001); Morocco (Currie
and Harrison 1997); Colombia (Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik 2004); and a large set of developing countries
(Wacziarg and Wallack 2004) and more recent work on India (Topalova 2010) and Vietnam (McCaig and Pavcnik 2014).

13

because tariff cuts were larger in more unskilled-labor intensive industries. But overall, import
liberalization played a relatively modest role, through this channel and others, in increasing
Colombia’s wage inequality between educated and less educated workers in the aftermath of the
country’s trade reforms (Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik 2004) and in influencing urban poverty
(Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007b). An important caveat is that because of data availability, most of the
above studies rely on data that is representative of workers in manufacturing formal firms above a
certain employment cut off or workers in urban areas (for example, the study for Colombia).
The findings from developing countries differ from those in studies on developed countries,
namely in the U.S., where employment in the 1970s and 1980s was more responsive to trade policy
shocks than were wages (Grossman 1986, Revenga 1992). Along similar lines, manufacturing
employment is reduced in the U.S. in response to increased low-wage import competition in the U.S.
during the 1990s (Bernard, Jensen, and Schott 2006, Pierce and Schott 2016), and in Canada in
response to increased competition from U.S. firms after the Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement
(CUSFTA) (Trefler 2004).
IV. B. Firm Affiliation Matters, as Does Worker Education
A worker’s employer or firm affiliation provides another mechanism that shapes how
international trade affects earnings and employment opportunities. Firms differ in their performance
within narrowly defined industries in developed and developing countries, and trade theory suggests
that initially better-performing firms are better positioned to withstand and adjust to increased
competition from imports, as well as to take advantage of new exporting opportunities (see surveys
by Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare 2010, De Loecker and Goldberg 2014, Melitz and Redding 2014).
The key message from this literature is that it matters what type of firm a worker works for
and how skilled the worker is. Better performing firms are more likely to survive the selection forces
of pro-competitive effects of import competition, as well as more likely to engage in international
trade, through exporting or importing of production inputs. Firm adjustment to international trade,
in turn, affects worker earnings opportunities. Trade leads to unequal effects on employment and
wages for workers across firms within an industry and for educated and less educated workers within
a firm. Because better performing firms tend to pay higher wages and trade further increases wages
in better performing firms, this increases inequality between workers across firms.
For example, evidence from Indonesia’s import tariff liberalization suggests that import
competition reduces wages of workers in firms that only sell domestically relative to more
14

productive, exporting firms. In addition, workers in firms that import intermediate inputs tend to
earn higher wages than workers in firms that only source inputs domestically (Amiti and Davis
2012). The declines in industry employment due to import competition should be particularly
concentrated in less productive firms. Studies from developing and developed countries, including
Brazil, the U.S., and Canada, find support for larger employment declines in less productive firms in
response to increased import competition or bilateral trade liberalization (Menezes-Filho and
Muendler 2011, Bernard, Jensen, and Schott 2006, Trefler 2004).
Exporting also increases wages of workers employed in initially high performing firms
relative to other workers. High performing firms are better positioned to take advantage of new
exporting activities than low-performing firms, and they share part of their revenue with workers. 13
Access to export markets also encourages more productive firms to innovate, adopt advanced
technology, or upgrade the quality of their products. Why? Exporting gives firms access to larger
markets, which makes innovation or technological adoption more profitable, especially for better
performing firms (Yeaple 2005, Bustos 2011a). Exporting to richer countries also gives firms access
to sophisticated consumers, encouraging product quality upgrading (Verhoogen 2008). 14 This
literature has used exporting shocks due to devaluation of domestic currency or trade agreements
such as MERCOSUR to examine these responses. Indeed, the adoption of new technology and
quality upgrading due to exporting is associated with increased earnings of individuals in affected
firms relative to other firms within an industry.
Exporting also increases the wage gap between more and less educated workers within firms.
This occurs because the adoption and operation of new technology and innovation by exporting
firms requires skill (Bustos 2011b). Likewise, the production and marketing of high-quality products
requires skilled workers or more effort from skilled workers, increasing the relative demand for
services of more skilled labor (Verhoogen 2008, Brambilla, Lederman and Porto 2012).
An advantage of these studies based on firm-level data is that they can simultaneously show
how firms are adjusting production and how this affects workers. The challenge, on the other hand,
is that workers that lose employment in this process are not observed after the loss of employment.
In order to understand the adjustment process to trade, it is key to know how easily these workers
gain employment elsewhere. We return to this issue in Sections V and VI, which focus on settings

This could reflect efficiency wages, fair wages, or profit sharing. See Helpman (2016) for review of theory literature.
Consumers in high-income countries are more quality-sensitive than consumers in developing country markets, so
that firms need to sell higher-quality products in richer markets.

13

14

15

that can capture these effects. In addition, because this evidence is based on datasets that only cover
formal manufacturing firms, these findings on inequality are only representative of workers
employed in the formal manufacturing sector. Even if we only focus on manufacturing, this means
that the data is representative of only 20 percent of manufacturing workers in India (Nataraj 2011),
42 percent in Vietnam (McCaig and Pavcnik 2015), and 70 percent of workers in Brazil (DixCarneiro and Kovak 2017). This raises the question of what types of workers are more likely to work
in the formal manufacturing sector. Evidence from many developing countries suggests that more
educated workers are more likely to select into this sector (see Goldberg and Pavcnik 2003 and
discussion of broader literature in McCaig and Pavcnik 2015). Another question that arises is
whether and how these exporting activities affect workers in the rest of the economy through
general equilibrium effects.
In fact, exporting can influence labor market outcomes of workers beyond those in the
formal manufacturing sector, at least in a small country such as Vietnam (see also related evidence
on China in Section V). An example from Vietnam’s experience after the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral
Trade Agreement illustrates how international trade can contribute to economic development by
promoting the reallocation of workers out of informal microenterprises to the formal sector. The
informal sector is important in low-income countries given that 70–80 percent of employment in
many low-income countries is in informal, family run microenterprises or farms (Gollin 2002,
Banerjee and Duflo 2007, La Porta and Shleifer 2014, Tybout 2000). In Vietnam, 85 percent of
workers economy-wide, and 66 percent of those in manufacturing, were employed in informal
microenterprises at the onset of the U.S.–Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement.
The primary policy change in this agreement was that the U.S. lowered taxes on Vietnamese
exports. When exporting requires fixed costs, the theory would suggest that lower exporting costs
benefit better performing firms, so that labor demand in the formal sector increases. In fact, in the
case of Vietnam, the removal of a product market distortion such as a tariff on exports, which had
been more binding for more productive firms, provided an impetus for the expansion of jobs in the
formal sector.
During this time period, the share of informal workers in Vietnam was declining, and trade
contributed to this process. Lower export costs were associated with the reallocation of workers
from microenterprises to the formal sector (McCaig and Pavcnik 2014). In a low-income country
setting such as Vietnam, working in a formal sector firm rather than a microenterprise changes the
way a worker is attached to the workforce. In Vietnam, workers in the formal sector earn higher
16

wages, are more likely to receive non-wage/salary payments, work longer hours, and are less likely to
hold multiple jobs. Not all workers were affected equally: individuals in areas of Vietnam closer to
seaports, younger cohorts, and the low and high educated were more likely to be reallocated. 15 ,16
This discussion illustrates that it is important to incorporate the informal sector in the
analysis. Indeed, labor reallocation across the formal and informal sectors provides a potentially
important margin of adjustment to trade reform in developing countries. This margin will also play a
role in long run adjustment to trade reform in local labor markets in Brazil (section VI).
V. The Focus on Local Labor Markets: The Effects of International Trade on Earnings and
Employment are Geographically Concentrated
International trade has unequal effects on the earnings of individuals residing in different
local labor markets. The economic activities of certain regions within countries are more closely
linked to international trade. Some regions have a high concentration of industries subject to import
competition, while others specialize in export-oriented industries or industries that are gaining
market access abroad. In this setting, nationally implemented trade policy (or other trade shocks) are
predicted to have different effects on wages across regional labor markets. Regional wage changes
reflect a weighted average of national price changes, with more weight in industries that use more
labor and have more elastic labor demand (Kovak 2013). A national trade-induced price change is
predicted to have a larger effect on wages in local labor markets where the affected industries
represent a higher share of total employment.
Why are the effects of trade concentrated only in local labor markets? Part of the answer is
low and imperfect inter-regional worker mobility, especially in the short run after large adverse trade
shocks. For example, less than 1 percent of rural individuals in India and less than 5 percent of
individuals in urban India moved across districts for employment purposes in the 1980s and 1990s. 17
Regions that are benefiting from trade and have increased employment opportunities observe
inflows of workers. For example, in Vietnam, provinces that were better positioned, because of their
Vietnam has higher education levels than other countries at similar levels of income (McCaig and Pavcnik 2017).
Formal sector activities required relatively low skill.
16 Over longer term, individuals in younger birth cohorts shift from the informal to the formal sector during a period of
fast growth in Vietnam from 1999-2009, but 70% of the decline occurs through between birth cohort changes. Older
cohorts that tend to work in the informal sector are replaced by younger workers that tend to work in the formal sector
(McCaig and Pavcnik 2015)
17These figures reflect permanent migration and are based on questions that compare the contemporaneous residence to
the residence 10 years ago.
15

17

existing industrial structure, to benefit from export opportunities receive more in-migrants than less
affected provinces (McCaig 2011). Over time, these movements presumably reduced some of the
initial inter-regional earnings inequalities induced by the trade agreement.
However, most studies that focus on import competition shocks find that even when there
are meaningful declines in trade protection for local industry, populations do not respond to these
adverse trade shocks by moving over time. This was the case in India, Brazil, and Mexico, 5–8 years
after the onset of reforms (Topalova 2010, Kovak 2013, Dix-Carneiro and Kovak forthcoming,
Chiquiar 2008). 18 The low degree of mobility out of labor markets with adverse labor demand
shocks is not unique to developing countries. The working age population did not respond to
increased Chinese import penetration in the U.S. regional labor markets during the 1990s and 2000s
(Autor, Dorn and Hanson 2013). More generally, low-skilled workers are much more likely to
continue to live in areas that face declines in labor demand in the U.S., despite lower wages and
employment opportunities (Notowidigdo 2013).
A key message from this literature is that trade policy has differential effects on the earnings
and other labor market outcomes of individuals across local labor markets, depending on the
region’s exposure to import and export shocks. Individuals in regions with a high concentration of
industries subject to import competition—or bigger tariff cuts— experience reduced earnings,
relative to individuals in less-exposed regions (Topalova 2007 and 2010 for India; Kovak 2013, DixCarneiro and Kovak forthcoming, Costa, Garred, and Pessoa 2016 for Brazil, Chiquiar 2008 for
Mexico). The finding is consistent with evidence on geographically concentrated negative labor
market effects of import competition in the U.S. (Autor, Dorn and Hanson 2013, McLaren and
Hakobyan 2016).
Along the same lines, individuals in regions with a high concentration of industries
benefiting from lower export costs or increased demand for their exports experience higher earnings
than individuals in less exposed regions (McCaig 2011 for Vietnam, Costa, Garred, and Pessoa 2016
for Brazil, Chiquiar 2008 for Mexico; Erten and Leight 2017 for China). The literature on developed
countries does not provide much evidence on the geographic concentration of the effects of
exporting. This in part reflects the lack of trade shocks that are large enough to identify these effects
in a large country such as the U.S. and does not necessarily mean that these effects do not exist.

18The

lack of spatial mobility in countries such as India and Brazil parallels the findings that trade reform did not affect
the structure of industry employment in several developing countries in the short run.

18

One important feature of the local labor market literature is that it relies on nationally
representative data of households, regardless of their employment status, and includes workers
employed in all sectors, including agriculture and services. This approach thus provides a more
representative picture of how trade shapes earnings opportunities in society. For example, as noted
in section IV, studies that focus on formal manufacturing alone would only cover 20 percent of
workers in manufacturing in India and 42 percent of manufacturing workers in Vietnam (and only
14 percent of workers economy-wide in 1999).
V.A. An Illustration: India and Vietnam
The studies from India and Vietnam illustrate how trade can either increase or decrease
poverty (in relative terms) within a country through the local labor market channel. These two
examples illustrate that the effects on poverty are context specific: they depend on the nature of
trade shocks, which determines the effects of trade on local product and labor market demand, and
the position of affected individuals in the income distribution of the country in question.
Consider the case of India, a country that accounted for a third of the world’s poor at the
onset of its 1991 large scale trade liberalization, studied by Topalova (2007, 2010). India unilaterally
implemented its 1991 trade reform, primarily reducing barriers such as import licenses and tariffs on
imports to India. The reduction in tariffs was large, as the average tariff dropped from more than 80
percent to about 30 percent by the late 1990s. National poverty in India had been declining since
1980s. However, households living in rural districts in India that were more exposed to reductions in
tariffs observed lower declines in poverty after the reform, as measured by the headcount ratio or
poverty gap, than households living in less exposed districts. Why? Increased import competition
reduced the demand for labor, so that the hard-hit districts experienced relative declines in
agricultural wages, and wages in industries with larger tariff cuts also declined. 19
Mobility across districts is particularly low for individuals living in the poorest households
(Figure 4, Topalova 2010). These households fared worst during trade reform. Consumption per
capita fell for families in the bottom 10th and 20th percentile of the consumption distribution in
hard-hit regions relative to families in less hard-hit regions. Consumption per capita was not affected
for richer families within the same district. In this case trade made poorer households in hard-hit

19The reform included large reductions in agricultural tariffs. Although quantity restrictions on agricultural products were
removed later on, 40 percent of agricultural products could be freely imported by 1998 (as compared to 7 percent in
1989 (Topalova 2007). The study relies on data from 1987/88 and 1999/00 NSS.

19

districts worse off, at least relative to richer households in their own district and relative to their
counterparts in less affected regions.
Consider now the relationship between trade and poverty in Vietnam, a country that
implemented a bilateral trade agreement with the U.S. in 2001, studied by McCaig (2011). In the
short run, the agreement primarily lowered U.S. import taxes on Vietnamese exports, so that the
costs of exporting fell. Vietnam is divided into provinces, and some provinces have a greater
concentration of industries that observed a decrease in export costs as a result of the agreement.
During this time period, poverty in Vietnam was declining. However, families living in provinces
that were more exposed to this positive export shock observed greater declines in poverty relative to
families in less exposed regions (McCaig 2011). Why? Greater demand for products produced in
Vietnam as a result of the agreement led to increased labor demand in these provinces, and higher
provincial wages. Wages increased, especially for less-educated workers, thus reducing poverty.
Because Vietnamese regions that benefited more from the trade shock were better off to begin with,
trade in this instance amplified regional inequalities. Better-off regions observe some in-migration.
Of course, we have to keep in mind that these effects are all relative because they compare
the effects of trade on poverty between regions more and less affected by trade. For example, in
India, aggregate poverty was declining, so to the extent that trade contributed to reduced poverty
through aggregate general equilibrium price effects or through its effect on aggregate growth, these
adverse effects in practice mean smaller gains. Because we have one observation per country,
without a model and additional assumptions, one cannot establish trade’s overall contribution to
poverty reduction.
V.B. From Agriculture to Manufacturing and Services: China’s Entry into the WTO
International trade can also contribute to economic development and poverty reduction if it
promotes structural change and the reallocation of workers from agriculture to manufacturing. This
is the usual story told for China, a country that often serves as a poster child for how trade can lift
people out of poverty through export-led growth. In fact, since the 1980s many individuals in China
moved from rural, agricultural areas to urban areas and gained jobs in manufacturing. This
relocation, combined with productivity growth, contributed to impressive declines in China’s
poverty. Several factors contributed to the productivity growth in manufacturing, including China’s
internal reforms with large investments in infrastructure, privatization, state-owned-enterprise
restructuring, but trade also played a role (Brandt et al. forthcoming). As noted in Section II, China’s
20

entry into the WTO granted the country a normal trading relationship with the U.S., reduced the
uncertainty about trade policy in a major export destination, and increased its exports to the U.S.
(Pierce and Schott 2016).
Indeed, trade contributed to the structural change and the reallocation of workers from
agriculture to manufacturing (Erten and Leight 2017). Chinese counties that were more exposed to
the policy change, because of their pre-existing industry structure, observed shrinking agricultural
employment and output as well as expanding employment and output in manufacturing and
services. Per capita (and total) GDP increased in these counties relative to less exposed counties
after the policy change. Inflows of FDI and export growth played important roles in this process.
As I noted in the introduction, much of the reduction in poverty in developing countries,
especially India and China, has been attributed (sometimes loosely) to their more rapid growth as a
result of trade. Indeed, the above evidence from Vietnam and China illustrates how export
opportunities helped lift households out of poverty through the labor market channel and structural
transformation, at least in relative terms. At the same time, evidence from India and Brazil illustrates
that individuals living in geographic areas more exposed to import competition were made worse off
from trade through the labor market channel, at least in relative terms. 20 In practice, trade affects
countries through both of these channels. Importantly, this local labor markets analysis cannot
identify the effects that trade might have on aggregate earnings/poverty through aggregate general
equilibrium price effects or through its effect on growth. Nonetheless, it shows high concentration
of the benefits and costs of trade.

V.C. Why Don’t People Move across Regions within a Country?
Low degree of inter-regional mobility out of labor markets with adverse labor demand
appears relevant in developing and developed country context to understand labor market responses
to trade. Why do people not move across regions within a country in response to negative earnings
shocks? This is an active ongoing agenda in economic research that has put forth several possible
explanations.
Moving is costly, and imperfect capital markets might preclude people from borrowing to
relocate. This might explain why the poor bear the brunt of the costs of lower protection in rural
20Studies

on Brazil focus on wages and do not directly consider poverty. In addition, because Brazilian regions more
exposed to its 1991 import reform were richer to begin with, trade actually reduced inter-regional inequality in Brazil.

21

India (Topalova 2010). The causes of mobility might not just be financial. In lower income
countries, with imperfect insurance markets and low-levels of public social safety nets, individuals
rely on their families and communities for help in times of crisis. For example, informal insurance
within castes in India generate a disincentive for individuals to move away or marry outside of caste
groups, and there is compelling evidence that this caste-based informal insurance contributes to why
families rarely move in India (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2016). Likewise, government restrictions on
mobility, such as the Hukou system in China, can play a role.
Workers that lose jobs in import-competing industries might not have the skills demanded in
industries and regions with expanding employment opportunities. Young (2013) argues that rural–
urban wage gaps mainly reflect differences in skills of workers living in rural and urban areas, and
differences in skill-intensity of production located in rural and urban areas, so that wage gaps do not
reflect frictions, but instead reflect labor sorting based on skills. In a trade context, Dix-Carneiro
(2014) finds large adjustment costs of switching across industrial sectors, particularly for less
educated and older individuals.
Individuals might not move because of match and search frictions in labor markets. It can be
hard for individuals to learn about opportunities for themselves in other locations. Several recent
randomized control trials examine the impact of making it easier for people to get jobs elsewhere.
For example, a recruitment campaign that provided information about job opportunities in business
process outsourcing in urban areas of India to young rural women led to increased mobility and
labor force participation (Jensen 2012).
Finally, housing costs might also play some role, potentially in explaining differences in
mobility across different types of workers. Evidence from the U.S. suggests that housing costs deter
the mobility of less-educated workers from regions facing negative labor demand shocks
(Notowidigdo 2013). Less-educated individuals are less likely to migrate out of U.S. regions that face
negative labor demand shocks than college-educated individuals, and earlier literature attributes this
to higher mobility costs for low-skilled workers (Topel 1986, Bound and Holzer 2000, Glaeser and
Gyourko 2005). Negative labor demand shocks reduce housing costs in local markets. Because lowskilled individuals spend a greater share of their budget on housing, they might be less likely to move
than higher-educated individuals (Notowidigdo 2013).
This discussion illustrates a variety of reasons—including education, information and
traditional institutions—for low mobility and demonstrates why the effects of trade on earnings
might be context specific.
22

VI. The Long-run Local Labor Market Effects of Trade
VI.A. The Local Labor Market Effects of Trade are Persistent, and Magnify over Time
The studies of the effects of trade on earnings or local labor markets discussed so far capture
the short- and medium-run effects of import competition about 5 to 9 years after the
implementation of trade reforms or local shocks. These negative local effects are presumed to
dissipate over time, as workers adjust to the trade shock, by changing the firm or industry of
employment toward areas less affected by import competition, or by moving out of locations
affected by increased import competition and toward locations with expanding sectors. But how
long is the long run? Do outcomes improve over the long run? How much mobility is there?
Evidence on this question is just starting to emerge: the negative effects of import
competition on earnings and employment through local labor markets persist, and are even
potentially magnified in the long run, in developing and developed country contexts.
Consider the case of Brazil, where the 1990–1995 unilateral trade liberalization lowered
domestic tariffs on imports. Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming) examine how formal sector
earnings and employment of workers adjust before, during, and 20 years after the onset of Brazilian
trade liberalization, through the exposure of local labor markets. 21 In addition, they also examine the
role of the informal sector in the adjustment process to trade. 22 In Brazil, 58% of workers overall
and 28% in manufacturing are informally employed at the onset of trade reform in 1991. This is to
my knowledge the only study in a developing country that has examined the long-run adjustment to
import competition.
The study finds that the adverse effects of lower import tariffs on formal earnings and
formal employment of workers are magnified over time. Figures 4a and 4b from their study illustrate
these findings. 23 The graph plots the estimated effects of the 1995–1990 decline in tariffs on log
regional earnings in the formal sector for each year from 1991 to 2010. The x-axis lists the years.
The vertical lines in the figures denote the onset of trade reform in 1991 and the end of policy
changes in 1995. The effect of tariffs on earnings and employment for the years after 1991 are
The analysis is based on match employee-employer data from RAIS.
A worker is considered informal in Brazil if he or she does not have a signed work card. This includes self-employed
and informal employees.
23 These figures and figures 5a-5c replicate figures from Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming). I thank the authors for
providing the results of the regression analysis underlying these graphs.
21
22

23

measured relative to 1991. Consistent with the estimates of the shorter and medium-run effects of
trade on earnings, the negative estimates suggest that individuals in regions exposed to greater tariff
cuts experienced larger reductions in earnings. What is perhaps more striking is that the magnitude
of the effects increases over time. Consider individuals in two regions, one that experienced a 10
percentage point greater decline in tariffs between 1990–1995 than the other region. The decline in
earnings was 5.29 percentage points greater in the more affected region that in the less affected
region between 1991 and 2000. The gap in earnings due to trade widened to almost 16 percentage
points by 2010.
Similarly, trade reform also led to larger declines in formal employment in regions more
exposed to trade policy changes relative to less exposed regions. As with earnings, the negative
effects on employment in the formal sector in more affected regions also widened over time until
about 15 years after the onset of reform, leveling off thereafter. Figure 4b, which has the same
structure as Figure 4a, illustrates the timing of effects of tariff declines on log regional employment.
Compare again the two regions from above, one that experienced a 10 percentage point greater
decline in tariffs than the other. The decline in employment was about 35 percentage points larger in
the region with a larger tariff cut than in the less affected region between 1991 and 2000, but the
effect grows to 46 percentage points by 2004 and levels off there until 2010. 24
These effects are contrary to the predictions of the conventional model of local labor
markets, which suggests that the earnings differentials should dissipate over time as workers relocate
across regions to arbitrage away regional earnings differences. Why are the effects of import
competition long lasting, in Brazil persisting 20 years after the onset of trade reform, and why do
they magnify over time?
For the case of Brazil, imperfect inter-regional mobility of workers and the dynamics of
labor demand amplify the effects of the initial trade shock over time (Dix-Carnerio and Kovak
forthcoming). As discussed earlier, inter-regional labor mobility is imperfect about 9 years after the
start of trade reform. What is perhaps more surprising is that regions exposed to larger tariff cuts do
not observe significant changes in working-age populations relative to less exposed regions, even 20
years after the start of the reform. This is in line with evidence from the U.S., where regions
negatively affected with increased import competition don’t observe significant changes in
population 10 years after the start of increased import competition (Autor, Dorn and Hanson 2013).

24

Earnings gaps persist, at 12.6 percentage points by 2010, even when one accounts for lower prices in these regions.

24

Why are the effects magnified over time? The dynamics in the demand for labor magnify the
short-run effects of trade on earnings and employment in the formal sector over time for two
reasons. First, there is evidence of agglomeration economies in formal employment at the regional
level, and agglomeration economies appear to magnify the initial negative local labor demand shock
to the traded sectors, but this process takes time (Kline and Moretti 2014, Dix-Carneiro and Kovak
forthcoming). Decreased formal employment in a region has negative spillovers for regional
productivity, and decreased productivity, in turn, further reduces earnings and demand for formal
employment.
Second, the slow adjustment of capital away from hard-hit regions also magnifies the effects
of the initial labor demand shock (Dix-Carneiro 2014). The new investment might respond more
quickly to liberalization in places with more economic activities relative to hard-hit regions, while
depreciation in hard-hit regions takes more time. These effects are illustrated in Figures 5a–c. The
effects of tariffs on the number of establishments, average establishment size, plant entry and exit,
and job creation and destruction in the Brazilian formal sector are consistent with this view. 25 Figure
5a plots the effects of the 1990–95 trade policy change on (log) the number of establishments and
average establishment size over time. As previously, all effects are measured relative to 1991. Trade
leads to a decline in the number of establishments and this effect increases over time, with no
offsetting increase in the average size of surviving establishments over time. Figure 5b separates the
total number of establishments to directly examine the effects of trade on cumulative establishment
entry and exit. One observes the decline in firm entry soon after the onset of the reform (reflecting
relative investment in more favorable affected places) and slower growth in firm exit (reflecting
relative capital depreciation in negatively affected places). Overall, these developments are reflected
in negative effects of import-competition on job creation, and positive effects on job destruction
that increase over time in hard-hit areas depicted in Figure 5c. Overall, this evidence is consistent
with slow capital stock adjustment, in that capital owners did not immediately downsize, but only
downsized or shut down local plants in response to import competition as capital depreciated.
VI.B. How Workers Adjust
How do Brazilian workers adjust, given that they do not migrate away? The informal sector
plays an important role, especially over the long run (Dix-Carneiro and Kovak 2017). Additional
analysis uses the Census of Population, which includes formal and informal workers and is available
25

Data constraints preclude a construction of direct measure of capital or investment at regional level.

25

every 10 years. About 10 years after the onset of reform, in 2000, not only is the growth in nonemployment higher in regions more hard hit by the 1991 trade reform, but informal employment
also grows more relative to less affected regions. Informal employment therefore in part buffered
the employment losses. Over 20 year, the informal sector fully absorbs the displaced workers. 20
years after the onset of reform, total regional employment growth since 1991 (formal and informal
combined) is similar across regions facing larger and smaller tariff reductions. However, the reform
had a negative long-run effect on regional earnings (formal+informal), although this effect was
smaller than when focusing on earnings in the formal sector alone, since lower tariffs are not
associated with significant changes in earnings in the informal sector. 26
The persistence of the effects of import competition on workers does not appear unique to
developing country labor markets, as persistent localized effects of trade have also been found in the
U.S. (Autor et. al. 2013, 2014, 2016), as well as in other developed countries. Individuals living in
commuting zones of the U.S. subject to greater exposure to import competition from China
observed a greater decline in manufacturing employment, lower earnings, and higher unemployment
than individuals living in areas less exposed to import competition. These employment losses are
consistent with firm-level evidence that U.S. firms in manufacturing industries more exposed to lowwage competition are more likely to exit and reduce employment (Bernard, Jensen and Schott 2006,
Pierce and Schott 2016) or, for that matter, with the declines in manufacturing employment in
Canada after the implementation of CUSFTA (Trefler 2004).
What is striking is the geographic concentration and persistence of the adverse effects of the
shocks and how workers in hard-hit regions adjust to the shock: workers do not move elsewhere,
and some of them, after prolonged unemployment, exit the labor force. A follow-up study on longterm workers paints an equally bleak picture (Autor et. al. 2014). Workers employed in industries
that were more exposed to Chinese competition in 1991 were more likely to face longer periods of
non-employment and have lower earnings, which the study attributes to a decline in industryspecific capital.
The concentrated effect of trade on local labor markets can have additional effects—beyond
their effects on adult labor market outcomes—that prolong their impact or amplify their effects.
Several studies have found evidence that trade might have negative spillovers, by increasing crime in
local labor markets relatively hard-hit by trade in developing and developed countries (Dix-Carneiro,
Dix-Carneiro and Kovak suggest that this could reflect increased demand by consumers in harder-hit areas for lowerquality goods, which tend to be produced by the informal sector.
26

26

Soares, and Ulyssea 2017, Feler and Senses forthcoming) and correlate with adult mortality in the
U.S. (Pierce and Schott 2017). Poorer health and greater crime in hard-hit areas might again imply
broader consequences for societies, further contributing to social tensions.
VI.C Next Generation: Trade’s Effect on Education and Child Labor
Trade’s impact on local labor market, even short-term ones, can have longer-lasting effects
because they influence a family’s investment decisions for children’s schooling.
Earning opportunities of families living in poverty influence their human capital decisions.
Consider the case of the geographically concentrated adverse effects of India’s import liberalization,
which led to increased poverty in harder-hit districts, discussed in section V.A. Edmonds, Pavcnik,
and Topalova (2009, 2010) show that primary school attendance for children ages 5–14 declined in
districts of India that were more hard-hit by India’s trade liberalization relative to less exposed
districts. Girls, in particular, were less likely to attend school, and these effects were particularly large
in districts with larger schooling costs. Interestingly, foregone household consumption due to
schooling costs appear to play a large role in this relationship and girls disproportionately bear the
burden of helping their families cope with poverty. These results are consistent with recent
experimental evidence that has also emphasized the importance of schooling costs in education
decisions.
The experience of India illustrates that the family as a whole is affected by trade adjustment,
and that the focus on adjustment assistance to adults alone might not be sufficient. In addition, the
children who were of school age when their communities were affected by trade reform bear the
consequences of lower school attendance throughout their lives. In particular, the primary schoolage children in rural districts of India had lower primary school completion rates and higher illiteracy
ten years after the onset of India’s trade reform relative to their peers in less exposed districts. Back
of the envelope calculations suggest that these children experience about 40 percent lower lifetime
consumption than children in communities that only benefit from the reform.
India’s example focuses on the effects of import tariff liberalization, which increased poverty
in hard-hit districts in India relative to less affected districts. Trade can also improve schooling or
reduce child labor if it increases the incomes of local poor families. For example, exporting
opportunities may increase the demand for products produced by relatively less educated workers,
including children. However, if most children work because of poor economic circumstances in
which their families live, increased export opportunities might reduce child labor by improving the
27

incomes of poor households. The income effect dominates for the case of Vietnam’s rice export
quota liberalization in the early 1990s (Edmonds and Pavcnik 2005). Because exporting increased
the standard of living among the poor farmers, child labor declined, even though demand for child
labor increased. Within a region, declines in child labor were particularly large in households that
were net rice producers prior to reform. It is important to note here that India’s and Vietnam’s
examples point to poverty as the main channel through which trade affects schooling and child
labor.
Trade can also improve schooling if it increases the returns to education, or brings jobs to
the community that require higher levels of education. For example, areas of India experienced an
inflow of IT service jobs in the first decade of this century. Multiple studies suggest that outsourcing
of IT services, such as call centers, to India benefited schooling of children in areas hosting these
centers relative to areas with lower exposure. For example, Oster and Steinberg (2013) find
increased schooling in areas of India where IT call centers were located. Information about
availability of these jobs plays a role in schooling decision. For example, a recruitment campaign in
rural villages that provided information about job opportunities in business process outsourcing in
urban areas of India to young rural women increased schooling of younger girls in these village
(Jensen 2012).
In the case of IT jobs outsourced to India, the new jobs required higher education than the
jobs otherwise available in the local labor market, so that the arrival of the jobs increased local
educational attainment. However, Mexican teens were less likely to complete high-school after the
arrival of maquiladora jobs to local labor markets, because these jobs required less education than
other available higher-paying local jobs and raised the opportunity cost of staying in school (Atkin
2016). 27
The above discussion highlights that there are several channels through which international
trade influences decisions of households to send children to school/work in poorer countries. As is
the case with adult labor markets, it demonstrates that the effects are geographically concentrated
and depend on the type of trade policy change and exact mechanisms involved, as well as on the
specific context in a country (or a region in a country).

VII. Concluding Thoughts
27

See Blanchard and Olney (2017) for the effect of international trade on schooling across countries.

28

The discussion in Sections IV-VI has highlighted several channels through which trade
shapes inequality and poverty. The answers to questions of whether trade benefits the poor or
increases inequality within a country are context specific. They depend on the nature of changes in
trade policy or patterns and the mechanisms involved; on the mobility of workers and capital across
firms, industries, and geographic locations; and on the position of affected individuals in the income
distribution of a country. The good news is that we now know more about the variety of channels
through which trade can affect poverty and inequality, and factors that impede individuals from
sharing more equally in benefits from trade. Indeed, the empirical and theoretical literature on trade
and inequality has come a long way, relative to using the simple Hecksher-Ohlin model for
predictions in the 1980s when developing countries started opening up. 28
While trade contributes to inequality within a country, the academic literature has concluded
that it is not its main driver (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007a, 2016, Helpman 2016). Indeed, the Pew
Global Survey suggests that the public does not perceive trade as the main culprit for inequality
between rich and poor within a country. Figure 6 plots the relationship between the percentage of
individuals in a country that blamed trade as the principal cause for inequality and the country’s
income per capita in 2014. 29 Individuals in none of the surveyed countries view trade as inequality’s
main driver. 30 Lower income countries, even though more favorable of trade’s benefits in general
and more likely to perceive trade as beneficial to worker livelihood in own country in Section III,
tend to view trade slightly more as the main driver of inequality than higher income countries.
In general, the effect of trade on income inequality might not yet be a first order concern for
developing countries, many of which have lifted a large share of their populations out of extreme
poverty over the past four decades. Likewise, most of these countries did not experience large

Consistent with the developments in empirical work, theory on the effects of trade on inequality is much more
nuanced (see Helpman 2016 for a recent review).
29 The question in the Pew Global Survey in 2014 asks: “In your opinion, which one of the following is the most
important reason for the gap between the rich and the poor in our country today?...trade and business ties between
countries, our government's economic policies, how much workers are paid, our educational system, our tax system, or
some people work harder than others?”
30 If respondents don’t blame trade, they tend to point to two other causes: domestic governmental policies, as well as
how much workers are paid (this second reason is more a symptom than a cause). As a result, I also examine the answer
to this question in 2002. In 2002, the survey asks about the direct role of trade rather than the role of multiple factors:
“Do you think this change in the gap between rich and poor people is largely because of the way the world has become
more connected or mostly for other reasons?” Note that the responses between the two surveys are not directly
comparable because of the changes in the exact wording of the question. Even in this case, with the exception of 3 cases
(Japan, Jordan and Egypt), most individuals don’t view trade as the main reason for inequality.
28

29

downturns in economic activities or quickly rebounded during the 2007–08 financial crisis, avoiding
the usual calls for protectionism that arise during economic downturns (Bagwell and Staiger 2003).
Although trade is not the primary contributor to changes in aggregate inequality, adverse
effects of import competition appear to be highly geographically concentrated and long-lasting, in
developing and developed countries. And they spill over to factors such as education of the next
generation, community crime, and adult health.
Despite the adverse distributional consequences of trade, resorting to protectionism is not a
solution. While it is true that the aggregate size of gains from trade from quantitative models
continues to be debated, these are very stylized models. 31 Empirical studies suggest that trade
increases aggregate income and growth (Feyrer 2009, Estevadeordal and Taylor 2013). Likewise, the
empirical literature on the effects of trade policy also consistently finds that international trade and
lower barriers to trade improve firm outcomes, such as productivity and innovation, that are
correlates of aggregate growth (see Goldberg and Pavcnik 2016). And the gains from trade are larger
in industry-specific studies that can capture the institutional nuances of a specific industry and nontariff barriers to trade (see Goldberg and Pavcnik 2016). Beyond that, protectionism too would
generate winners and losers.
How can we ensure equality of opportunity and broader sharing in gains from trade?
VII.A. Compensation
Although one could in principle design a compensation scheme so that winners share the
gains from trade with the losers, such schemes do not necessarily happen in practice. In an
influential book titled “Has Globalization Gone Too Far?,” Rodrik (1997) warned that governments
are not well equipped to mitigate the adverse shocks and uncertainty of globalization. The evidence
on how social transfers mitigate the effects of adverse trade shocks is scant.
Consider the use of social transfers in response to the China shock in the U.S. (Autor, et. al.
2013). Transfer payments increased in response to increased import competition, including
unemployment and trade adjustment assistance, disability benefits, retirement benefits, other
government income assistance, and medical benefits. But these income transfers offset only about
10 percent of the income loss for a household without children (Autor, et al. 2013, 2016).
This is to my knowledge the only study that directly examines the role of social transfers in
adjustment to trade. Several European countries have a more generous social safety net than the
31

Quantitative models suggest relatively small gains from trade (Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare 2014).

30

U.S. These countries also experienced increased imports from China, so they present good case
studies to compare with the experience in the U.S.
VII.B. Active Labor Market Policies
Possible ways to address the bleak employment opportunities of workers in areas hard-hit
with trade include retraining and other forms of active labor market programs. What has been tried
so far, mostly does not appear to work in developing and developed countries. A recent survey
systematically assesses evidence based on 24 randomized control trials that examine the effectiveness
of several types of active labor market programs across in over 10 developing countries and
concludes that “these programs have at best modest impact in most circumstances,” and points to
the high costs of some of the programs, especially vocational training (McKenzie 2017). The
evidence from developing countries is consistent with the general lack of effectiveness of active
labor market policies in developed countries (Crepon and van den Berg 2016).
Evidence is from recent randomized control trials in countries including Colombia, the
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Kenya, the Philippines, and India, which aimed to improve labor
market outcomes for low-income young and for unemployed people through three types of labor
market interventions. One set of interventions focused on vocational training, which aimed to
improve the technical skills of potential workers. Other programs provided employment subsidies to
the employers, which aimed to increase the demand for labor among employers by reducing costs to
the firms. A third type of program aimed to lower search frictions in the labor market, and improve
the matching of the needs of employers with workers, through the offering of public information
about jobs, skill certification, organization of job fairs, and transportation services. Economically,
the goal of these programs is to reduce frictions in the labor market, which could be large in some
settings.
An assessment of vocational training programs suggests that only 6 out of 9 studies found “a
significant impact on employment” and that the results across these programs suggest that “for
every 100 people offered vocational training, fewer than 3 will find a job they would not have
otherwise found.” Effects on earnings are also modest. McKenzie points out that this means a cost
of approximately $17,000–$60,000 per additional person employed (McKenzie 2017). Employment
subsidies were also not particularly effective, especially in cases where only firms had to register
workers formally, and even in the one study with positive effects, these effects were not long-lasting.
These are discouraging results given the high cost of vocational training and employment subsidies.
31

The costs of search and matching programs is substantially lower ($25 dollars per assisted
individual), but the survey notes that “only 1 out of 10 interventions finds a significant impact on
employment.”
The policies might not have been effective because places and sectors that were targeted by
the programs ultimately were not places that had a current demand for workers (McKenzie 2017).
Indeed, the one successful program was the recruitment campaign that provided information about
job opportunities in business process outsourcing in urban areas of India to young rural women
(Jensen 2012) discussed in Section V. Exploring ways to reduce the spatial mismatches might be
particularly relevant for the consequences of trade shocks, which are spatially concentrated.
VII.C. Provision of Public goods
Government could in principle help individuals and communities smooth these adverse
shocks, and more generally, invest in local infrastructure and the provision of public goods.
Consider the example of trade and schooling in India discussed in Section VI. Schooling costs might
make schooling expensive relative to other things that the poor household consumes. Consequently,
for the case of schooling cost in India, policies that reduce the cost of primary schooling can break
the relationship between poverty and schooling, helping children in families living in poverty break
out of the poverty cycle.
Of course, government’s ability to do so will depend on the availability of tax revenue. When
local governments are responsible for the provision of local public goods, and government revenue
is highly dependent on local sources of taxes, such smoothing might not occur. In this case, tradeinduced adverse shocks to individual income and communities might be amplified.
This is the case in the United States, where much of the local revenue is financed by local
property and sales taxes. In fact, evidence from the United States suggests that families in areas hard
hit by increased import competition from China not only disproportionately bear the hardship of the
job loss, but at the same time bear the negative consequences of an eroding local tax base (Feler and
Senses forthcoming). Localities harder hit by import competition experienced declines in policing
and increased property crime rates, deteriorating local infrastructure, and lower funding for schools
(Feler and Senses forthcoming).
Government budgets in developing countries are potentially not as well positioned to assist
those hurt by international trade. For some developing countries, large-scale trade reforms meant
large losses in government revenue, in part because collection of taxes at the border might be easier
32

to administer than other forms of taxation. In fact, some developing countries have been only
partially successful at recovering lost tariff revenue with other forms of taxation (Bown and Crowley
2016). Of course, fast-growing developing countries are better positioned to address these
challenges.
Given this state of affairs, it is important for academics and policy makers alike to engage
more with distributional issues to design policies that ensure growth and its opportunities, whether
caused by trade or technological progress, are shared more broadly by the less fortunate in society.

33

Data Appendix
Section II and Figure 1:
Exports of Goods and Services (Current USD). (Source: WDI)
Exports as a share of GDP: Exports of goods and services (% of GDP), (Source: WDI)
Imports as a share of GDP: Imports of goods and services (% of GDP). (Source: WDI)
Country Classifications*
Low Income (L): Low income group aggregate: Low-income economies are those in which 1987
GNI per capita was $480 or less.
Lower Middle Income (LM): Lower middle income group aggregate. Lower middle income
economies are those in which 1987 GNI per capita was between $481 and $1940.
Upper Middle Income (UM): Upper middle income group aggregate. Upper middle income
economies are those in which 1987 GNI per capita was between $1941 and $6000.
High Income (H): High income group aggregate. High income economies are those in which 1987
GNI per capita was $6000 or greater.
Countries that did not exist in 1987 or were not in the data in 1987 were assigned World Bank
income designation the first available year. Most of these countries are former republics of
Yugoslavia and USSA.
Section III:
PEW Survey Data
Over 40 countries are represented across the income level spectrum. The analysis in this paper
draws only on data from 2002 and 2014. Countries that do not have data available in 2014 are not
included in Figure 3 and 6. Countries without data in 2014 are excluded from Figure 2, Panel B.
Some countries do not have nationally representative sample in 2002 and are marked below as such.
Sample countries: Angola†*, Argentina, Bangladesh†, Bolivia†*, Brazil†, Britain, Bulgaria*, Canada*,
Chile¤, China†, Colombia¤, Czech Republic*, Egypt†, El Salvador¤, France, Germany, Ghana,
Greece¤, Guatemala†*, Honduras†*, India†, Indonesia†, Israel¤, Italy, Ivory Coast†*, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Lebanon, Malaysia¤, Mali†*, Mexico, Nicaragua¤, Nigeria†, Pakistan, Palestine¤, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Senegal†, Slovakia*, Spain¤, Tanzania,
Thailand¤, Tunisia¤, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United States, Uzbekistan*, Venezuela†, Vietnam†
Legend:
† - non-national sample in 2002
* - data only available for 2002
¤ - data only available for 2014

34

References
Amiti, M., and Davis, D. (2012). "Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence." Review of
Economic Studies, 79(1), 1–36.
Atkin, D. (2016). “Endogenous skill acquisition and export manufacturing in Mexico.” American
Economic Review, 106(8), 2046-2085.
Attanasio, O., P. Goldberg, and Pavcnik, N. (2004). “Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality in
Colombia,” Journal of Development Economics, 74, 331–366.
Autor, D, Dorn, D., and Hanson, G. (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of
Import Competition in the United States." American Economic Review, 103(6), 2121–68.
Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. H., and Song, J. (2014). “Trade adjustment: Worker-level
evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4), 1799–1860.
Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., and Hanson, G.H. (2016). “The China Shock: Learning from Labor-Market
Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade,” Annual Review of Economics, 8, 205–240.
Baier, S., and Bergstrand, J., (2001), “The growth of world trade: tariffs, transport costs, and income
similarity”, Journal of International Economics, 53(1), 1-27
Bagwell, K., and Staiger, R. W. (2003). “Protection and the business cycle.” Advances in Economic
Analysis & Policy, 3(1), 1–43.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Duflo, E. (2007). “The Economic Lives of the Poor” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21(1), pp. 141–168.
Bernard, A., Jensen B., and Schott, P.K. (2006). “Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage
Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing Plants”. Journal of International
Economics 68:219-237
Blanchard, O. J., and Katz, L. F. (1992). “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, (1), 1–61.
Blanchard, E. and Olney, W. 2017. “Globalization and Human Capital Investment: Export
Composition Drives Educational Attainment,” Journal of International Economics 106: 165-183
Bound, J., and Holzer, H. J. (2000). “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor Market
Outcomes During the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(1), 20–54.
Bown, C. P., & Crowley, M. A. (2016). “The empirical landscape of trade policy,” in Staiger, B. and
K. Bagwell (eds.), the Handbook of Commercial Policy, Volume 1A, Elsevier
Brambilla, I., Lederman, D., and Porto, G. (2012). “Exports, Export Destinations, and Skills,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 7, pp. 3406–3438.

35

Brewer, C. A., & Harrower, M. (2002). ColorBrewer: Color Advice for Maps. Retrieved July 27,
2017, from http://www.ColorBrewer2.org
Brandt, L., Van Biesebroeck, J., Wang, L., and Zhang, Y. (forthcoming). “WTO Accession and
Performance of Chinese Manufacturing Firms,” American Economic Review
Bustos, P. (2011a). "Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the
Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms," American Economic Review, 101(1), 304–
40.
Bustos, P. (2011b). “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Skill Upgrading: Evidence from
Argentina,” unpublished manuscript.
Chiquiar, D. (2008). “Globalization, regional wage differentials and the Stolper-Samuelson theorem:
Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of International Economics, 74(1), 70-93.
Costa, F., Garred, J., and Pessoa, J. P. (2016). “Winners and Losers from a Commodities-forManufactures Trade Boom,” Journal of International Economics, 102, 50–69.
Costinot, A. and Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2014). “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the
Consequences of Globalization.” In Gopinath, G., Helpman, E. and Rogoff, K. (Ed.),
Handbook of International Economics (Vol. 4). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Crepon, B., and van den Berg, G.J., (2016). “Active Labor Market Policies,” Annual Review of
Economics, 8, 521–546)
Currie, J. and Harrison, A. (1997). “Sharing the Costs: The impact of Trade Reform on Capital and
Labor in Morocco,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(3), S44–71.
De Loecker, J. and Goldberg, P. (2014). “Firm Performance in a Global Market.” Annual Review of
Economics, 6, 201-227.
Dix-Carneiro, R. (2014). “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics”, Econometrica, 82(3),
pp. 825–885.
Dix-Carneiro, R., and Kovak, B. (forthcoming). “Trade Reform and Regional Dynamics: Evidence
from 25 Years of Brazilian Matched Employer-Employee Data,” American Economic Review
Dix-Carneiro, R., and Kovak, B. (2017). “Margins of Labor Market Adjustment to Trade,” NBER
Working Paper 23595.
Dix-Carnerio R., Soares. R., and Ulyssea, G. (2017). “Economic Shocks and Crime: Evidence from
the Brazilian Trade Liberalization,” NBER Working Paper 23400.
Edmonds, E., and Pavcnik, N. (2005). “The Effect of Trade Liberalization on Child Labor,”, Journal
of International Economics 65(2), 401-41.

36

Edmonds, E., Pavcnik, N. and Topalova, P. (2009). "Child Labor and Schooling in a Globalizing
Economy: Some Evidence from Urban India." Journal of European Economic Association,
Papers and Proceedings, 7 (2–3), 498–507.
Edmonds, E., Pavcnik, N. and Topalova, P. (2010). “Trade Adjustment and Human Capital
Investment: Evidence from Indian Tariff Reforms.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2(4), 42–75.
Erten, B., and Leight, J. (2017). “Exporting out of Agriculture: The Impact of WTO Accession on
Structural Transformation in China,” mimeo
Estevadeordal, A. and Taylor, A. (2013). “Is the Washington Consensus Dead? Growth, Openness,
and the Great Liberalization, 1970s–2000s.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95: 1669–
690.
Feler, L. and Senses, M. (forthcoming). “Trade Shocks and the Provision of Local Public Goods,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Feliciano, Zadia M. (2001). “Workers and Trade Liberalization: The Impact of Trade Reforms in
Mexico on Wages and Employment,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55(1), 95–115.
Feyrer, J. (2009). “Distance, Trade, and Income - The 1967 to 1975 Closing of the Suez Canal as a
Natural Experiment,” NBER Working Paper 15557
Glaeser, E. L., and Gyourko, J. (2005). “Urban Decline and Durable Housing.” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(2), 345–375.
Gollin, Douglas. (2002). "Getting Income Shares Right," Journal of Political Economy, 110 (2), 458–
474.
Goldberg, P., and Pavcnik, N. (2003). “The Response of the Informal Sector to Trade
Liberalization”, Journal of Development Economics, 72, 463–496.
Goldberg, P. and Pavcnik, N. (2007a). "Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing
Countries." Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1), 39–82.
Goldberg, P. and Pavcnik, N. (2007b). "The Effects of the Colombian Trade Liberalization on
Urban Poverty." in Harrison, A (ed), Globalization and Poverty, the University of Chicago
Press, pp. 241-290.
Goldberg, P. and Pavcnik, N. (2016). “The Effects of Trade Policy,” in Staiger, B. and K. Bagwell
(eds.), the Handbook of Commercial Policy, Volume 1A, Elsevier, pp. 161–206.
Grossman, G.M. (1986). “Imports as a Cause of Injury: The Case of the U.S. Steel Industry.”
Journal of International Economics, 20 (3–4), 201–23.
Hakobyan, S., & McLaren, J. (2016). “Looking for Local labor Market Effects of NAFTA.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 98(4), 728–741.
37

Handley, K. (2014). “Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of
International Economics, 94(1), 50–66.
Handley, K. and Limão, N. (forthcoming). “Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare: Theory and
Evidence for China and the U.S.,” American Economic Review
Hanson, G. (2012). “The rise of Middle Kingdoms: Emerging economics in global trade,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 41–64.
Hanson, G. and Harrison, A. 1999. “Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequality in Mexico,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 1999, vol. 52, issue 2, 271-288
Harrison, A. and Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2010). “Trade, foreign investment, and industrial policy for
developing countries.” In Rodrik, D. and Rosenzweig, M. R. (Eds.), Handbook of
Development Economics (Vol. 5, pp. 4039-4214). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
Helpman, Elhanan. (2016). “Globalization and Wage Inequality.” Vol. dp C.E.P.R. Discussion
Papers, CEPR Discussion Papers: 11701.
Jensen, Robert. (2012). “Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women’s Work and Family
Decisions? Experimental Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
127(2), pp. 753–792.
Kline, P., and Moretti, E. (2014). “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies, and
the Big Push: 100 years of evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 129(1), 275–331.
Kovak, B. (2013). “Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What Is the Correct Measure of
Liberalization?” American Economic Review, 103(5), 1960–76.
Krugman, P. (1995). “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences.” Brookings Papers on
Economics Activity, 1(25), 327–77.
La Porta, R. and Shleifer, A. (2014). “Informality and Development,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 28(3), 109–26.
McCaig, B. (2011). “Exporting out of poverty: Provincial poverty in Vietnam and U.S. market
access.” Journal of International Economics, 85(1), pp. 102–113.
McCaig, B. and Pavcnik, N. (2014). “Export Markets and Labor Reallocation in a Low-Income
Country." NBER Working Paper No. 20455.
McCaig, B. and Pavcnik, N. (2015). “Informal employment in a growing and globalizing low-income
country,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105(5), 545-50.

38

McCaig, B. and Pavcnik, N. (2017). “Moving out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Vietnam,” in
McMillan, M., D. Rodrik, and C. Sepulveda (eds.). Structural Change, Fundamentals, and
Growth, IFPRI, pp. 81-124.
McKenzie, D. (2017.) “How Effective Are Active Labor Market Policies in Developing Countries?
A Critical Review of Recent Evidence,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8011.
Medina, P. (2017). “Import Competition, Quality Upgrading and Exporting: Evidence from the
Peruvian Apparel Industry,” University of Toronto mimeo.
Melitz, M. (2003). “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica 71, 1696–1725.
Melitz, M. and Redding, S.J., (2014). “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade,” in Gopinath, G., Helpman,
E., and Rogoff, K. (eds). Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4: Elsevier.
Menezes-Filho, N. and Muendler, M. (2011). "Labor Reallocation in Response to Trade Reform,"
NBER Working Paper 17372.
Milanovic, B. (2016). Global inequality: a new approach for the age of globalization. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Munshi, K., & Rosenzweig, M. (2016). “Networks and misallocation: Insurance, migration, and the
rural-urban wage gap.” American Economic Review, 106(1), 46-98.
Nataraj, S. (2011). “The impact of trade liberalization on productivity: Evidence from India’s formal
and informal manufacturing sectors,” Journal of International Economics 85, 292–301.
Notowidigdo, M. J. (2013). “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks,” mimeo and NBER
Working Paper 17167.
Oster, E., and Steinberg, B. (2013). “Do IT service centers promote school enrollment? Evidence
from India,” Journal of Development Economics 104, p. 123-135.
Pierce, J.R., and Peter K. Schott, P.K. (2016). "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing
Employment," American Economic Review, 106(7), 1632–62.
Pierce, J.R., and Peter K. Schott, P.K. (2017). Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from
U.S. Counties, mimeo.
R Core Team. (2017). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from https://www.R-project.org/
Revenga, A. (1992). "Exporting Jobs? the Impact of Import Competition on Employment and
Wages in U.S. Manufacturing." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 255-284.
Revenga, A. (1997). “Employment and Wages Effects of Trade Liberalization: The Case of Mexican
Manufacturing,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(3), S20–43.
39

Rodrik, D. (1997). Has Globalization Gone Too Far? Washington, DC. Institute for International
Economics
Schott, Peter, K.. (2003). “A Comparison of Latin American and Asian Product Exports to the
United States, 1972 to 1999,” Latin American Journal of Economics. 121:414-422
Slowikowski, K. (2016). ggrepel: Repulsive Text and Label Geoms for “ggplot2.” Retrieved from
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=ggrepel
Topalova, P. (2007). “Trade Liberalization, Poverty and Inequality: Evidence from Indian Districts,”
in Harrison, A. (ed). Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press.
Topalova, P. (2010). “Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence
on Poverty from India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. Vol. 2, No. 4,
pp. 1–41.
Topel, R. H. (1986). “Local labor markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), S111-S143.
Trefler, D. (2004). “The Long and Short of the Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement,” American
Economic Review, 94(4), 870–95.
Tybout, J. R. (2000). “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They Do, and
Why?” Journal of Economic Literature, 38(1), 11–44.
Utar, H., and Ruiz, L. B. T. (2013). “International Competition and Industrial Evolution: Evidence
from the Impact of Chinese Competition on Mexican Maquiladoras.” Journal of
Development Economics, 105, 267–287.
Verhoogen, E. (2008). "Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123, no.2, pp. 489–530.
Wacziarg R. and Wallack, J. (2004). Trade Liberalization and Intersectoral Labor Movements,”
Journal of International Economics, 64, 411–439.
Wickham, H. (2009). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag New York.
Retrieved from http://ggplot2.org
Wickham, H. (2017). tidyr: Easily Tidy Data with “spread()” and “gather()” Functions. Retrieved
from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=tidyr
Wickham, H., & Bryan, J. (2017). readxl: Read Excel Files. Retrieved from https://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=readxl
Wickham, H., Francois, R., Henry, L., & Müller, K. (2017). dplyr: A Grammar of Data
Manipulation. Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=dplyr

40

Wickham, H., & Miller, E. (2017). haven: Import and Export “SPSS”, “Stata” and “SAS” Files.
Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=haven
World Trade Organization (2016). World Trade Report. World Trade Organization.
Yeaple, S. R. (2005). “A simple model of firm heterogeneity, international trade, and wages”. Journal
of International Economics, 65(1), 1-20.
Young, A. (2013). “Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap, and Migration,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128, 1727–1785.

41

Figure 1: Percentage of World Exports of Goods and Services by Country Income

Note: Authors’ calculations based on data from WDI (World Exports of Goods and Services). A country’s income
category group is fixed in time and based on a country’s position in 1987 World Bank income groups. See Data
Appendix for a list of countries in each group.

42

Figure 2: Trade and Business Ties Are Good for a Country
Panel A: 2002

Panel B: 2014

Note: The figure plots the percent of individuals in a country that say trade is very good or somewhat good for a country
(labeled as “good”) against a country’s income per capita and the best fit line. Based on 2002 and 2014 PEW Global
Attitudes survey and World Development Indicators. The figure singles out the responses of a handful of countries:
Vietnam (VNM), China (CHN), Brazil (BRA), India (IND), Colombia (COL), Mexico (MEX), the United States (USA).
Colombia is not in the sample in 2002.

43

Figure 3: Perceptions of Trade’s Effect on Wages and Jobs in Own Country

Note: The figure plots the percent of individuals in a country that say trade lowers wages (top left), raises wages (top
right), destroys jobs (bottom left), or creates jobs (bottom right) in that country against a country’s income per capita
and the best fit line. Based on 2014 PEW Global Attitudes survey and World Development Indicators. The figure
singles out the responses of a handful of countries: Vietnam (VNM), China (CHN), Brazil (BRA), India (IND),
Colombia (COL), Mexico (MEX), the United States (USA).

44

Figure 4a: The Effects of Import Liberalization on Regional Formal Earnings

Note: Source is Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming). The graph shows the effect of regional import tariff reduction
(from 1990 to 1995) on regional (log) formal earnings premium from 1991 to the year listed on the x-axis. Negative
estimates imply larger earnings declines in regions facing larger tariff reductions (relative to less affected regions).
Vertical bars indicate that trade reform begins in 1991 and ends by 1995. Shaded areas represent 95 percent confidence
intervals. Pre-liberalization trends are measured relative to 1986.

Figure 4b: The Effects of Import Liberalization on Formal Regional Employment

Note: Source is Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming). The graph shows the effect of regional import tariff reduction
(from 1990 to 1995) on the change in regional (log) formal employment from 1991 to the year listed on the x-axis.
Negative estimates imply larger employment declines in regions facing larger tariff reductions (relative to less affected
regions). Vertical bars indicate that trade reform begins in 1991 and ends by 1995. Shaded areas represent 95 percent
confidence intervals. Pre-liberalization trends are measured relative to 1986.

45

Figure 5a: The Effects of Import Liberalization on Number of Establishments and Establishment
Size

Note: Source is Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming). The graph shows the effect of regional import tariff reduction
(from 1990 to 1995) on the change in regional log number of formal establishments [marked with pink] or the change in
regional log average formal establishment size [marked with orange]. Change is measured from 1991 to the year listed on
the x-axis. Vertical bars indicate that trade reform begins in 1991 and ends by 1995. Shaded areas represent 95 percent
confidence intervals. Pre-liberalization trends are measured relative to 1986.

Figure 5b: The Effects of Import Liberalization on Establishment Entry and Exit

Note: Source is Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming). The graph shows the effect of regional import tariff reduction
(from 1990 to 1995) on (log) cumulative regional formal establishment entry [marked with orange] or exit [marked with
pink] from 1991 to the year listed on the x-axis. Positive exit estimates and negative entry estimates imply larger rates of
exit and smaller rates of entry in regions facing larger tariff reductions (relative to less affected regions). See notes to
Figure 5a.

46

Figure 5c: The Effects of Import Liberalization on Job Creation and Job Destruction

Note: Source is Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming). The graph shows the effect of regional import tariff reduction
(from 1990 to 1995) on (log) cumulative regional job creation rate [marked with pink] or destruction rate [marked with
orange] from 1991 to the year listed on the x-axis. Positive job destruction estimates and negative job creation estimates
imply larger rates of job destruction and smaller rates of job creation in regions facing larger tariff reductions (relative to
less affected regions). Vertical bars indicate that trade reform begins in 1991 and ends by 1995. Shaded areas represent
95 percent confidence intervals. Pre-liberalization trends are measured relative to 1986.

47

Figure 6: Percent that Blames Trade as Number One Cause for Inequality

Note: The figure plots the percent of individuals in a country that blame trade as number one cause of wealth gap
between rich and poor in that country against a country’s income per capita and the best fit line. Based on 2014 PEW
Global Attitudes survey and World Development Indicators. The figure singles out the responses of a handful of
countries: Vietnam (VNM), China (CHN), Brazil (BRA), India (IND), Colombia (COL), Mexico (MEX), the United
States (USA).

48

