NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COGNITIVE AND NONCOGNITIVE SKILLS AND THE SELECTION AND SORTING
OF MIGRANTS
Aline Bütikofer
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 23877
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23877

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

We gratefully acknowledge comments from seminar participants at the Norwegian School of Economics,
the 21st Annual Meetings of the Society of Labor Economists, the 28th EALE Conference, and the
Institute for Social Research. This work was partially supported by the Research Council of Norway
through its Centres of Excellence Scheme, FAIR Project No. 262675 (Bütikofer) and by the Research
Council of Norway VAM-project No. 240321 (Peri). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Aline Bütikofer and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills and the Selection and Sorting of Migrants
Aline Bütikofer and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 23877
September 2017, Revised September 2018
JEL No. J24,J61,R23
ABSTRACT
There is growing evidence that cognitive and noncognitive skills are strong predictors of the economic
and social outcomes of individuals. In this paper, we analyze how they affect the migration decisions
of individuals over their lifecycles. We use data that combine military enlistment and administrative
records for the male population born in 1932 and 1933 in Norway. Records of interviews with a psychologist
at age 20 allow us to construct an index of `sociability' and `adaptability' for each individual, as well
as an index of cognitive ability, the intelligence quotient. We find that adaptability and cognitive ability
have significant and positive impacts on the probability of an individual migrating out of his area,
whether this involves rural-urban, long distance, or international migration. Adaptability has a particularly
strong impact on migration for individuals with low cognitive skills, implying a strong positive selection
of less educated migrants with respect to the (previously unobserved) adaptability skill. We also show
that cognitive skills have a strong positive effect on sorting of migrants across destinations, whereas
adaptability has no significant effect on sorting. This evidence suggests that adaptability reduces the
psychological cost of migrating, whereas cognitive skills increase the monetary returns associated
with migration.

Aline Bütikofer
Department of Economics
Norwegian School of Economics
Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen
Norway
aline.buetikofer@nhh.no
Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Recent economic research has found that noncognitive skills, often referred to as ‘soft skills’, including the degree of sociability or adaptability to new people and situations, are important predictors
of economic outcomes such as earnings and employment. Although the traditional theory of human
capital has emphasized the role of schooling and mainly focused on cognitive abilities, we are beginning to understand the role of other noncognitive abilities in labor productivity. These abilities
may affect the marginal productivity of individuals (see Lindqvist and Vestman, 2011; Lundborg,
Nystedt, and Rooth, 2014; Gensowski, 2014, among others), enhance their accumulation of human
capital (Segal, 2013), or affect their occupational choice (see, e.g., Bacolod, Blum, and Strange,
2009). They may also affect other social outcomes with important economic consequences, such as
the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, the probability of criminal activity, or an individual’s
health outcomes.1 In the context of this literature, the present paper analyzes how noncognitive
skills affect individuals’ probability of migrating and their sorting across destinations. We also compare the role of noncognitive skills to that of cognitive skills (measured as the intelligence quotient,
IQ) in the selection and sorting of migrants.
International, interregional, and rural–urban migration are crucial ways of enhancing the labor
market outcomes of individuals. The literature (e.g., Malamud and Wozniak, 2012; Grogger and
Hanson, 2011) has long recognized the positive role of schooling in predicting the propensity to
migrate internally and internationally. This is known as ‘positive selection’ of migrants in terms of
skills. What part of this selection is due to cognitive and what part to noncognitive skills remains
little known. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to analyze how cognitive and noncognitive
skills, measured at age 20 years, help predicting the probability of migration and the sorting of
migrants across locations for individuals over their lifetime.
Answering this question advances a line of research that has been central in the migration
literature. As already mentioned, this paper improves our understanding of migrant selection and
sorting across destinations. If having certain skills makes individual more likely to migrate, then the
migrant population will have a higher intensity of that skill relative to the nonmigrant population.
This is known as ‘positive selection’ of migrants along that skill dimension. Second, and equally
important, if migrants move in response to opportunities which increase their compensation for that
skill, then also the sorting of migrants across locations will depend on their skills and the geographic
compensation of those. However, if a skill simply decreases the cost of migrating, then selection of
migrants, but not their sorting will be affected by the skill and the monetary return to migration
may also not be correlated with that skill. A positive selection and/or sorting of migrants on
noncognitive characteristics, such as adaptability and sociability, affects their subsequent outcomes
1
Noncognitive abilities appear to differ between men and women more than cognitive ones and, hence, they may
contribute to explaining the gender wage gap and its secular decline (Beaudry and Lewis, 2014)

2

as a group.2
This paper contributes also to another branch of the literature, which studies the channels
through which cognitive and noncognitive skills affect an individual’s economic success. Migration is
an important investment and a mechanism through which people increase their permanent income.
Migrants pay a cost to move to locations where the income for their skills is higher and, hence,
brings higher returns to their abilities. The connection between abilities and labor market success
can be mediated by geographical mobility. Skills that reduce the cost of or increase the economic
returns to moving may, in the long run, facilitate better employer–employee matches and encourage
more efficient allocation of productive resources, with gains for workers and firms.
The correlations between schooling and migration and the selection of migrants along the educational dimension have been studied extensively (see, e.g., Borjas, 1987; Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo,
1992; Dahl, 2002; Grogger and Hanson, 2013). However, to our knowledge, fewer studies have analyzed how cognitive and noncognitive abilities affect the selection and sorting of migrants (Jaeger,
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, and Bonin, 2010; Jokela, Elovainio, Kivimäki, and KeltikangasJärvinen, 2008; Jokela, 2009). The main contribution of this paper is to analyze whether two types
of noncognitive skills, which we define as ‘adaptability’ and ‘sociability’, and one cognitive skill,
‘IQ’, all measured at age 20 years, affect the probability of individuals migrating and their sorting
across destinations during their working life. We investigate these effects by using detailed population registry data from Norway from 1960 until 2010, which include annual information on the
municipality of residence and labor market outcomes of all individuals. These data can be linked
to those on military enlistment for men. Military enlistment was mandatory for Norwegian men
during the considered period. The military enlistment data include an abundance of individual and
family background characteristics and, more interestingly, several scores assessing the cognitive
ability of individuals and their psychological suitability for military service, evaluated at the time
of enlistment. The psychological suitability for military service, evaluated by military psychologists
in personal interviews, assesses two interesting traits of the recruits: adaptability and sociability,
which we will define precisely below.3 The data on psychological characteristics are available only
for individuals who enlisted in 1952 and 1953 (birth cohorts 1932 and 1933). Hence this paper
analyzes these two cohorts, that we can follow over their working life, starting in 1960, when they
were 27 to 28 years old, until their retirement.
Our main goal is to analyze whether IQ, adaptability, and sociability scores at military enlistment predict the probability of migrating and where individuals will move over their lifecycle. We
2
For instance high selectivity of migrants may help explain why some studies find that migrants have higher
entrepreneurial rates (Robb and Fairlie, 2009), lower incarceration rates (Butcher and Piehl, 2007), and better health
outcomes (Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015) than U.S. natives with similar observable characteristics.
In general, if cognitive and noncognitive abilities that increase the probability to migrate also contribute to their
economic and social success, this bodes well for their assimilation into the receiving economy.
3
We follow previous work by Lindqvist and Vestman (2011) in considering that assessments by military psychologists offer a reasonable and objective measure of noncognitive abilities. We discuss the details below.

3

also analyze whether the cognitive and noncognitive attributes of an individual interact with one
another in determining the propensity to migrate. Besides establishing a link between skills and the
probability of moving out of one’s local labor market, we ask a second important question: through
what channels do adaptability, sociability, and cognitive ability affect migration? In particular,
with a focus on noncognitive skills, did these factors mainly affect the potential economic return to
migration or rather did they reduce the psychological cost of migration.
We develop a simple variation of the Roy (1951) model of migration and selection, where a
rational individual decides to emigrate if the expected returns from migration are larger than the
(monetary plus psychological) costs of moving. We allow for different skills and we derive different
predictions of the model in regard to the migration probability, the sorting between destinations
and the pre- and post-migration earnings differential, depending on whether a skill affect productivity (and hence returns) or psychological costs of migration. This model generates the prediction
that, under assumptions that are satisfied in our data, a person with high level of a productivityenhancing skill should be more likely to migrate and more likely to choose a destination with high
returns to that skill. Moreover, such a person should have positive and significant pre-post migration earnings differential. Instead, a skill that affects the psychological cost of migration still has a
positive predictive power on the migration probability, but it will not be correlated with the sorting
into destinations with high returns to those abilities and should show a null (or negative) pre-post
migration average earnings differential.
We find that IQ has a significant and positive predictive power on the probability of migrating
(across regions or moving from rural to urban locations) within the first decades of working life.
Sociability does not exhibit any correlation with the propensity to migrate. Adaptability, instead
has a strong predictive power on the probability of migration and this is particularly strong for
individuals outside the top quintile of cognitive ability. Adaptability is an attribute significantly
increasing the probability of migration, except for people with very high cognitive skills, whose
probability of migrating is high in any case. This suggests a strong and positive selection of
migrants along the adaptability dimension, especially for those with lower cognitive abilities.
In several extensions and checks, we show that adaptability has a strong predictive power on the
probability of migrating, even when we control for all unobserved family-specific effects by using
within-family variation between male siblings. Moreover this association is not due to migration
during childhood or relocation during military service, or because of marriage, as controlling for
those does not change the impact of adaptability. This higher propensity to migrate of highly
‘adaptable’ individuals is stronger earlier in life and also applies to international mobility. Moving
to sorting across destinations, our empirical analysis shows that higher individual adaptability does
not increase the probability of sorting into destination with high returns to adaptability. This is in
contrast with the role of cognitive skills. Individuals with high levels of cognitive skills have higher
probability of migrating as well as of locating in places with high returns to cognitive skills. Finally

4

we show that pre-post migration earnings differential are positive and positively correlated with
the IQ, while the pre-post migration earnings differential are not correlated with the individual
level of adaptability. Taken together, these findings are consistent with adaptability reducing the
psychological costs of migration while IQ increase the economic returns of migration.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes the previous literature that
analyzes the effect of noncognitive abilities on labor market characteristics. Section 3 presents the
theoretical model. We discuss the data and provide descriptive statistics in Section 4. We describe
our empirical strategy in Section 5. We discuss our results and the robustness analysis in Section 6
and Section 7. Section 8 provides concluding remarks.

2

Previous Literature

The existing literature on the selection of migrants is abundant. Part of this literature is based
on variations of the model introduced by Roy (1951), and then adapted by Borjas (1987) and
Grogger and Hanson (2013), to analyze the skill selection of international migrants. Those models
emphasize different types of selection across skills depending on the skill returns in the sending and
receiving economies. In the context of internal migration, Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo (1992) finds
that workers are more likely to leave their state of origin if their skills are mismatched with the
reward structure offered by their current state, and Dahl (2002) shows that differences in the returns
to education and amenities across states are important determinants of the relative state-to-state
migration flows of individuals with university versus high school educations. Another strand of the
literature focuses on documenting the higher geographic mobility of university-educated relative
to less educated individuals, both internally (e.g. Malamud and Wozniak, 2012; Molloy, Smith,
and Wozniak, 2011) and internationally (e.g. Marfouk, 2007). Some studies analyze the selection
of migrants on observable and unobservable characteristics (e.g. Fernández-Huertas Moraga, 2011;
Ambrosini and Peri, 2012), mainly relying on wages before migration to capture the unobserved
human capital characteristics of migrants. Hence, these papers characterize the migrant selection as
positive or negative depending on the premigration wage of migrants relative to that of nonmigrants.
Much less common are investigations of the connection between cognitive and noncognitive skills
and migration behavior. One reason for this is the extremely limited availability of measures
of cognitive and noncognitive skills at the individual level, in data that track individuals across
locations. In many cases, the skill content of individuals is derived from their occupational choice
(e.g. Beaudry and Lewis, 2014), which is clearly the result of a choice (often made jointly with
geographical mobility) and hence is ill suited to predict propensity to migrate.
One of the few papers analyzing the impact of noncognitive skills of individuals on migration is a
study by Jaeger, Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, and Bonin (2010), which looks at the relationship
between self-assessed risk attitudes and migration using data on risk aversion from the German
Socioeconomic Panel (GSOEP). The authors find that individuals who are more willing to take
5

risks are also more likely to migrate, confirming the theory that migration is a risky investment in
human capital.4 Differently from our paper, Jaeger, Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, and Bonin
(2010) do not analyze sorting of migrants, nor are they able to use early-life measures of cognitive
and noncognitive skills to predict migration over the whole lifecycle. We are also able to control
for many more family and individual background characteristics to isolate more carefully the role
of noncognitive and cognitive skills in selection and sorting of migrants. Finally, relative to Jaeger,
Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, Sunde, and Bonin (2010) we consider broader measures of skills, spanning
cognitive and non-cognitive characteristics of individuals and assessed by experts rather than just
one specific attitude, self-assessed as in the GSOEP sample.
A few studies in the psychological literature have investigated the relationship between selfassessed personality traits and migration. Examples include Jokela, Elovainio, Kivimäki, and
Keltikangas-Järvinen (2008), who examine whether sociability and emotionality predict migration
propensity, selective urban to rural migration, and migration distance in a 9-year prospective study
in Finland. The authors find that high sociability predicts migration to urban areas and longer
migration distances. In addition, Jokela (2009) examines the role of personality in predicting the
propensity to migrate within and between states in the U.S. He shows that high openness and low
agreeableness increase within- and between-state migration, whereas high extroversion increases
within- but not between-state migration. Other mental traits were not related to migration probability. Therefore, our study is the first to use individual panel data from administrative sources
fully covering a two-year birth-cohorts of males in a country (Norway) and a measure of noncognitive soft skills based on personal interviews (not self-assessed or occupation-inferred) and analyze
whether they predict propensity to migrate and selection into destinations. As these abilities are
measured at age 20 years and the individuals are followed over their whole working life, we can
assess the long-term predictive ability of different cognitive and noncognitive abilities on migration
outcomes.
Although few studies have analyzed noncognitive skills in relation to migration choices, the
literature on the impact of noncognitive skills on the labor market outcomes of individuals is growing. The majority of these papers, however, measure noncognitive abilities based on self-reported
questionnaires (Duncan and Morgan, 1981; Murnane, Willett, Braatz, and Duhaldeborde, 2001;
Goldsmith, Veum, and Jr., 1997; Mueller and Plug, 2006; Borghans, Meijers, and ter Weel, 2008)
or infer noncognitive ability from observed behavior (Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001; Heckman,
Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006; Kuhn and Weinberger, 2005). More recently, noncognitive ability has
been measured using teacher evaluations (Segal, 2013) or personal interviews with a psychologist
(Lindqvist and Vestman, 2011). In particular, Segal (2013) finds that eighth-grade misbehavior, as
assessed by a teacher, is negatively correlated with earnings and is associated with lower educational
4

Bauernschuster, Falck, Heblich, Suedekum, Lameli (2014) study the mechanisms behind the higher mobility of
risk-loving individuals and find that these people are more mobile over longer distances because they are more willing
to cross cultural boundaries and move to regions that are culturally different from their homes.

6

attainment, even after controlling for test scores and family background characteristics. Lindqvist
and Vestman (2011) use Swedish data from military enlistment, similar to the data that we use
in this paper, and find that a low level of labor market attachment and low annual earnings are
closely associated with a lack of noncognitive, rather than cognitive skills, in Swedish men. On the
other hand, they present empirical evidence showing that cognitive ability is a stronger predictor of
earnings for highly skilled workers. Several other papers use the same Swedish military enlistment
data as Lindqvist and Vestman (2011). For example, (Grönqvist and Vlachos, 2016) analyze the
effects of teachers’ social abilities on student achievement and show that an increase in teachers’
social abilities reduces the achievement gap between high- and low-aptitude students. Moreover,
Black, Grönqvist, and Öckert (2017) study the effect of birth order on noncognitive abilities and
find that earlier-born men are more emotionally stable, persistent, socially outgoing, willing to assume responsibility, and able to take the initiative than later-born men. Edin, Fredriksson, Nybom,
and Öckert (2017) examine the changes in the relative rewards to cognitive and noncognitive skills
from 1992 to 2013. In addition, Huttunen, Møen, and Salvanes (2018) and Løken, Lommerud, and
Lundberg (2013) show that noneconomic factors such as family ties are very important for migration behavior in Norway. Our study uses data with quality comparable to that of Lindqvist and
Vestman (2011). To our knowledge, this is the first study using individual data over individuals’
lifecycle to analyze the selection into migration and the sorting of migrants as affected by cognitive
and noncognitive skills. We do this within the simple framework of a Roy model.
Let us emphasize that most of this literature, and our paper too, considers the cognitive and
noncognitive abilities of individuals as determined early in life (in part possibly as innate) and
then analyze how these traits help to predict outcomes during people working and social life. This
literature cannot be considered as genuinely identifying ‘causal’ effects, because it is impossible to
randomly assign or change these skills. However, it is still very important to identify skills that
have a strong and stable predictive power for labor market and economic outcomes.5 In terms of
migration, our analysis will help characterize what are the specific traits of migrants, how they
differ from those of the general population, and how these traits predict probability of migrating
and sorting. This is the sense in which, sometimes, we will say that noncognitive skills ‘affect’
migration. As in all this literature such a statement is not so much about causality (as random
assignment of noncognitive skills is impossible) as about prediction and robust association.

3

Framework

We consider a framework that extends the typical model by Roy (1951) to two skills, cognitive
and non-cognitive, and we discuss the selection of migrants. In this framework, individuals differ
in terms of two observable characteristics s (consider cognitive skills as s1 , and noncognitive skills
5

In recent OECD report, Kautz, Heckman, Diris, ter Weel, Borghans (2015) discuss that individual skills are
stable at a point in time, but can be shaped in the early years of life.

7

as s2 ), and one residual unobservable characteristic ε, the distribution of which, conditional on
the other characteristics, is a random normal with a 0 average and a standard deviation of one.6
These individuals live in location H, maximize their wage income, and are considering whether
to migrate to location F . Location F has higher return to cognitive skills relative to H, as well
as higher return to noncognitive skills. This captures the fact that in the Norwegian regions that
we analyze, the return to cognitive and noncognitive skills are strongly positively correlated across
regions (see scatterplot in Figure A1 in the appendix); Individuals compare the alternative location
to their current one. The wage that individual i would receive if he remains in H and works in
that location is:
wiH = µH + β H ∗ si + βεH εi ,

(1)

where ∗ indicates a vector product, µH is the average productivity of an individual in location
H, β H = (β1H , β2H , ) is the vector of linear returns to units of cognitive and noncognitive skill si
in location H and si = (s1i , s2i , ) is the endowment of each skill for individual i. In expression
(1), we assume that skills affect productivity linearly and independently of each other. This is a
simplification that can be removed to analyze interactions across skills (as we do in the empirical
analysis). Similarly, we assume that the parameter βεH ≥ 0 represents the return to one unit of
the unobservable skill and εi is individual i’s endowment of that skill. The wage that individual i
receives if he were to move to F is:
wiF = µF + β F ∗ si + βεF εi ,

(2)

where µF is the average productivity of location F and β F = (β1F , β2F ), with β1F > β1H ≥ 0 and
β2F > β2H ≥ 0 are the returns to individual cognitive and noncognitive skills, respectively, in location
F . Consider the case where region F has also larger return for the unobservable skill (βεF > βεH ).
This case presumes that locations in Norway with large returns to cognitive and noncognitive skills
have also higher returns to unobservable skills. As we think of our indicator of cognitive and
noncognitive skills as imperfect measures of the latent skills of an individual the unobserved part
likely captures skills that are valued similarly to the observed ones.7 We also assume that the cost
of moving to any location for individual i is equal to Ci . Ci has two components: CM , representing
monetary costs, which is expressed in units of labor income and is common to all migrants; and
c(si ), representing psychological costs that may depend also on the cognitive and noncognitive
individual skills si . In particular, it is plausible to assume that ∂c/∂si ≤ 0 for i0 s = 1, 2, so
6
Skills may be correlated in their distribution across individuals. The term ε is the residual skill and, conditional
on observable skill endowments, is randomly distributed across individuals with a mean of zero.
7
Dustmann, Fadlon, and Weiss (2011) consider a model in which different locations have different rates of returns
for two separate skills. They consider all possible cases, including one in which a location grants higher returns to
one skill and lower returns to the other and they also include different learning in each skill dimension. Their goal is
to explain potential migration and return.

8

that higher endowments of cognitive, or noncognitive skills may reduce (or have no effect on) the
psychological costs of migration.
Given this very simple setup, the decision of an income maximizing agent on whether to migrate
is driven by a comparison of the wage income at home (H) with the wage income at the destination
(F ), net of migration costs. Hence, individual i migrates from H to F if:
wiF − wiH − CM − c(si ) > 0.

(3)

Substituting (1) and (2) into (3) and solving for the variable εi , we find that individual i migrates
if his unobservable skills εi satisfy the following condition:
εi > εT (si ) =

CM + c(si ) − (µF − µH ) − (β F − β H ) ∗ si
.
(βεF − βεH )

(4)

The above expression implies that, given the assumptions on the parameters and on function
c(.), the threshold εT for the nonobservable skill such that individual i will migrate is decreasing
in each component of the vector si so that ∂εT /∂s1 ≤ 0 and ∂εT /∂s2 ≤ 0. An individual with
higher cognitive and noncognitive ability will (possibly) gain more from migration and (possibly)
have lower costs of migrating. Hence, the unobserved productive component will have a lower
threshold above which the individual will migrate. This structure implies also that the selection
on the unobserved skill, εi , is positive, just as the selection on observed skills si .
Consider now individuals organized into groups that have a certain vector of observable characteristics sG = (sG1 , sG2 ). Within each group, there are individuals with different unobservable
characteristics εi , and these characteristics are normally distributed with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation 1, independent of the other characteristics. Then, the probability of migration
for an individual in group G (i.e., with observable characteristics sG ) is:
IG
probM
(sG ) = Pr(εi > εT (sG )) = 1 − Φ(εT (sG )),
i

(5)

where Φ(.) is the cumulative density function of a standard normal distribution, the first derivaIG
tive of which is strictly positive. Expression (5) implies that the probability of migrating probM
i

for individual i in group G is larger when any of the observable skill components sG1 or sG2 is larger.
Interestingly, this simple model implies that, looking at the probability of individuals migrating as
a function of their (cognitive and noncognitive) abilities that may have a productivity or migration
cost-reducing effect, one obtains a similar positive relation with migration probability.
There are two channels through which higher skills affect the probability of migrating, both of
which imply a nonnegative effect under the assumptions of the model. One is through the term
−(β F − β H ) ∗ si in expression (4), which implies a higher return to migration for individuals with
a higher value of any of the skill components si that have a positive productivity effect. This term
also reduces the unobserved skill threshold, increasing the probability of migrating. The other
9

effect works through the term c(si ) in expression (4), which implies a lower psychological cost of
migration, associated with higher skills, a reduction of the migration threshold, and an increase in
migration probability.
While the qualitative implication of cost-reducing and productivity-enhancing skills on probability to migrate may be similar there is a crucial difference. The intensity of the effect of skill on
migration probability increases with the return to the skill in the receiving country for productivityenhancing skills, while it does not for cost-reducing skills. In this sense, productivity-enhancing
skills affects the intensity of ‘sorting’ of migrants in destination countries and not just their selection
into migration.
Think of a country F where the returns to a skill (say cognitive) increase (β F increases),
then the probability of emigration to that country increases (the threshold εT (sG ) decreases) and
proportionately more for individuals with larger values of s1 because of the interaction effect. Hence
across countries with different returns to productivity-enhancing skills migrants will sort according
to their level of productivity enhancing skills. To the contrary for cost-reducing skills which have
no productivity effects (which implies βiH = βiF = 0 for that skill), higher values of that skill will
still imply higher probability of migrating, but they will have no implication on sorting.
A second difference between skills affecting returns and skill affecting costs is on the average
migration premium for people who migrate. The migration premium is the difference in wages
between migrating and staying for individual i in group G. For individual i in group G, that
premium can be expressed as:
F
wG

−

H
wG

F

H

F

H

= (µ − µ ) + (β − β ) ∗ sG +

(βεF

−

βεH )

Z∞
xdx.

(6)

εT (sG )

This expression allows us to characterize the impact that an increase in a specific skill si for
the group will have on the expected return to migration for people who migrate. First, let us
F = β H = 0, but does have an impact
consider a skill si , which has no impact on productivity, βm
m

on migration through reducing the costs of migration ∂c/∂si < 0. In this case, an increase in that
skill will imply a larger probability of migrating in (5), as ∂εT /∂si < 0. Moreover, the only effect
on the migration premium is through the factor εT (sG ) in the last term of (6). As that average of
the normally distributed variable x, conditional on x > εT (sG ), is an increasing function of εT (sG ),
an increase in the skill si will reduce this term. Hence, if skill sm only affects the cost of migrating,
by decreasing these costs, without any impact on the returns to migration, the effect of an increase
in such a skill on the expected return for people who migrate is negative.
Consider instead a skill, si0 , that only affects productivity, and hence the return to migration,
so that βiF0 − βiH0 > 0 and ∂c/∂si0 = 0. In this case, the first effect of an increase in si0 will be an
increase in the term (β F − β H ) ∗ sG in expression (6). This term increases the expected returns to
migration. However, the same increase will also have an effect on reducing εT (si ) and hence, the
10

last term of expression (6) would decrease. However, for a sufficiently large value of (β F − β H )—
that is, if the effect on returns to migration is sufficiently large—the first term will prevail and an
increase in the productivity-enhancing skill si0 will have a positive impact on the average premium
of migrants. On the other hand, this skill will also have a positive impact on the probability of
migrating si0 .
Overall, the effect on expected returns to migration will depend on the relative strength of the
two effects on productivity and costs. A larger impact of such a skill on the cost of migrating will
reduce the expected returns to migration. A larger impact on productivity will imply a positive
effect on expected returns. At the same time, the increase in that type of skill will increase the
probability of migration through both channels.
Hence, we can summarize the implications of the model above into the following stylized predictions:
1. Productivity-enhancing skill: Consider two groups, G and G0 , of workers with different
0

G
levels of skill m so that sG
m < sm . If this skill mainly affects productivity (positively):
IG (s 0 ) >
• We should observe a higher emigration probability of group G0 , namely probM
G
i
IG (s ) (Selection).
probM
G
i

• Considering two destination countries 1 and 2, such that β1F > β2F , we should observe
higher probability of group G0 to migrate to country 1 relative to group G (Sorting).
• Finally, we should observe higher average wage differential from pre to post-migration
F − w H > w F − w H . (Returns)
for group G0 relative to G: wG
0
G
G
G0

2. Cost-reducing skills: Consider two groups G and G0 of workers with different levels of skill
0

G
n so that sG
n < sn . If this skill mainly affects migration costs (negatively):
IG (s 0 ) >
• We should observe a higher migration probability of group G0 , namely: probM
G
i
IG (s ) (Selection).
probM
G
i

• We should observe no sorting of these groups across foreign countries.
• Finally we should observe a lower or equal average wage differential pre- and postF − w H ≤ w F − w H . (returns)
migration for G0 relative to G: wG
0
G
G
G0

These three predictions relating different types of skills to selection, sorting and income-differentials
of migrants are tested in our empirical analysis. This allows us a consistent interpretation of the role
played by cognitive and noncognitive skills in increasing returns or reducing the cost of migration.

11

4

Data and Descriptive Statistics

The data used are compiled from various sources. Our primary data source is the Norwegian Registry Data, a linked administrative dataset that covers the whole resident population in Norway
up to 2010. These data combine different administrative registers, including the central population
register, the family register, the education register, and the tax and earnings register. The data
follow individuals over time in a longitudinal design and provide information about place of birth,
place of residence, educational attainment, labor market status, earnings, and demographic variables, as well as information on family background. This information is collected for each individual
every year. To obtain information on individual cognitive and noncognitive skills, we linked the
registry data with detailed military enlistment data for two full cohorts of men, born in 1932 and
1933, for whom these data are available. These two cohorts include all male individuals born in
Norway between 1932 and 1933 who were subject to mandatory military enlistment in 1952 and
1953. They constitute our sample. We describe the variables and summary statistics for our sample
and some of the average characteristics in the following sections.

4.1

Registry Data: Migration and Demographics

The central population register contains the municipality of birth and the municipality of residence of each individual from 1960 onwards. In addition, the central population register includes
an indicator identifying individuals who emigrated permanently to a foreign country after 1960.
Moreover, the enlistment data include the place of residence at enlistment, which represents the
location where an individual lived at about age 20 years. Hence, from 1960 (when individuals in the
sample were 27 or 28 years old), we know their residence and, in particular, whether they moved
from the municipality of residence at military enlistment. Educational attainment is obtained from
the educational database provided by Statistics Norway and enlistment records.8 The earnings
measure is not top-coded and includes labor earnings (expressed in constant 2014 NOK), taxable
sick-leave benefits, unemployment benefits, parental leave payments, and pensions.
Table 1 contains the summary statistics for various migration outcomes used as dependent
variables in our analysis and summary statistics for demographic characteristics and skills for male
Norwegian individuals born in 1932 and 1933. Examining the years of schooling completed at
enlistment, we clearly see that the majority of individuals had already completed their schooling
at enlistment: the average years of schooling were 8.4 at enlistment, compared with an average
completed years of education of 9.5 years for the same sample of individuals. This reflects the
fact that in the two considered cohorts, only a few individuals continued to university education.
8

Since 1974, educational attainment has been reported directly on an annual basis to Statistics Norway, thereby
minimizing any measurement error. For individuals who completed their education before 1974 (most of our sample),
we use self-reported information from the 1970 Census, which is considered to be very accurate (see, e.g., Black,
Devereux, and Salvanes, 2005).

12

The average earnings in 1980 were 325,442 NOK (in 2014 values); in 1967, the first year for which
income data is available, the average earnings were 239,388 NOK (in 2014 values), reflecting the
real growth in earnings for this group over time and over their lifecycle.
We use several different indicators of mobility: the first captures mobility by ages 27–28 years
and is a dummy equal to one if an individual resides in a labor market in 1960 different from the
one where he resided at enlistment. Labor market areas are an aggregation of municipalities (the
smallest political entity in Norway) based on commuting patterns between municipalities, subject
to the constraint that regions should be sufficiently large for empirical analysis (see Bhuller, 2009).9
There are a total of 46 local labor market areas in Norway (see Figure A2).10 These local labor
market areas have no administrative or political purposes. We use an alternative mobility indicator,
equal to a dummy for living in a different local labor market as of year 1980, that captures overall
mobility by ages 47–48 years. The average of these two variables (0.39 and 0.45, respectively)
implies that 39 percent of the Norwegian male population born in 1932–33 moved out of the local
labor market where they resided at age 20 years by age 28 years. By age 48 years, 45 percent had
moved. These statistics confirm that most migration out of local labor markets took place when
individuals were young, and that Norwegian male individuals were quite mobile during this period.
Interestingly, 31 percent moved permanently. That is, they moved out of the local labor market
where they had resided at age 20 years and never moved back (as of 2010 or the year of death). The
data also show that, among those who moved out of their labor market region of origin, 74 percent
had only moved once as of 1980. Only 5 percent of the movers moved three times or more. The
average distance that individuals moved between age 20 years and year 1980 was 470 km, which is
comparable to the distance between Paris and London or Milan and Munich. The median distance
was 225 km, which implies that a large proportion of the moves were more local.
To capture mobility between more distant locations specifically, we consider an additional indicator, which is equal to one when an individual had moved to a different ‘macroregion’ (in
Norwegian, a landsdeler) as of 1980. Norway is commonly divided into five geographical macroregions (see Figure A3), which are geographical characterizations only and have no administrative
purposes. As shown in Table 1, by 1980, 19 percent of the Norwegian male population born in
1932–33 had moved out of the macroregion where they resided at age 20 years.
Finally, in terms of migration outcomes, we consider a dummy variable that captures rural–
urban migration and a dummy for having moved abroad. Statistics Norway divides municipalities
into four different levels (on a scale from 0–3) in terms of centrality (see, e.g., SSB, 1994). We
define municipalities as urban areas if they have the highest level of centrality and as rural if they
have lower values. The highest level of centrality includes urban settlements with a population of
9

We focus on migration across local labor markets rather than across counties (Norwegian: fylke). Some large
cities in Norway encompass more than one county and, therefore, cross-county movement may not reveal genuine
changes in work locations and environments.
10
The archipelagos in the Arctic Ocean, Svalbard and Jan Mayen, are not included in the labor market regions.

13

at least 50,000, as well as municipalities located within 75 minutes travelling time from the center
of an urban settlement with a population of at least 50,000. By ages 27–28 years, about 19 percent
of individuals had moved from a rural to an urban location, and by ages 47–48 years, about 23
percent had moved from a rural to an urban location. Even more than overall mobility, rural–urban
mobility takes place early in the working life of an individual. These features are consistent with
male migration in the age range between 20–48 years being mainly job driven: it is easier to change
jobs when one is young because the urban environment provides greater opportunities for jobs and
people usually move once or at most twice for a job opportunity.

4.2

Military Enlistment Data

Military enlistment and military service was mandatory for men in Norway in 1952 and 1953.
Hence, our enlistment data include all male individual born in 1932 and 1933 (20 years old in
1952 and 1953). Before these young men could join the military, their medical and psychological
suitability was assessed. Note that we focus on these two birth cohorts as we can only link these
two cohorts’ measures of noncognitive skills from military enlistment to the population register. In
the 1950s, about 20 men per day were examined in military enlistment centers. Each conscript was
interviewed individually by an officer and a psychologist, in addition to receiving an examination
by a doctor. In addition to the interviews and medical tests, the enlistment procedure included
physical fitness and cognitive ability tests and a questionnaire that aimed to reveal noncognitive
skills and personality traits. However, a low score on a cognitive or noncognitive ability test did not
mean that a conscript could avoid military service. Only serious health issues such as tuberculosis or
physical disabilities such as severe hearing problems were reasons for being exempted from military
service. Of those who received sufficient health ratings, almost all served in the military. The test
scores defined the type of service that conscripts were selected for, ranging from the King’s Guard
to support troops.
Although medical tests had been performed since enlistment was instituted, tests of conscripts’
cognitive and noncognitive ability were introduced in the 1950s. These tests have changed substantially since their introduction. However, the tests are identical for each cohort. As we focus on two
subsequent cohorts only, the major test components are highly comparable. The tests introduced
in the 1950s for military sessions in Norway were developed by Erik Adrian Lundgren at the Department for Psychology within the military (Thrane, 1977). Including instructions, breaks, and
time to answer the questionnaire items on personality and noncognitive traits, the tests take about
2 hours and 30 minutes to complete.
4.2.1

Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills

The tests administered to determine cognitive skills consist of four different components. The first
two components aim to assess general cognitive ability by testing logical and mathematical skills
14

(in a procedure similar to the Army Alpha test used to evaluate U.S. military recruits during World
War I) and spatial visualization skills (based on J.C. Ravens’ ‘Progressive Matrices’, which were
used to classify military recruits in Britain during World War II). The third component assesses
the technical knowledge of mechanics, which was important for military practices.11 The last
component is a test measuring processing speed (Thrane, 1977). As the first two tests measure
math and analytical skills as opposed to knowledge, we used them to measure cognitive ability in
an index that mirrors IQ measures.
Our data include the scores of these two subtests, which range from 0–26 for the logical, mathematical skills test and from 0–24 for the spatial visualization ability test. We add the two scores
to construct our index of cognitive ability. The total score is then percentile rank-transformed and
converted by taking the inverse of the standard normal distribution (see also Lindqvist and Vestman, 2011). The conscripts were also interviewed by a psychologist. The goal of the interview was
to analyze whether a conscript met the psychological requirements of military service. The psychologists assigned each conscript a score for sociability on a scale from 0–10. The variable follows
a Stantine scale that approximates a normal distribution. Characteristics such as willingness to
take on responsibility, an outgoing personality, independence, persistence, and emotional stability
increase the score. Motivation for military service does not affect the score (see, e.g., Cronbach,
1964). Psychologists found that high sociability was linked to professional success. In the context
of military service, sociability was valued because it increased a leader’s ability to interact with his
subordinates (see, e.g., Goleman, 2011). In addition, the psychologist assessed a conscript’s ability
to adjust to a new environment. Generally, an individual is classified as being adaptable if they can
modify their behavior to meet the demands of a new situation (Pulakos, Arad, Donovan, and Plamondon, 2000). Hence, if the situation or environment changes, an individual must deal with the
change in an effective manner. For the military, adaptability was relevant to assessing a conscript’s
ability to complete tasks and his interest in learning new tasks.12 Similar to sociability, adaptability may have a broad value as a skill. Adaptability is important in a working environment where
innovation and changes are paramount. An individual’s adaptability is valuable to firms (Griffin
and Hesketh, 2003) and may be an asset when one is exposed to new environments. Adaptability
is reported on a scale from 0–10 in the military psychologist tests. We use these two measures
of noncognitive ability (sociability and adaptability) based on the psychologists’ interviews and
normalize both 0–10 scores to distributions with a mean of zero and a unit variance.
Table 2 contains correlation coefficients for cognitive ability, sociability, adaptability, processing
speed, and technical knowledge of mechanics all standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation equal to one. The table also includes the years of education at age 20 years. These raw
11

This test was based on the mechanical comprehension test introduced by G.K. Bennett to U.S. military sessions
during World War II (see Anastasi, 1968, page 362).
12
In recent studies, self-efficacy, openness to new experiences, and interest in learning new tasks have been found
to be good predictors of adaptive performance (Griffin and Hesketh, 2003; Pulakos, Schmitt, Dorsey, Arad, Borman,
and Hedge, 2002).

15

correlations are interesting as they show three important facts. First, the two indices of noncognitive
abilities have a relatively low correlation (0.2 or lower) with cognitive skills at the individual level.13
The very low correlations suggest that sociability and adaptability genuinely capture different type
of skills relative to the cognitive tests. Second, those two measures have a low correlation with
each other (–0.056). The skill that we call adaptability measures a trait not captured by the
other indices. While such a skill is not available in most data, it seems that being able to adjust
to new environments and cope with changing tasks can be particularly useful when moving to a
new region. The third interesting fact is that the correlation between cognitive skills, processing
speed, technical knowledge of mechanics, and schooling is the highest. This reveals that education
is mainly an indicator (or a result) of cognitive skills and specific knowledge, but it does not
proxy noncognitive skills very well. As processing speed and technical knowledge of mechanics are
strongly correlated with cognitive ability (0.72 and 0.74) and education (0.49 and 0.48), we focus
on cognitive, sociability, adaptability indices below.
As final summary statistics, in Table 3, we report the average values for the cognitive, sociability,
and adaptability indices separately for movers and nonmovers (as of 1960) either across labor
markets (columns 1–4) or from rural to urban areas (columns 5–8). For each of the measures,
we see a significant positive difference in average values for movers relative to nonmovers (the pvalues for the difference are significant at the 1 percent level, with the exception of sociability for
rural to urban movers relative to nonmovers). Once we standardize the difference for the standard
deviations of the skill variable, we can see that average cognitive ability is 0.37 standard deviations
higher for movers than for nonmovers, sociability is 0.10 standard deviations higher for movers,
and adaptability is 0.11 standard deviations higher for movers. In general, it seems that there is a
positive selection of migrants according to each of these skills. This is compatible with our model
of positive selection on all skills and with the assumption that those skills increase the returns to
migration or decrease costs.
4.2.2

Parental Background

Migration propensity might also be affected by socioeconomic background. The military enlistment
data contains information on the conscripts’ parents. As proxy variables for parental background,
we use a dummy indicating whether both of the conscript’s parents were present in the household
where the conscript grew up. Furthermore, we include the father’s work status and profession.
We divide professions into high, medium, and low socioeconomic status. We classify engineers,
academics, and highly ranked professionals in public administration as high status. The skilled
labor professions, such as mechanics or carpenters, are classified as medium status. Low status
13

The correlation of the cognitive and noncognitive measures is smaller compared to the correlation found by
Lindqvist and Vestman (2011), who focus on more recent cohorts of Swedish men born in 1965 or later. In a 2006
working paper, Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) report correlation coefficients between 0.07 and 0.21 for a
different set of cognitive and noncognitive measures for men.

16

professions include those related to agriculture, fishing, forestry, mining, and factory work. About
12.4 percent of fathers have a high status profession and 41.2 percent a medium status profession.
About 96.3 percent of fathers were present in the household. We include these parental background
variables as controls in our regressions.

5

Empirical Strategy and Identification

Following the empirical predictions of the model in Section 3, we estimate the following basic
specification:
Mi,t = βC Ci,t0 + βS SSi,t0 + βA Ai,t0 + γXi,t0 + εi ,

(7)

where Mi,t represents a migration outcome at time t (which could be 1960 or 1980) for individual
i, who was 20 years of age at time t0 . The migration outcome can be a dummy either for living in
a different local labor market at t relative to t0 , for living in a different macroregion, or for having
moved from a rural to an urban location between t0 and t. The three linear terms reported above,
βC Ci,t0 , βS SSi,t0 , βA Ai,t0 , capture the linear association of cognitive skills, Ci,t0 , sociability, Si,t0 ,
and adaptability, Ai,t0 on the outcome. The skills are measured by the military recruitment test
and standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation equal to one. Cognitive and
noncognitive skills, as well as control variables, are measured at time t0 , which represents the year
of enlistment when the individual was 20 years old. In the basic specification, we consider cognitive
and noncognitive skills as affecting the probability of migration via a linear term βC Ci,t0 +βS SSi,t0 +
βA Ai,t0 , which is consistent with the simple structure of the theoretical model. In addition, we will
consider nonlinear forms and specifications with interactions. Xi,t0 is a vector of controls for the
individual i at time t0 , which includes the region of residence at age 20 years, the occupation of
the father, an indicator for the death of the father, the mother, or both parents, the parent’s civil
status, the individual’s height in cm at age 20 years (as a health indicator), and his year of birth.
Hence, all control variables are predetermined at the time of military enlistment. εi is a mean
zero nonobservable idiosyncratic characteristic of individual i. The predictions of our model on
the signs of the coefficients are as follows: if skills have a positive effect on the productivity of an
individual, or a negative effect on the nonmonetary costs of migrating, then the estimates of βC,
βS , and βA will be positive. A zero estimate will reveal no impact of that skill on productivity
or on migration costs. We also estimate a specification identical to (7), but with the variable
Pi,t,to = ln wi,t − ln wi,t0 as a dependent variable. This variable captures the logarithmic change in
wage from pre- to post-migration, but only for individuals who have migrated. This is a proxy for
the ‘migration premium’. The model predicts that the coefficient will be positive if the effect of a
specific ability mainly works by affecting productivity. However, if a specific ability mainly affect
costs, the coefficient will be negative or zero as there will only be an effect through selection of
migrants on the basis of unobserved skills.

17

The estimated coefficients βC , βS , and βA in (7) should capture the impact on migration
probability of increasing a specific skill, keeping the other skill fixed. A concern affecting our
interpretation is that measurements of cognitive ability and adaptability or sociability could be
positively correlated (see Table 2). In our sample, the correlation between cognitive ability and
sociability was 0.21, and that between cognitive ability and adaptability was 0.12. On the one hand,
it is possible that the military psychologists, knowing the cognitive test scores of the conscript prior
to the psychologist assessment, would be influenced in evaluating his noncognitive skills. Then, the
positive correlation would only derive from measurement error, which could result in measurement
error bias and underestimation of the effects of noncognitive skills. On the other hand, higher
noncognitive ability can result in better performance in cognitive tests, and hence, by controlling
for cognitive performance, one could underestimate the effect of noncognitive ability. Borghans,
Meijers, and ter Weel (2008), for example, show that individual performance at cognitive tests
depends on noncognitive skills. To see whether the potential bias affected our results, we estimated
specifications that include one skill at a time and specifications that are included together. Given
their relatively low correlations, it is unlikely that the two specifications would produce very different
estimates.

6

Estimates of Migration Probability and Sorting

6.1

Cognitive and Noncognitive Ability and Probability of Migration

In this section, we illustrate and discuss the basic association of cognitive and noncognitive abilities
with different measures of migration. We consider seven different outcomes as dependent variables,
corresponding to the seven columns of Table 4. The first two variables capture mobility at two
time points: when young and during prime working age. The first variable is a dummy indicating
whether an individual changed location (between local labor markets) between ages 20–28 years
(by year 1960). The second is a dummy equal to one if the individual changed locations between
ages 20–48 years (by year 1980). The third outcome is a dummy variable indicating whether an
individual moved permanently after age 20. The fourth is the number of moves across local labor
markets after age 20 years. Then, we focus on longer distance migration by including a dummy
variable indicating whether an individual moved to a different macroregion after enlistment. Finally,
in specifications 6 and 7, we consider dummies indicating whether an individual migrated from a
rural to an urban area by age 28 years (in 1960) or by age 48 years (1980), respectively.
The coefficients of interest for Regression 7 are presented in Table 4, where each column shows
the results from a regression with different dependent variables, as described above. The main
results, show consistently across all columns (i.e., for all migration outcomes), that cognitive ability
and adaptability have a strong and positive association with the probability of migrating, whereas
sociability is usually uncorrelated with that outcome. Column 1 shows that an increase in cognitive

18

ability by one standard deviation predicts an increase in the probability of moving across local labor
markets before 1960 by 5.1 percentage points. This is an increase of about 15 percent relative to
the unconditional migration probability of 39 percent between ages 20–28 years (recall that these
individuals were born in 1932 and 1933). Similarly, an increase in cognitive ability by one standard
deviation predicts an increase in the probability of moving across counties before year 1980 by
5.7 percentage points, or 13 percent relative to the unconditional migration probability over this
time range (45 percent). Overall, sociability has no significant impact on mobility across local
labor markets. However, adaptability has a robust and statistically significant correlation with
mobility. A one standard deviation increase in the adaptability index increases the probability that
an individual migrates before 1960 by 3.8 percentage points and before 1980 by 4.2 percentage
points. Relative to the corresponding unconditional migration probabilities of 39 percent (column
1) and 47 percent (column 2), this indicates a 10 and a 9 percent increase, respectively. When
entered linearly, the measure of adaptability at age 20 years has an effect on the probability of
migration after enlistment that is approximately two-thirds the impact of cognitive skills.
In column 3, we find similar results when investigating the probability of migrating permanently
to a different labor market area. An increase in cognitive skills by one standard deviation predicts
an increase in the probability of moving permanently, before 1980, by 5 percentage points. In the
case of an increase in adaptability by one standard deviation, the corresponding increase is 3.5
percentage points. Similarly, in column 4, we find that the number of moves across labor market
regions increases by about 0.06 when cognitive ability is increased by one standard deviation and
by 0.02 when adaptability is increased by one standard deviation. Column 5 focuses on moving
to a different macroregion within Norway, which represents a longer distance move. We find that
this increases by about 4.4 percentage points when cognitive ability is increased by one standard
deviation, and by 2.8 percentage points when adaptability is increased by one standard deviation.
Columns 6 and 7 in Table 4 present the results for Regression 7 with indicators of migration
from rural to urban areas as outcomes. The sample here is different as it only included individuals
who were first observed in rural areas. For this group of individuals, economic success was likely
to be strongly correlated with ability to move to a more productive urban environment. Hence,
migration to a city may be a particularly important determinant of their economic success. We find
that adaptability had a significant and positive effect on migration into an urban area: an increase
in adaptability by one standard deviation predicts an increase in the probability of moving into an
urban area before 1980 by about 2.7 percentage points. This is an increase of about 10 percent
relative to the unconditional migration probability. The same change in cognitive ability predicts
an increase in the probability of moving into an urban area before 1980 by 5.8 percentage points,
or 21 percent relative to the unconditional migration probability. Even for this type of migration,
sociability is not a significant predictor of migration propensity.
Overall, the linear regressions including cognitive and noncognitive skills confirm some of the

19

findings from the previous literature. As there is a strong correlation between cognitive skills and
schooling, the significant positive effect of this index on migration probability implies a positive
selection of migrants along the standard measures of human capital (see, e.g., Malamud and Wozniak, 2012). The new finding of our analysis, however, is that adaptability measured at age 20
years is an important additional predictor of the probability of migrating: a one standard deviation
increase in adaptability results in a 4 percent higher probability of migrating across labor market
areas, compared with a 5–6 percent increase for the same change in cognitive skills.14
One concern in interpreting the coefficients estimated in Table 4 is that there may be a very
strong correlation between adaptability and cognitive ability. In fact, one may say that adaptability
could simply be a by-product of higher IQ, or that smarter people receive a higher adaptability
score. In that case, part of the cognitive effect works through higher adaptability and, by controlling
for this, we underestimate the total effect of cognitive skills. Alternatively, if these two skills are
not related to each other, and each contributes independently to important aspects of migration
outcomes, do the partial effects estimated in Table 4 fully capture the total effect of each skill? As
we saw above, cognitive ability and adaptability are only weakly correlated (0.123). The correlation
between sociability and adaptability is even smaller, and negative (–0.056). These covariances may
affect our interpretation of the results discussed above. To capture the ‘total’ effect of each skill,
we estimate Regression 7 separately for each measure. Table 5 presents the estimated effects
when cognitive skills (panel A), sociability (panel B), and adaptability (panel C) are each included
separately in the regression. The estimated coefficients on cognitive ability and their significance
level do not change much. For adaptability, the coefficients become marginally larger, but not
statistically different from their values when estimated jointly. The association between sociability
and migration propensity is somewhat higher and significant when cognitive ability and adaptability
are not included. However, the point estimate is much smaller than for the other two. Overall, the
estimates are very similar when the three skills are measured together or separately. This indicates
that the three measures capture three sufficiently different types of ability. Cognitive ability and
adaptability turn out to have the larger and more significant effects on the propensity to migrate.
The basic set of control variables included in Tables 4 and 5 do not include the schooling level at
the time of enlistment. Schooling may have an important role in the formation and measurement
of skills (see, e.g., Lindqvist and Vestman, 2011). For the cohorts born in 1932 and 1933, the
mandatory schooling requirement was only 7 years. Hence, the conscripts who only obtained
mandatory schooling completed their education 3 years before the enlistment date. Conscripts
who were still in school at enlistment received substantially more schooling than those with only
mandatory schooling. Conscripts with only mandatory schooling had a cognitive ability score
that was 1.1 standard deviations lower compared with those with more than mandatory schooling.
Men with more than mandatory education also had a higher average level of noncognitive ability.
14

Note that when including processing speed or technical knowledge of mechanics in Equation 7 the estimated
coefficients for both measures are not statistically different from zero for all outcomes.

20

The difference equals 0.04 standard deviations for sociability and 0.42 standard deviations for
adaptability. The significant correlation between cognitive test scores and years of schooling can
proceed from two factors. First, high ability men sort into higher education but years of schooling
do not affect the cognitive ability of people. In this case, controlling for schooling biases the total
effect of cognitive ability on migration downward. Second, schooling might increase cognitive skills,
and different schooling levels may be correlated with skills, so not controlling for schooling may
generate an upper bias of the effects of cognitive skills. In short, if the differences in cognitive test
scores are mostly driven by sorting, controlling for education at the time of enlistment could create
a downward bias in determining the partial effect of cognitive ability on migration. If schooling
increases cognitive skills, not controlling for the education level at age 20 years may create an upward
bias in measuring the coefficient of interest. Therefore, we estimate Equation 7, where we either
include a dummy variable for whether an individual has education above mandatory schooling at
enlistment15 or the number of years of schooling at enlistment. Table 6 presents the estimates, when
including progressively more comprehensive measures of schooling, on the probability of migration
by age 48 years (columns 1–4) or on the probability of migration from rural to urban labor markets
(columns 5–8). Introducing a dummy variable for whether an individual has education above
mandatory schooling at enlistment did not greatly alter the results (see columns 2 and 6). When
controlling for the number of years of education at enlistment, the association between cognitive
ability and migration became somewhat weaker (see columns 3 and 7), but remained significant and
quantitatively relevant. These findings suggest a significant correlation between cognitive skills and
schooling. If one believes that schooling is mainly a mechanism to ‘sort’ individuals according to
their endowment of cognitive skills, and that those are the only relevant skills determining returns
to and costs of migration, then we should consider that the total effect of pure cognitive skills
on migration is 0.058 (column 1), and that adding schooling ‘over-controls’ the results, producing
a partial effect. If, instead, we believe that schooling itself increases the productivity or reduces
the costs of migration, then the pure impact of cognitive skills on migration probability is 0.035
(column 3), and the remaining part is an effect of schooling (which in turn is related to cognitive
ability). Similarly, for rural–urban migration, the impact of cognitive skills can be as high as 0.058
(column 5) when not controlling for schooling, or 0.03 when controlling for schooling (column 7).
More interestingly, however, we see that the relationship between adaptability and migration is not
altered at all when controlling for different measures of schooling. Adaptability does not seem to
be related to the level of schooling at age 20 years (or later), and its impact on the propensity to
migrate is about 0.042 (for migration to another labor market) or 0.027 (rural to urban migration)
for each one standard deviation increase of the measure. This result also suggests that, although
schooling can be used as a good indicator of cognitive skills and their effect on migration, it does
not proxy at all for sociability and its impact on migration.
15

This specification reflects the main specification used by Lindqvist and Vestman (2011).

21

In columns 1–3 and 5–8 of Table 5, all included controls are predetermined at the time of
enlistment. However, selection into higher education (for a relatively small group in this period, as
only 5 percent of people in our sample graduated university) might be an important mechanism that
increases migration probabilities and is affected by cognitive and noncognitive skills. In columns
4 and 8 of Table 6, we include completed education as a control variable. If the only way in
which skills affected mobility was by determining total schooling, such a variable would absorb
most of the skill impact. This is close to being true for cognitive skills. When controlling for the
completed years of education, the effect of cognitive ability becomes small, though still significant,
at 0.016. Completed years of schooling seems to be almost sufficient to capture the impact of
cognitive abilities on the probability of moving: by controlling for completed years of schooling,
the coefficient on cognitive skills declines by more than 70 percent. However, this is not true for
adaptability. The association between adaptability and migration is equally strong regardless of
whether completed years of education are included. Hence, selection into higher education and into
a job market for highly qualified workers might be a fundamental channel by which cognitive ability
affects the migration decision, but it is not likely to be the mechanism through which adaptability
affects the migration decision.

6.2

Nonlinear Predictions and the Interaction between Skills

The effect of cognitive ability and adaptability on the probability of migration may not be linear. As
we have detected significant and robust linear effects for those two skills only, we focus on these in the
remainder of the analysis. The existing literature has found positive selection of internal migrants,
and has pointed out that there could be a stronger effect for very high levels of schooling (or IQ).16
Hence, we consider nonlinear forms for function f (·) in Regression 7. To impose the least amount
of structure, we allow for skill intensity at different quintiles of the skills distribution. We estimate
a specification in which we split the cognitive ability measure and the adaptability measure into
quintiles, and then estimate a separate coefficient for (dummies relative to) each quintile, omitting
the lowest one. The results, presented in Table 7, focus on four migration outcomes. The first two
columns show the probability of migration across labor market areas (before 1960 and before 1980
in columns 1 and 2, respectively). The third and the fourth columns focus on migration from rural
to urban locations. Interestingly, the effect seems to be monotonic and not too far from linear in
the quintiles for cognitive ability. Migration probability across labor market areas (columns 1 and
2) seems to increase only after the second quintile of cognitive abilities, and after that, it increases
by 2–3 percent for each quintile. Rural to urban migration seems to increase more gradually, by 3–4
percent for each quintile of the cognitive distribution (columns 3 and 4). While some convexity of
mobility in IQ may exist, given that the largest increase in the probability of migration is between
the fourth and fifth quintiles, the overall shape of the function is not too far from linear. The effects
16

For example, Glaeser and Mare (2001) discuss the selectivity of migrants in the context of rural–urban migration.

22

of adaptability look different. While there is some positive effect on migration from being in the
second to fourth quintiles of the adaptability distribution (relative to the first and lowest quintiles),
these effects are similar to each other. One cannot rule out the possibility that the probability of
moving (across labor markets and from rural to urban areas) is the same for individuals at the
second or fourth quartile of the adaptability distribution. By contrast, individuals in the fifth (top)
quintile of adaptability exhibit a much larger probability of migrating. The increase in mobility
from being in this group (relative to the lowest adaptability group) is almost as large as the increase
from being in the top relative to the lowest cognitive skill group, and is very precisely estimated.
Adaptability measures a skill that makes a real difference in the probability of migration, but only
at high levels. People can really possess entrepreneurial or ‘pioneer’ spirits and this makes them
more likely to move. Although they may not necessarily possess the highest intellectual abilities,
they have genuine abilities that make them better at dealing with new environments and more
attracted to new opportunities.
So far, we have considered cognitive skills and adaptability as independently (i.e., additively)
affecting migration probability. However, it is plausible that these two skills may interact with each
other. In particular, it may be the case that individuals with high cognitive ability are likely to
migrate regardless of their adaptability level. Given their very high intellectual abilities, they may
have large gains to migrating that push them to move, independent of their level of adaptability. By
contrast, individuals with lower cognitive ability and smaller monetary gains from migration may
be much more affected by their degree of adaptability in deciding whether to migrate. Adaptability
may reduce their psychological discomfort in moving and may imply that they more proactively
consider alternative locations. It is plausible that higher adaptability may be a crucial factor in the
decision to migrate when people do not have extremely high cognitive ability and the associated
large gains from migration.
In order to explore this hypothesis, we have partitioned the cognitive and adaptability skill
continuum into three groups, comprising the bottom quintile, the (three) intermediate quintiles,
and the top quintile. Then, we estimate a regression in which we include dummies for all the
possible interactions between the three groups of each ability (hence, there are nine separate effects).
We report the coefficients in Figure 1 after standardizing the coefficient on the dummy for the
interaction between the two lowest skill quintiles to zero. The estimated effects for each dummy
are presented in the Appendix Table A1. Figure 1 visualizes these results by showing the estimated
coefficient for the three different cognitive skill groups in the bottom, intermediate, or top quintile
of adaptability, arranged in the figure from left to right, respectively. We connect the estimates for
those individuals in the bottom cognitive ability quintile (dashed line), in the intermediate cognitive
ability quintiles (dotted line), and in the top cognitive ability quintile (solid line). The left panel
of Figure 1 shows the estimated effect on migration across local labor markets, and the right panel
shows the impact on the probability of rural–urban migration. Three clear patterns emerge. First,

23

both cognitive ability and adaptability increase migration propensity as the reported coefficients
increase from left to right, and when moving from the dashed to the dotted to the solid line. Second,
increases in adaptability are much more relevant for individuals with low and intermediate cognitive
ability (dotted line and light grey lines, respectively) and much less relevant for individuals with
high cognitive ability (dark dotted line). For the first two groups, going from the bottom quintile
of the adaptability distribution to the top quintile increases the probability of migration across
local labor markets before 1980 by 20 percentage points. This is a sizable effect compared to
the average probability of migrating of 47 percent. By contrast, for individuals with cognitive
ability in the top quintile, the level of adaptability does not seem to make any significant difference
to their probability of migrating. The third important fact emerging from the estimates is that
individuals with cognitive ability in the top quintile are highly likely to migrate, independent of
their adaptability levels. These results imply that, although there is a positive selection overall
of migrants with cognitive and adaptability skills, there is an even stronger selection of migrants
with low to intermediate cognitive abilities on the basis of adaptability. Our results show that
people with low cognitive skills are much more likely to be migrants if they have high levels of
adaptability. If they do have high adaptability, they are almost as likely to migrate as individuals
with high cognitive skills. As cognitive skills have a very high correlation with schooling, but
adaptability does not, this implies that selection on one (previously) unobserved characteristic, the
adaptability of individuals, is much more important for low skill than for high skill migrants. If
this characteristic helps individuals adjust, integrate, and assimilate into the receiving economy
and to succeed in any way, then migrants with low cognitive skills have a much better chance than
comparable nonmigrants to achieve economic success. Moreover, this result shows that individuals
select themselves into migration following a criterion that the receiving economy would use, if
such skill could be observed, to select migrants who can assimilate well to new circumstances and
new working situations. Furthermore, this results compares well with the findings of Lindqvist
and Vestman (2011), who show that noncognitive skills are a stronger predictor of labor force
participation and the wages of unskilled than of skilled workers.

6.3

Role of Early Mobility and Family

Our data measure individual skills at age 20 years. Although they certainly reflect some innate
abilities, the measures we use are also affected by the experiences of the individual as a child, and
as a student. Our regression controls for some characteristics of the family, and of the parents in
particular, and we discussed the effects of including schooling as a control to capture the effect of
upbringing on the probability of migration. In this section, we analyze whether moving as child,
presumably with one’s family, between birth and military enlistment affects a person’s cognitive
and adaptability skills. It is important to analyze whether this increases the propensity of an
individual to migrate later in life. Through a process of positive feedback, experiencing a move

24

with the family could make individuals more adaptable, and may affect the likelihood of mobility
as an adult. On the other hand, if mobility disrupts the learning process, it may affect cognitive
ability. Moreover, if higher adaptability is associated with early moves in life, then this skill may
be transmitted to the children of migrants via their early childhood experience. To address this
question, we perform two regressions. First, we analyze whether cognitive ability, sociability, and
adaptability are significantly associated with a dummy variable equal to one if an individual moves
across local labor markets between birth and the date of enlistment. Then, we analyze whether
the inclusion of such a dummy affects the coefficients on the effects of sociability, adaptability, or
cognitive ability on the probability of migrating. The results, displayed in the Appendix Table A2,
show a significant positive association between cognitive ability and the probability of moving
during childhood. Sociability and adaptability, however, are not significantly affected by moving
during childhood. Noncognitive abilities do not seem to be affected by the experience of migrating
as a child. Then, the regression reported in Appendix Table A3 analyzes whether controlling
for childhood mobility affects the impact of adaptability on the probability of migrating as an
adult. In Table A3, we include a dummy for having moved as a child in Regression 7. We find
that moving during childhood is positively and significantly associated with all of the migration
measures considered. The coefficients on cognitive ability, sociability, and adaptability were not
significantly changed by the inclusion of the dummy variable for moving during childhood. Hence,
adaptability at age 20 years is neither a simple consequence of previous mobility nor a less important
determinant of migration when controlling for childhood mobility.

6.4

Sorting Across Destinations

Do migrants sort into labor markets with higher monetary returns to their skills? Wozniak (2010)
shows that, in the U.S., college-educated workers are disproportionately attracted to regions with
better entry-level labor market conditions for the college educated. In a similar way, we test whether
individuals with high cognitive ability or high adaptability are likely to move to labor markets where
they receive a high return for their skills.
In this test, we consider the specific location choice of an individual in terms of labor markets,
rather than simply the probability of migrating. The probability that an individual will choose to
move to a specific local labor market m∗ depends on the conditions in m∗, as well as conditions in
all other local labor markets, m 6= m∗. This is a standard choice problem and we analyze it using
McFadden’s conditional logit representation (McFadden, 1974). To estimate whether individuals
choose to locate in labor markets where their skills have a higher return, we first estimate the
linear returns to both cognitive ability and adaptability separately in each local labor market
(with a Mincerian regression) and standardize these measures with a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one. The conditional logit specification includes the following controls: returns to
cognitive ability in the local area, returns to adaptability in the local area, an interaction term of

25

both the returns to cognitive ability and adaptability with an indicator variable that is equal to
one if the individual’s skill is in the second tercile of the distribution for that skill (cognitive ability
or adaptability), and an interaction term of both the returns to cognitive ability and adaptability
with an indicator variable that is equal to one if the individual’s skill is in the top tercile of the
distribution for that skill (cognitive ability or adaptability). We also include an indicator for birth
region and dummy variables for each potential choice region.
The results from the conditional logit estimation are presented in Table 8. The top numbers
in each cell are odds ratios, implied by the estimated coefficients (unreported). Z-statistics are
presented in parentheses. The odds ratios in the two top rows of Table 8 show that the returns
to both cognitive ability and adaptability have no detectable effects on the choice of a person
with a cognitive ability score or an adaptability score in the lowest tercile (reference group). The
coefficients are not different from one, which implies that persons with low ability and adaptability
are not more likely to move to regions with high return. However, individuals with higher cognitive
abilities have significant responses to local returns to cognitive abilities. The odds ratios on the
interactions of the returns to cognitive ability with dummies for IQ scores in the second and third
terciles of the IQ score distribution are significantly greater than one in both specifications. These
results show that individuals with higher cognitive abilities are more responsive in their migration
choices to returns to cognitive ability in a local labor market than are individuals with low cognitive
ability. High IQ individuals sort themselves into areas with high monetary returns for cognitive
abilities. For an individual with an IQ score in the second tercile, a standard deviation increase in
the return to cognitive ability increases the odds of choosing that labor market by 10–11 percent.
For an individual with an IQ score in the top tercile of the IQ score distribution, the increase is
14–16 percent. These coefficients are consistent with migration being directed by increasing returns
to skills.
On the other hand, individuals with an adaptability score in the second or top tercile of the
adaptability distribution are not more likely to choose a local labor market with large monetary
returns to adaptability. Migration of highly adaptable people is not directed by high return regions,
in contrast to the migration of high IQ individuals. These results can be interpreted within the
framework presented in section 3. They are consistent with cognitive ability being an attribute
increasing mobility by directing people to locations with higher monetary returns to that skill,
whereas individuals with high adaptability may be more mobile as a result of the lower psychological
costs of migration.

6.5

Extensions and Robustness Analysis

In the past, a man’s birth order within his household influenced his probability of inheriting farmland in Norway and thereby his probability of migrating to another local labor market or city (see
Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson, 2012, for a discussion of this issue in the context of interna-

26

tional migration). If birth order also affects personality traits such as adaptability, this could create
a correlation between the two. Interestingly, the probability of migrating to a different area differs
between the firstborn son, for whom it is 43 percent, and other, later born sons, for whom it is
46 percent. The difference is significant at the 5 percent significance level (p-value = 0.0499). By
contrast, the probabilities for rural to urban migration are not significantly different for firstborn or
later born sons. To test whether different skills have different effects on the migration decisions of
firstborn and later born sons, we estimate Regression 7 separately for the two groups. The results,
displayed in Appendix Table A4 (Panel A), show that the association of cognitive ability, sociability, and adaptability with cross-area migration (columns 1 and 3) and rural to urban migration
(columns 2 and 4) are not significantly different between the two groups. Hence, birth order does
not seem to affect the role of abilities in affecting migration.
In Panel B of Appendix Table A4, we analyze whether different socioeconomic backgrounds
may be related to the impact of skills on migration. Although we controlled for the parents’ socioeconomic backgrounds in our regressions, in this table, we analyze whether partitioning individuals
into high and low socioeconomic backgrounds generates any difference in the impact of cognitive
skills and adaptability on the probability of migrating. We find that cognitive ability is somewhat
more important for the migration decisions of individuals from a high socioeconomic background.
For both groups, however, the cognitive variable is very significant. On the other hand, the association of adaptability and migration probability across local labor market regions and, to a
lesser extent, from rural to urban, is significantly higher for individuals with low socioeconomic
backgrounds. Together, these results imply that adaptability skills are very strongly related to
migration probability for individuals with low socioeconomic backgrounds, who are less likely to be
highly educated. In the case of cross-area migration, adaptability is as important as cognitive skills
for these individuals with low socioeconomic backgrounds. By contrast, for individuals with high
socioeconomic backgrounds, cognitive ability is the more relevant characteristic affecting migration.
Finally, in Appendix Table A4, we analyze whether skills affect the probability of migration
from the most remote parts of Norway, where the cost of moving may be larger owing to isolation
from the rest of the country. The area comprising the local labor markets in the very north of
Norway is larger than in the south of Norway and distances to other populated regions are on
average much longer in the north of Norway. Therefore, we determine whether the association
between cognitive and noncognitive abilities and migration outcomes differs for individuals born
in northern Norway compared to the rest of the country. Panel C of Table A4 shows that the
point estimates are similar for individuals born in northern Norway and those born in the other
macroeconomic regions.
One possible determinant of the relation between different individual abilities and migration
propensity is unobserved family of origin characteristics. Rather than individuals varying in their
adaptability or IQ, and this affecting the costs and benefits from migrating, different families

27

may provide better or worse environments for the development of some skills as well as different
incentives or perceptions of migration. Although we control for parental and family characteristics,
many unobservable variations remain. Our data include individuals from only two consecutive
cohorts (1932 and 1933). We are, however, able to identify 104 brother couples in our dataset,
based on parents’ personal identification number. These data allow us to perform a very demanding
specification and estimate Regression 7 based on siblings only, including family-fixed effects.17 Such
a specification will only identify the effect of skills on migration based on within-family variation
between brothers, who must be born less than 2 years apart to be included in the data. The results
are reported in columns 1 and 2 in Table A5. The variance and number of observations is drastically
reduced, making the power to identify effects much more limited. Nevertheless, whereas differences
in cognitive ability between brothers are not associated with differences in migration propensity,
their differences in adaptability predict differential mobility outcomes among brothers. The point
estimates for adaptability in the brothers’ fixed effects regressions are even slightly higher than our
baseline results in Table 4, although they do not differ significantly. Moreover, we note that they
are much less precisely estimated. These two very demanding regressions suggest that adaptability
is a skill that may vary even more significantly than IQ within a family between brothers, and that
its impact on migration does not seem to be simply a reflection of the family attitude.
One channel through which the different abilities may affect migration is family life dynamics,
which may have a more direct impact than the costs and benefits of economic migration discussed
above. If some characteristics (e.g., IQ, sociability, and adaptability) make men more likely to
marry at an earlier age, this may negatively affect subsequent mobility, because moving as a couple
or family may be more costly than moving as an individual. We test this channel by regressing a
‘married’ dummy in 1960 (when men were either 27 or 28 years old) on cognitive ability, sociability,
and adaptability. Being married at these ages could be a reason why people are less likely to move
and may explain some of the effects of the skills. The results are presented in column 3 of Appendix
Table A5. Cognitive ability and adaptability were positively and significantly correlated with the
probability of being married in 1960, whereas sociability was not. The coefficients on IQ and
adaptability were around 0.01, which is much smaller than those on the probability of migrating.
Moreover, even if marriage decreases mobility, these results reveal that IQ and adaptability enhance
it, even if these individuals marry younger. An interesting result is that sociability does not seem
to affect marriage probability. The knowledge of this skill (or at least the measure of this skill
obtained by the test) does not provide much insight into the family and migration decisions of
individuals.
A further channel thought which cognitive ability, sociability, or adaptability may affect migration is directly though thetype and location of military service. If the cognitive or noncognitive
17

Note that fathers’ occupation, county of origin, height, cognitive ability, sociability and adaptability do not differ
significantly between the main sample and families with two sons. However, parents with two sons in the sample are
significantly more likely to both be alive at military enlistment and married.

28

assessment in the enlistment test affected the type and location of military service, especially increasing the probabliity of a person being sent farther, that may be the reason for larger subsequent
mobility. We cannot control for the main military base an individual was assigned to. However,
men assigned to the King’s Guard are almnost certainly stationed in Oslo (the capital and main
residency of the royal family). Hence, we can test whether among members of the King’s Guard
cognitive ability and adaptability are equally good predictors of mobility for men who grew up in
Oslo and for men who grew up outside the capital. Moreover, we can control for the assignment
to the King’s Guards in the regressions focusing on rural to urban migration and test whether
the inclusio of this variable reduces the role of adaptabililty in predicting migration. Column (3)
in Appendix Table A3 shows estimates only considering Men assigned to the King’s guard. For
them the basic effects of cognitive ability and adaptability are similar to those estimated on the
general population and the association between mobility their skills is not significantly different for
men already residing in Oslo before military service and men who resided elsewhere. This can be
seen by the interaction of ”Oslo” with the level of each skill in regression (3). The coefficient is
quite imprecisely esitmated but not significant. Column (4) in Table A3 focuses on men residing
in a rural area at time of enlistment and suggests that controlling for assignment to the King’s
guard (and thereby for service in the capital city) did not alter the importance of cognitive ability
and adaptability in explaining rural to urban migration. Hence, the available data suggests that
relocation during the military service was not the main driver of our results.
A final extension of our results is to determine whether the most substantial form of mobility,
namely the probability of international migration, is affected by the three skills considered. As
mentioned in Section 4, the central population register includes an indicator identifying individuals
who emigrated permanently to a foreign country after 1960. In total, 372 individuals, or about
1.2 percent of our sample, emigrated during the observation period. Thus, this was quite a low
probability event for the cohort analyzed. To test whether cognitive and noncognitive skills are
relevant for the probability of emigrating abroad, we estimate Regression 7 using a dummy variable
indicating whether an individual emigrated to a foreign country as an outcome variable. The
results are presented in column 4 of Table A5. They show that an increase in cognitive ability
by one standard deviation predicts an increase in the probability of emigrating by 0.6 percentage
points, and that an increase in adaptability by one standard deviation predicts an increase in
the probability of emigrating by 0.3 percentage points. Although the estimated coefficients are
small, they indicate a 50 and a 25 percent increase, respectively, relative to the unconditional
emigration probability of 1.2 percent. Sociability has no significant association with the probability
of emigrating. Hence, the importance of skills in determining the decision to emigrate abroad is
similar to the importance of skills determining geographic mobility within Norway. The implied
selection of international migrants from Norway was also strongly positive in terms of cognitive
skills and significantly positive in terms of adaptability skills. Taken together, these estimates

29

reveal a significant and robust effect of adaptability in increasing the probability of migration of
any kind, whether local, rural to urban, long distance, or international.

7

Migration Earning Premium

The empirical evidence presented so far establishes that both cognitive skills and adaptability have
a significant, robust, and quantitatively relevant effect on the migration probability of individuals
in our sample. We also found that individuals with medium to low cognitive skills are strongly
selected into immigration if they have very high levels of adaptability. Moreover, we show that
individuals with a high cogtnitive ability score are more likley to choose a local labor market with
large monetary returns to cognitive ability while individuals with a high adaptability score are not
more likely to choose a local labor market with large monetary returns to adaptability. Building on
the implications of the model developed in Section 3, we perform and additional test. In particular,
we analyze whether cognitive ability and adaptability increase the monetary returns to migration,
measured as the difference in (log) earnings between 1 year (or 3 years) before and 1 year (or 3
years) after migration to a different labor market area or from a rural to an urban location. The
model in Section 3 predicts that if the skill under consideration mainly affects productivity, and
hence the monetary returns to migration, then one would find a positive correlation between such a
skill and the average pre- and post-migration wage differential. However, if the skill mainly affects
the psychological (nonmonetary) costs of migration, one should find a negative or null correlation
between the skill and the average pre- and post-migration wage differential, but a positive effect
on migration probability. Figure 2 (a) presents the earnings differences between individuals in
the highest and lowest IQ terciles, and Figure 2 (b) presents the earnings differences between
individuals in the highest and lowest adaptability terciles, relative to the year of moving across
labor markets.18 The earnings differences between individuals with high and low cognitive abilities
increase quite soon after the migration event and are substantial in size 10 years after moving. On
the other hand, the earnings differences between highly adjustable individuals and low adjustability
individuals increases more slowly and are very small even 10 years after moving. Table 9 shows the
coefficients from a specification similar to Regression 7, where the dependent variable is the pre- and
post-migration earnings difference for the individual.19 In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable
is the difference in log earnings between the year before and the year after migration for migration
across local labor markets or rural–urban migration). In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is
the earnings differential between 3 years before and 3 years after migration. The 3-year differential
avoids the possible effects of negative conditions occurring right before the migration decision that
18
Figure A4 in the Appendix plots the same relationship for individuals moving from a rural to an urban area and
shows the same pattern.
19
Note that when estimating Regression 7 with log earnings as an outcome variable, all three skills, cognitive ability,
sociability, and adaptability, are significantly and positively correlated with earnings.

30

could push people away and, at the same time, negatively affect their premigration earnings.20 The
results are clear: cognitive ability significantly and positively affects the post-migration earnings
premium, conditional on individuals moving and having positive earnings prior to moving. This
implies that individuals with higher cognitive skills have higher monetary returns from moving
to a new local labor market. The earnings difference is between 0.2 and 0.4 logarithmic points
(between 22 and 41 percent) and is highly significant. This is consistent with cognitive ability
mainly affecting productivity and, through that channel, increasing the pre- and post-migration
earnings differential. The average migrant will earn 22 to 41 percent more after migrating, if he has a
one standard deviation higher IQ. On the other hand, the measure of adaptability does not affect the
pre-post-migration earnings difference. People who are more adaptable are more likely to migrate,
but conditional on migrating and having positive earnings prior to moving, higher adaptability
does not provide a higher earnings premium. This is consistent with adaptability mainly affecting
the nonmonetary cost of migration so that, for a given monetary return, people who are more
adaptable are more likely to move. The effect is zero rather than negative, confirming that there is
not a strong negative selection of migrants on nonobservable productive characteristics (associated
with higher adaptability), but that adaptability per se does not affect the pre- and post-migration
earnings premium. This indicates that adaptability must affect migration through nonmonetary
costs.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we combined measures of the cognitive and noncognitive abilities of individuals,
measured at 20 years of age, and data on their subsequent working life. Characteristics that
have been considered as unobservable but that are potentially important to predict labor market
outcomes and career choices, such as sociability and adaptability, can be observed and measured
in our data. The data also include details of the working career and the migration behavior of
individuals. Our sample, based on the Norwegian male population born in 1932 and 1933, for
which we have information on cognitive and noncognitive skills, allows us to analyze how those
predict migration behavior. This allows us to infer how migrants are selected and sort themselves
on the basis of their cognitive and (unobserved thus far) noncognitive skills. Our results suggest
that cognitive skills, which are highly correlated with schooling, have a strong positive predictive
power on the probability of migrating and induce sorting of migrants in locales with high returns
for those skills. This is a known fact in the literature on internal and international migration:
migrants are positively selected based on schooling and cognitive skills. However, this is the first
study to find a second important result, namely that people with high adaptability, as measured
20

If individuals migrate after having experienced some idiosyncratic shock, we would expect a premigration wage
dip similar to Ashenfelter’s dip, which shows that the mean earnings of participants in training programs generally
decline just prior to participation (Ashenfelter, 1978).

31

by tests assessing their ability to cope with new environments and situations, also have a much
higher probability of migrating. In particular, among individuals with low levels of education
and low cognitive abilities, those with high adaptability are much more likely to migrate than
the rest of the population. To understand whether cognitive skills and adaptability affect the
monetary returns or the psychological costs of migration, we developed a simple variation of the
Roy model. This model predicts that a skill increasing labor productivity would increase both
the probability of migration, will induce sorting across location with different return to that skill
and, conditional on migrating, will be positively associated with the pre-post-migration earnings
differential. By contrast, a skill decreasing the (nonmonetary) psychological costs of migration
increases the probability of migration, but, does not induce specific sorting and, conditional on
migrating, would not be associated with larger pre- and post-migration earnings differences.
We found that both cognitive ability and adaptability have a significant and positive impact
on the probability of migration across labor areas, from rural to urban areas, as well as on long
distance and international migration. In addition, we presented empirical evidence that cognitive
skills are positively correlated with the sorting of immigrants across locations with different return
to those skills and have a significant positive effect on the pre-post migration earnings differential.
Adaptability, on the other hand, predicts migration probability but it is not associated with sorting
nor with pre-post migration wage differential. This evidence is consistent with adaptability being a
skill that mainly reduces nonmonetary migration costs. Interestingly, we also found that the effect
of high adaptability on increasing the migration probability is stronger for individuals with low
cognitive skills and low socioeconomic backgrounds.
These results have interesting implications. First, adaptability, an unobserved skill thus far, can
be measured at age 20 years, and it has an important effect in that it increases mobility. Moving to
a different region or country requires the ability to deal with new situations and people; therefore,
better adaptability skills can decrease adjustment costs and increase the propensity to migrate. As
mobility within a country improves the functioning of the labor markets, enhances the efficiency
of firm–worker matches, and reduces the impact of local economic shocks, better measurement of
this skill may have important implications for our understanding of the labor market consequences
of local shocks. Second, the importance of adaptability raises the question of whether such a skill
can be increased in the population. The possibility of improving the adaptability of individuals
through schooling, or by exposing students to a varied and changing environment and to individuals
with diverse and heterogeneous backgrounds, suggests an important additional role for diversity
and flexibility in the learning environment. These are interesting issues that we leave to future
research.

32

References
Abramitzky, R., L. P. Boustan, and K. Eriksson (2012): “Europe’s Tired, Poor, Huddled
Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration,” American Economic Review, 102(5), 1832–56.
Ambrosini, J. W., and G. Peri (2012): “The Determinants and the Selection of Mexico-US
Migrants,” The World Economy, 35(2), 111–151.
Anastasi, A. (1968): Psychological testing. Macmillan, New York, 3rd edn.
Ashenfelter, O. (1978): “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings,” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 60(1), 47–57.
Bacolod, M., B. S. Blum, and W. Strange (2009): “Skills in the city,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 65(2), 136–153.
Bauernschuster, S., O. Falck, S. Heblich, J. Suedekum, and A. Lameli (2014): “Why
are Educated and Risk-Loving Persons More Mobile Across Regions?” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 98, 56–69.
Beaudry, P., and E. Lewis (2014): “Do Male-Female Wage Differentials Reflect Differences in
the Return to Skill? Cross-City Evidence from 1980-2000,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 6(2), 178–94.
Bhuller, M. (2009): “Inndeling av norge i arbeidsmarkedsregioner,” Discussion Paper 24, Statistisk Sentralbyrå.
Black, S. E., P. J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes (2005): “The More the Merrier? The Effect
of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120(2), 669–700.
Black, S. E., E. Grönqvist, and B. Öckert (2018): “Born to Lead? The Effect of Birth
Order on Non-Cognitive Abilities,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(2), 274–286.
Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel (2008): “The Role of Noncognitive Skills in
Explaining Cognitive Test Scores,” Economic Inquiry, 46(1), 212.
Borjas, G. J. (1987): “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants,” The American Economic
Review, 77(4), 531–553.
Borjas, G. J., S. G. Bronars, and S. J. Trejo (1992): “Self-selection and internal migration
in the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics, 32(2), 159 – 185.

33

Butcher, K. F., and A. M. Piehl (2007): “Why are Immigrants’ Incarceration Rates so Low?
Evidence on Selective Immigration, Deterrence, and Deportation,” NBER Working Papers 13229,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2015): “Hispanic Health,” http://www.cdc.
gov/vitalsigns/hispanic-health, Accessed: 22.02.2016.
Cronbach, L. J. (1964): Essentials of Psychological Testing. Harper and Row, London, UK, 2nd
edn.
Dahl, G. B. (2002): “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple
Markets,” Econometrica, 70(6), 2367–2420.
Duncan, G. J., and J. N. Morgan (1981): “Sense of Efficacy and Subsequent Change in
Earnings—A Replication,” Journal of Human Resources, 16(4), 649-57.
Dustmann, C., I. Fadlon, and Y. Weiss (2011): “Return migration, human capital accumulation and the brain drain,” Journal of Development Economics, 95(1), 58–67.
Edin, P.-A., P. Fredriksson, M. Nybom, and B. Öckert (2017): “The Rising Return to
Non-cognitive Skill,” IZA Discussion Paper Series 10914, IZA.
Fernández-Huertas Moraga, J. (2011): “New Evidence on Emigrant Selection,” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 72–96.
Gensowski, M. (2018): “Personality, IQ, and Lifetime Earnings,” Labour Economics, 51, 170–183.
Glaeser, E. L., and D. C. Mare (2001): “Cities and Skills,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(2),
316–42.
Goldsmith, A. H., J. R. Veum, and W. D. Jr. (1997): “The Impact of Psychological and
Human Capital on Wages,” Economic Inquiry, 35(4), 815–29.
Goleman, D. (2011): The Essentials: HBRs 10 Must Reads. Harvard Business Review Press,
Boston, MA.
Griffin, B., and B. Hesketh (2003): “Adaptable behaviours for successful work and career
adjustment,” Australian Journal of Psychology, 55(2), 65–73.
Grogger, J., and G. Hanson (2013): “The Scale and Selectivity of Foreign-Born PhD Recipients
in the US,” American Economic Review, 103(3), 189–92.
Grogger, J., and G. H. Hanson (2011): “Income maximization and the selection and sorting
of international migrants,” Journal of Development Economics, 95(1), 42–57.
34

Grönqvist, E., and J. Vlachos (2016): “One Size Fits All? The Effects of Teachers’ Cognitive
and Social Abilities on Student Achievement,” Labour Economics, 42, 138 – 150.
Heckman, J. J., and Y. Rubinstein (2001): “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons
from the GED Testing Program,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 145-49.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006): “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3),
411-82.
Huttunen, K., J. Møen, and K. G. Salvanes (2018): “Job Loss and Regional Mobility,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 36(2), 479–509.
Jaeger, D. A., T. Dohmen, A. Falk, D. Huffman, U. Sunde, and H. Bonin (2010): “Direct
Evidence on Risk Attitudes and Migration,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3), 684–
689.
Jokela, M. (2009): “Personality predicts migration within and between U.S. states,” Journal of
Research in Personality, 43, 79–83.
Jokela, M., M. Elovainio, M. Kivimäki, and L. Keltikangas-Järvinen (2008): “Temperament and Migration Patterns in Finland,” Psychological Science, 19(9), 831–837.
Kautz, T., J. J. Heckman, R. Diris, B. ter Weel, and L. Borghans (2015): “Fostering and
Measuring Skills: Improving Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills to Promote Lifetime Success,”
OECD.
Kuhn, P., and C. Weinberger (2005): “Leadership Skills and Wages,” Journal of Labor Economics, 23(3), 395-436.
Lindqvist, E., and R. Vestman (2011): “The Labor Market Returns to Cognitive and Noncognitive Ability: Evidence from the Swedish Enlistment,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3, 101–128.
Løken, K. V., K. E. Lommerud, and S. Lundberg (2013): “Your Place or Mine? On the
Residence Choice of Young Couples in Norway,” Demography, 50(1), 285–310.
Lundborg, P., P. Nystedt, and D.-O. Rooth (2014): “Height and Earnings: The Role of
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills,” Journal of Human Resources, 49(1), 141–166.
Malamud, O., and A. Wozniak (2012): “The Impact of College on Migration: Evidence from
the Vietnam Generation,” Journal of Human Resources, 47(4), 913–950.

35

Marfouk, A. (2007): “Brain Drain in Developing Countries,” World Bank Economic Review,
21(2), 193–218.
McFadden, D. (1974): “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behaviour,” in Frontiers
in Econometrics, ed. by P. Zarembka, pp. 105–142. Academic Press New York, New York, NY,
USA.
Molloy, R., C. L. Smith, and A. Wozniak (2011): “Internal Migration in the United States,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 173–96.
Mueller, G., and E. Plug (2006): “Estimating the Effect of Personality on Male and Female
Earnings,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60(1), 3-22.
Murnane, R. J., J. B. Willett, J. M. Braatz, and Y. Duhaldeborde (2001): “Do Different
Dimensions of Male High School Students’ Skills Predict Labor Market Success a Decade Later?
Evidence from the NLSY,” Economics of Education Review, 20(4), 311-20.
Pulakos, E., S. Arad, M. Donovan, and K. Plamondon (2000): “Adaptability in the workplace: Development of a taxonomy of adaptive performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
85(4), 612–624.
Pulakos, E., N. Schmitt, D. Dorsey, S. Arad, W. Borman, and J. Hedge (2002): “Predicting Adaptive Performance: Further Tests of a Model of Adaptability,” Human Performance,
15(4), 299–323.
Robb, A. M., and R. W. Fairlie (2009): “Determinants of Business Success: An Examination
of Asian-Owned Businesses in the USA,” Journal of Population Economics, 22(4), 827–858.
Roy, A. (1951): “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, 87,
S7–S36.
Segal, C. (2013): “Misbehavior, Edication, and Labor Market Outcomes,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(4), 743-779.
SSB (1994): “Standard for Kommuneklassifisering 1994 (Standard Classification of Municipalities
1994),” Norges offisielle statistikk (Official Statistics of Norway): Oslo-Kongsvinger.
Thrane, V. C. (1977): “Evneprøving av Utskrivingspliktige i Norge 1950-53,” Discussion Paper 2,
INAS.
Wozniak, A. (2010): “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor Market Opportunities?,” The Journal of Human Resources, 45(4), 944–970.

36

9

Tables and Figures

0

0

effect on probability to migrate across LLM
.1
.2
.3
.4

effect on probability to migrate into cities
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25

Figure 1: Interactions of Cognitive Ability and Adjustability

Adapt. bottom quintile

Adapt. 2nd−4th quintile
IQ bottom quintile
IQ top quintile

Adapt. top quintile

Adapt. bottom quintile

IQ 2nd−4th quintile

Adapt. 2nd−4th quintile
IQ bottom quintile
IQ top quintile

(a) Mobility across local labor markets

Adapt. top quintile
IQ 2nd−4th quintile

(b) Rural to urban migration

Notes: The figures reflect the estimated associations of cognitive ability (IQ) and adaptability on the probability of
moving across local labor markets or into cities, as reported in Table A1. The left figure shows how the probability of
moving across local labor markets changes with adaptability for different levels of cognitive ability. The right figure
shows how the probability of moving from a rural to an urban area changes with adaptability for different levels of
cognitive ability.

37

Mean Earnings Difference Relative to Year of Move
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000

Mean Earnings Difference Relative to Year of Move
−10000
0
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000

Figure 2: Average Earnings Difference Relative to the Year of Moving across Local Labor Markets

−5

0
5
Year Relative to Year of Move

(a) Highest IQ vs. Lowest IQ Tercile

10

−5

0
5
Year Relative to Year of Move

10

(b) Highest Adaptability vs. Lowest Adaptability
Tercile

Notes: Figure (a) displays the average earnings differences between individuals in the highest IQ tercile and individuals
in the lowest IQ tercile in 1998 NOK, relative to the year of moving across local labor markets. Figure (b) displays
the average earnings differences between individuals in the highest adaptability tercile and individuals in the lowest
adaptability tercile in 1998 NOK, relative to the year of moving across local labor markets.

38

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Variable
Percent of local labor market movers as of 1960
Percent of local labor market movers as of 1980
Percent of permanent movers
Number of cross-local labor market moves
Percent of region movers as of 1980
Percent of rural-to-urban movers as of 1960
Percent of rural-to-urban movers as of 1980
Percent emigrated as of 1980
Earnings in 1960 (in 2014 NOK)
Earnings in 1980 (in 2014 NOK)
Completed years of education
Years of education at age 20 years
Cognitive ability (ranging from 0 to 50)a
Sociability (psychologists’ evaluation, ranging from 0 to 10)a
Adaptability (psychologists’ evaluation, ranging from 0 to 10)a
Processing speed
Technical knowledge of mechanics
Number of observations

Mean

Standard Deviation

0.394
0.446
0.310
0.188
0.191
0.192
0.232
0.012
239,388
325,4412
9.5
8.4
20.3
4.95
4.86
41.7
5.30

0.497
0.489
0.463
0.562
0.393
0.394
0.422
0.091
99,685
174,308
2.8
1.6
9.42
1.42
1.71
17.6
1.85

30387

a

Notes: In the regressions, the scores are normalized to have a mean of zero and a unit
variance.

39

Table 2: Correlation Coefficients

Cognitive ability
Sociability
Adaptability
Processing speed
Mechanics
Education (age 20)

Cognitive
ability

Sociability

Adaptability

Processing
speed

Mechanics

Education
age 20

1.000
0.209
0.123
0.721
0.736
0.680

1.000
-0.056
0.150
0.172
0.250

1.000
0.118
0.118
0.131

1.000
0.586
0.486

1.000
0.483

1.000

Notes: Entries represent correlation coefficients for cognitive ability, sociability, adaptability, processing speed, and
technical knowledge of mechanics, all standardized to have a mean of zero and a unit variance. Years of education
are measured at enlistment at age 20 years.

Table 3: Differences between Movers and Stayers

Stayers
(1)
Cognitive ability
Sociability
Adaptability

-0.09
-0.03
-0.03

Across LLM movers
Movers Difference
(2)
(3)
0.28
0.07
0.08

-0.37
-0.10
-0.11

p-value
(4)

Stayers
(5)

0.00
0.00
0.00

-0.17
-0.05
-0.07

Into city movers
Movers Difference
(6)
(7)
0.15
0.04
0.07

-0.32
-0.09
-0.14

p-value
(8)
0.00
0.02
0.00

Notes: Columns 1 and 5 display the average standardized values of cognitive ability, sociability, and adaptability for
stayers, columns 2 and 6 show the average standardized values for movers, and columns 3 and 7 show the differences
between the average values for movers and stayers. Columns 4 and 8 contain the p-values indicating whether the
difference is significant. Movers are defined as individuals who moved across the border of their local labor market of
origin before 1960 (columns 1–4) or those who moved from a rural to an urban area before 1960 (columns 5–8). The
sample includes birth cohorts for 1932 and 1933. In columns 5–8, the sample only includes individuals who lived in
a rural municipality at the time of enlistment.

40

Table 4: Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities and the Probability of Moving
Moved across LLM
before 1960 before 1980 before 1980
permanently
(1)
(2)
(3)
Cognitive ability

Sociability

Adaptability
Mean of
dep. variable
R-squared
N

Number of moves
before 1980
across LLM
(4)

Moved across
region
before 1980
(5)

Moved into cities
before 1960
before 1980
(6)

(7)

0.051***
(0.003)

0.057***
(0.003)

0.053***
(0.003)

0.058***
(0.005)

0.044***
(0.003)

0.046***
(0.003)

0.058***
(0.004)

0.003
(0.003)

0.001
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.011**
(0.005)

0.000
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.038***
(0.003)

0.042***
(0.003)

0.035***
(0.003)

0.022***
(0.004)

0.028***
(0.003)

0.016***
(0.003)

0.027***
(0.003)

0.39
0.122
23829

0.45
0.123
23829

0.31
0.080
23829

0.19
0.037
18220

0.19
0.080
23829

0.19
0.170
16221

0.23
0.133
16221

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients with standard errors in parentheses from the OLS regression of the effects of cognitive ability,
sociability, and adaptability on different mobility indicators. Columns 1–4 examine migration across local labor markets, column 5 migration across
macroregions, and columns 6 and 7 rural–urban migration. The sample includes birth cohorts from 1932 and 1933. In columns 6 and 7, the sample only
includes individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment. Control variables include the occupation of the father, an indicator for
the death of the father or mother or both parents, the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the individual’s year of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

Table 5: Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities and the Probability of Moving: Separate Regressions
Moved across LLM
before 1960 before 1980 before 1980
permanently
(1)
(2)
(3)

Number of moves
before 1980
across LLM
(4)

Moved across
region
before 1980
(5)

Moved into cities
before 1960
before 1980
(6)

(7)

0.044***
(0.003)

0.048***
(0.003)

0.061***
(0.004)

0.006*
(0.003)

0.005
(0.003)

0.008**
(0.004)

Panel A: Cognitive Ability
Cognitive ability

0.056***
(0.003)

0.062***
(0.003)

0.057***
(0.003)

0.058***
(0.004)

Panel B: Sociability
Sociability

0.009***
(0.003)

0.007**
(0.003)

0.009***
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.004)

Panel C: Adaptability
Adaptability
N

0.042***
(0.003)

0.046***
(0.003)

0.039***
(0.003)

0.026***
(0.004)

0.031***
(0.003)

0.021***
(0.003)

0.032***
(0.003)

23829

23829

23829

22683

22683

16221

16221

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses, from the OLS regressions of the effects of cognitive ability,
sociability, or adaptability on different mobility indicators. Columns 1–4 examine migration across local labor markets, column 5 examines migration
across macroregions, and columns 6 and 7 examine rural–urban migration. The sample includes birth cohorts from 1932 and 1933. In columns 6 and 7,
the sample only includes individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment. Control variables include the occupation of the father,
an indicator for the death of the father or mother or both parents, the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the individual’s year of
birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

41

42

0.001
(0.003)
0.042***
(0.003)
0.123
23829

Sociability

Adaptability

0.045***
(0.003)
0.124
23829

-0.002
(0.003)

0.058***
(0.004)

0.042***
(0.003)
0.123
23825

0.001
(0.003)

0.035***
(0.004)

LLM
Years of
education
at session
(3)

0.042***
(0.003)
0.129
23278

-0.002
(0.003)

0.016***
(0.004)

Completed
years of
education
(4)

0.027***
(0.003)
0.133
16221

-0.001
(0.004)

0.058***
(0.004)

(5)

No education
controls

0.027***
(0.003)
0.133
16221

-0.001
(0.004)

0.058***
(0.004)

0.024***
(0.003)
0.139
16218

-0.006*
(0.004)

0.030***
(0.005)

Moving into cities
Some secondary Years of
education at
education
session (0/1)
at session
(6)
(7)

0.026***
(0.003)
0.159
15801

-0.004
(0.004)

0.018***
(0.004)

Completed
years of
education
(8)

Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

and the individual’s year of birth.

the occupation of the father, an indicator for the death of the father or mother or both parents, the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm,

1933. In columns 5–8, the sample only includes individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment. Further control variables include

of enlistment is included in the regression, and in columns 4 and 8, the completed years of education. The sample includes birth cohorts from 1932 and

This specification reflects the main specification used by Lindqvist and Vestman (2011). In columns 3 and 7, the number of years of schooling at the time

a dummy variable indicating whether an individual has some secondary education at the time of enlistment (at age 20 years) is included in the regression.

rural–urban migration. Columns 1 and 5 do not include control variables for education and reflect the main specification of Table 4. In columns 2 and 6,

sociability, and adaptability on different mobility indicators. Columns 1–4 examine migration across local labor market, and columns 5 and 6 examine

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors in parentheses, from the OLS regressions of the effects of cognitive ability,

R-squared
N

0.057***
(0.003)

Cognitive ability

(1)

No education
controls

Moving across
Some secondary
education at
session (0/1)
(2)

Table 6: Controlling for Different Education Measures

Table 7: Nonparametric Functional Form
Moved across LLM
before 1960 before 1980
(1)
(2)

Move into cities
before 1960 before 1980
(3)
(4)

Cognitive ability in 2nd quintile

0.005
(0.009)

-0.000
(0.009)

0.033***
(0.010)

0.029***
(0.010)

Cognitive ability in 3rd quintile

0.055***
(0.009)

0.054***
(0.009)

0.036***
(0.010)

0.054***
(0.010)

Cognitive ability in 4th quintile

0.080***
(0.009)

0.087***
(0.009)

0.062***
(0.010)

0.074***
(0.010)

Cognitive ability in 5th quintile

0.118***
(0.009)

0.125***
(0.009)

0.114***
(0.010)

0.131***
(0.010)

Adaptability in 2nd quintile

0.031***
(0.009)

0.032***
(0.009)

0.017*
(0.009)

0.025**
(0.010)

Adaptability in 3rd quintile

0.052***
(0.008)

0.054***
(0.008)

0.013
(0.009)

0.016*
(0.009)

Adaptability in 4th quintile

0.041***
(0.011)

0.045***
(0.011)

0.023**
(0.012)

0.027**
(0.012)

Adaptability in 5th quintile

0.104***
(0.009)

0.122***
(0.008)

0.070***
(0.009)

0.093***
(0.010)

0.162
25367

0.167
25367

0.168
17299

0.129
17299

R-squared
N

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses, from the
OLS regressions of the effects of different cognitive ability quintiles and adaptability quintiles on different
mobility indicators. Columns 1 and 2 examine migration across local labor markets, and columns 3 and
4 examine rural–urban migration. The sample includes birth cohorts from 1932 and 1933. In columns 3
and 4, the sample only includes individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment.
Control variables include the occupation of the father, an indicator for the death of the father or mother
or both parents, the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the individual’s year of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

43

Table 8: Sorting across destinations: Cognitive Abilities and Adaptability
Moved by 1960

Moved by 1980

Returns to cognitive ability

0.92
(-1.12)

0.90
(-0.92)

Returns to adaptability

0.87
(-1.02)

0.89
(-0.92)

Cognitive ability in second tercile
× returns to cognitive ability

1.11**
(2.16)

1.10**
(2.02)

Cognitive ability in top tercile
× returns to cognitive ability

1.16***
(4.10)

1.14***
(3.92)

Adaptability in second tercile
× returns to adaptability

1.07
(1.11)

1.04
(0.89)

Adaptability in top tercile
× returns to adaptability

1.08
(1.04)

1.00
(0.92)

Notes: The top numbers in each cell are odds ratios, implied by the estimated coefficients (unreported). Z-statistics
are shown in parentheses. The conditional logit specification includes the following controls: returns to cognitive
ability, returns to adaptability, an interaction term of both the returns to cognitive ability and adaptability with an
indicator variable that is equal to one if an individual’s IQ score is in the second tercile of the IQ distribution, an
interaction term of both the returns to cognitive ability and adaptability with an indicator variable that is equal to
one if an individual’s IQ score is in the third tercile of the IQ distribution, an indicator for birth region, and dummy
variables for each potential choice region.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

44

Table 9: Log Earnings Difference before and after Moving
Differences in log earnings
1 year before and after moving
Moved across LLM Moved into cities
(1)
(2)

Differences in log earnings
3 years before and after moving
Moved across LLM Moved into cities
(3)
(4)

Cognitive ability

0.227**
(0.099)

0.223**
(0.090)

0.418***
(0.130)

0.212**
(0.101)

Sociability

-0.036
(0.092)

0.047
(0.087)

0.028
(0.087)

0.187*
(0.104)

Adaptability

0.021
(0.088)

0.032
(0.084)

0.026
(0.116)

0.065
(0.101)

0.841
8674

0.855
7356

0.784
8651

0.797
7288

R-squared
N

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses, from the OLS regressions of the effects of cognitive ability, sociability, and adaptability on log earnings differences 1 year prior compared
with 1 year after migration (columns 1 and 2) and log earnings differences 3 years prior compared with 3 years after
migration (columns 3 and 4). The sample includes movers with positive earnings before moving from the 1932 and
1933 birth cohorts. Columns 1 and 3 focus on individuals who moved across counties. Columns 2 and 4 focus on
individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment and later moved to urban areas. Control
variables include the occupation of the father, an indicator for the death of the father or mother or both parents, the
parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the individual’s year of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

45

A

Online Appendix

0

Returns to adaptability
.2
.4

.6

Figure A1: Correlation between Returns to Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills

0

.1

.2
Returns to IQ

.3

.4

Notes: The y-axis displays the returns to adaptability in each local labor market. The x-axis plots the returns to
cognitive skills in each local labor market. The returns are estimated using average yearly earnings between age 35
and 40.

46

Figure A2: Local Labor Markets

Notes: The map displays the 46 local labor markets in Norway. Labor market regions are an aggregation of municipalities (the smallest political entity in Norway), based on commuting patterns between municipalities, subject to
the constraint that regions should be sufficiently large for empirical analysis (see Bhuller, 2009). The archipelagos in
the Arctic Ocean, Svalbard and Jan Mayen, are not included in the labor market regions.

47

Figure A3: Macro-regions

Northern Norway
Trøndelag
Western Norway
Southern Norway
Eastern Norway

Notes: The map displays the five different macroregions (Norwegian: landsdeler): Northern Norway, Trøndelag,
Western Norway, Southern Norway, and Eastern Norway. In addition, the map shows the 19 administrative areas
called counties (Norwegian: fylke). The archipelagos in the Arctic Ocean, Svalbard and Jan Mayen, are outside the
county division and are ruled directly at the national level.

48

Mean Earnings Difference Relative to Year of Move
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
9

−5

10

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3

−4

−5

Mean Earnings Difference Relative to Year of Move
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000

Figure A4: Average Earnings Difference Relative to Year of Rural-to-Urban Move

Year Relative to Year of Move

(a) Highest IQ vs. Lowest IQ Tercile

0
5
Year Relative to Year of Move

10

(b) Highest Adaptability vs. Lowest Adaptability
Tercile

Notes: Figure (a) displays the average earnings differences between individuals in the highest and those in the lowest
IQ tercile in 1998 NOK, relative to the year of moving from a rural to an urban area. Figure (b) displays the average
earnings differences between individuals in the highest and those in the lowest adaptability tercile in 1998 NOK,
relative to the year of moving from a rural to an urban area.

49

Table A1: Interactions between Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills
Moved across LLM
before 1960
before 1980
(1)
(2)

Move into cities
before 1960 before 1980
(3)
(4)

Medium cognitive ability

0.078***
(0.015)

0.088***
(0.014)

0.052***
(0.015)

0.060***
(0.016)

High cognitive ability

0.296***
(0.018)

0.324***
(0.017)

0.176***
(0.019)

0.223***
(0.020)

Medium adaptability

0.067***
(0.015)

0.090***
(0.015)

0.032**
(0.015)

0.052***
(0.016)

High adaptability

0.171***
(0.022)

0.185***
(0.022)

0.093***
(0.023)

0.128***
(0.024)

Medium cognitive ability ×
Medium adaptability

-0.007
(0.018)

-0.009
(0.017)

-0.009
(0.018)

-0.002
(0.019)

Medium cognitive ability ×
High adaptability

0.056**
(0.027)

0.058**
(0.028)

0.002
(0.026)

0.001
(0.027)

High cognitive ability ×
Medium adaptability

-0.104***
(0.021)

-0.102***
(0.021)

-0.062***
(0.023)

-0.066***
(0.024)

High cognitive ability ×
High adaptability
R-squared
N

-0.115***
(0.028)
0.143
25367

-0.128***
(0.027)
0.146
25367

-0.089***
(0.030)
0.168
17299

-0.114***
(0.031)
0.130
17299

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses, from the
OLS regressions of the effects of different cognitive ability quintiles and adaptability quintiles, as well as
the interactions of these, on different mobility indicators. Columns 1 and 2 examine migration across local
labor markets, and columns 3 and 4 examine rural–urban migration. The sample includes birth cohorts
from 1932 and 1933. In column 2, the sample only includes individuals who lived in a rural municipality
at the time of enlistment. Control variables include the occupation of the father, an indicator for the
death of the father or mother or both parents, the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and
the individual’s year of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

50

Table A2: Reverse Causality: Association between Moving during Childhood and Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities

Moving during childhood
R-squared
N

Cognitive ability

Sociability

Adjustability

0.096****
(0.013)

-0.002
(0.012)

0.007
(0.013)

0.138
24161

0.026
24668

0.016
24899

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses,
from the OLS regressions of the effects of a variable indicating whether an individual moved
during childhood on cognitive ability (column 1), sociability (column 2), and adaptability
(column 3). The sample includes birth cohorts from 1932 and 1933. Control variables include
the occupation of the father, an indicator for the death of the father or mother or both parents,
the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the individual’s year of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

51

Table A3: Controlling for Childhood and Military Service Mobility
Moved across LLM
before 1980
(1)

Moved into cities
before 1980
(2)

Moved across LLM
before 1980
(3)

Moved into cities
before 1980
(4)

0.053***
(0.003)

0.057***
(0.004)

0.061***
(0.015)

0.059***
(0.004)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.004
(0.014)

-0.001
(0.004)

Adaptability

0.040***
(0.002)

0.025***
(0.003)

0.050***
(0.012)

0.027***
(0.003)

Childhood mobility

0.506***
(0.005)

0.084***
(0.007)

Cognitive ability

Sociability

Cognitive ability
× Oslo

0.104
(0.110)

Sociability
× Oslo

-0.094
(0.111)

Adaptability
× Oslo

-0.080
(0.151)

Oslo

-0.238**
(0.118)

King’s Guard
R-squared
N

-0.019
(0.012)
0.189
23829

0.141
16221

0.134
1358

0.133
16221

Notes: Entries in Columns 1 and 2 represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses,
from the OLS regressions of the effects of cognitive ability, sociability, adaptability, and childhood mobility on different
mobility indicators. The sample includes birth cohorts from 1932 and 1933 and in column 2, the sample only includes
individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment. Entries in column 3 only include member of
the King’s Guard and represent the estimated coefficients from the OLS regressions of the effects of cognitive ability,
sociability, adaptability, an indicator variable for residing in Oslo at time of military enlistment and interaction terms
of the Oslo-indicator with the different skill measures on an indicator variable for moving across local labor markets.
Entries in column 4 include individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment and represent
the estimated coefficients from the OLS regressions of the effects of cognitive ability, sociability, adaptability, and an
indicator variable for being assigned the King’s Guard on an indicator variable for moving from a rural to an urban
area. Control variables include the occupation of the father, an indicator for the death of the father or mother or both
parents, the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the individual’s year of birth in all specifications.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

52

Table A4: Heterogeneity
Moved across LLM
before 1980
(1)

Cognitive ability

Sociability

Adaptability
R-squared
N

Cognitive ability

Sociability

Adaptability
R-squared
N

Cognitive ability

Sociability

Adaptability
R-squared
N

Moved into cities
before 1980
(2)

Moved across LLM
before 1980
(3)

Panel A: Birth Order
Firstborn Sons
0.059***
0.057***
(0.005)
(0.006)

Moved into cities
before 1980
(4)

Second or Later Born Sons
0.051***
0.059***
(0.004)
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.006)

0.011*
(0.006)

0.004
(0.004)

-0.006
(0.005)

0.044***
(0.004)

0.026***
(0.005)

0.041***
(0.004)

0.028***
(0.004)

0.123
9905

0.138
6619

0.125
13924

0.132
9602

Panel B: Socioeconomic Background
Low Socioeconomic Background
High Socioeconomic Background
0.049***
0.050***
0.064***
0.064***
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)

0.001
(0.005)

0.002
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.005)

0.049***
(0.004)
0.079
11172

0.029***
(0.004)
0.128
8673

0.036***
(0.004)
0.168
12657

0.025***
(0.005)
0.139
7548

Panel C: Macro-Regions
Southern, Middle, and Western Norway
0.059***
0.058***
(0.003)
(0.004)

Northern Norway
0.049***
0.058***
(0.009)
(0.008)

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.009
(0.009)

-0.005
(0.009)

0.040***
(0.003)
0.129
20689

0.026***
(0.004)
0.143
13182

0.047***
(0.008)
0.042
3140

0.029***
(0.007)
0.042
3039

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses, from the OLS regressions of the
effects of cognitive ability, sociability, and adaptability on different mobility indicators. Columns 1 and 3 examine migration
across local labor markets, and columns 2 and 4 examine rural–urban migration. The sample includes birth cohorts from 1932
and 1933. In columns 3 and 4, the sample only includes individuals who lived in a rural municipality at the time of enlistment.
Control variables include the occupation of the father, an indicator for the death of the father or mother or both parents, the
parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the individual’s year of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

53

Table A5: Sibling Sample, Marriage Outcomes, and International Migration
Brother Fixed Effects
Moved across LLM Move into cities
before 1960
before 1980
(1)
(2)

Married
in 1960
(3)

Emigrating to a
foreign country
(4)

Cognitive ability

0.085
(0.073)

-0.022
(0.031)

0.012***
(0.003)

0.006***
(0.001)

Sociability

0.028
(0.036)

0.002
(0.015)

0.005
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.001)

Adaptability

0.062**
(0.030)

0.033**
(0.015)

0.011***
(0.003)

0.003***
(0.001)

0.49
0.191
230

0.25
0.106
208

0.62
0.036
23829

0.01
0.009
23829

Mean of
dep. variable
R-squared (within)
N

Notes: Entries represent the estimated coefficients, with standard errors shown in parentheses, from the OLS regressions of the effects of cognitive ability, sociability, and adaptability on different outcomes. Columns 1 and 2 present
brother fixed effects estimates for the probability of moving across local labor markets before 1980 or from a rural
area to a city before 1980. Column 3 considers the probability of being married in 1960, and column 4 analyzes the
probability of emigrating to a foreign country. Control variables include the occupation of the father, an indicator
for the death of the father or mother or both parents, the parent’s civil status, the individual’s height in cm, and the
individual’s year of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

54

