                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            OLDER AND SLOWER:
THE STARTUP DEFICIT’S LASTING EFFECTS ON AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

                                           Titan Alon
                                          David Berger
                                          Robert Dent
                                        Benjamin Pugsley

                                       Working Paper 23875
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23875


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2017




 Prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference, NYU, April 2017. We are grateful for
 the very helpful comments from an anonymous referee as well from Steve Davis, Ryan
 Decker, John Haltiwanger, Greg Kaplan, Pete Klenow, Geoffrey Tate, and participants
 in the NBER Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth conferences, Northwestern University
 Macro Lunch, Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference on Public Policy, 2017 SED meetings,
 and the NBER Macro Productivity group. We also thank Javier Miranda and Ryan Decker
 for their generous assistance with the Business Register, Jim Spletzer for his
 documentation, Sara Moreira for her work merging the revenue data to the LBD and Harry
 Wheeler for his excellent research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are
 those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the
 National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
 confidential information is disclosed.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2017 by Titan Alon, David Berger, Robert Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley. All rights reserved.
 Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
 provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Older and Slower: The Startup Deficit’s Lasting Effects on Aggregate Productivity Growth
Titan Alon, David Berger, Robert Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley
NBER Working Paper No. 23875
September 2017
JEL No. E01,E24

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the link between declining firm entry, aging incumbent firms and sluggish U.S.
productivity growth. We provide a dynamic decomposition framework to characterize the
contributions to industry productivity growth across the firm age distribution and apply this
framework to the newly developed Revenue-enhanced Longitudinal Business Database (ReLBD).
Overall, several key findings emerge:(i) the relationship between firm age and productivity
growth is downward sloping and convex; (ii) the magnitudes are substantial and significant but
fade quickly, with nearly 2/3 of the effect disappearing after five years and nearly the entire effect
disappearing after ten; (iii) the higher productivity growth of young firms is driven nearly
exclusively by the forces of selection and reallocation. Our results suggest a cumulative drag on
aggregate productivity of 3.1% since 1980. Using an instrumental variables strategy we find a
consistent pattern across states/MSAs in the U.S. The patterns are broadly consistent with a
standard model of firm dynamics with monopolistic competition.

Titan Alon                                        Robert Dent
Northwestern University                           Nomura Securities
Department of Economics                           robcdent@gmail.com
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208                                Benjamin Pugsley
titanalon@u.northwestern.edu                      University of Notre Dame
                                                  Department of Economics
David Berger                                      Notre Dame, IN 46556
Department of Economics                           bpugsley@nd.edu
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
david.berger@northwestern.edu
1        Introduction
Over the last three decades, the U.S. business sector has experienced a collapse in the rate of
new startups alongside an enormous reallocation of economic activity from entrants and young
firms to older incumbents. Figures 1a and 1b reproduced from Pugsley and Sahin (2014) illustrate
the trends.1 The magnitude of the reallocation across firm age groups is quite startling and even
surpasses those flows documented in the structural transformation literature from manufacturing to
services over the same period.2 These patterns are also widespread across industries and geographic
markets, suggesting they are independent of any compositional variation in economic activity.3 In
what follows, we refer to the persistent and widespread collapse in startup rates and the subsequent
aging of U.S. businesses as the startup deficit.
        Recently, economists and policy makers have begun questioning whether the startup deficit may
impact the health of the aggregate economy through a variety of channels. For example, growth
theory often associates new firms with the introduction of new innovations and new products;
in trade, these firms are typically responsible for opening new markets; in industrial organization,
entrants play a critical role in maintaining market competition; and in the firm dynamics literature,
new and young firms typically drive productivity gains from selection and reallocation. Work by
Evans (1987) and Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989) in the manufacturing sector, and more
recently Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) for the entire nonfarm business sector, highlight
the key role of firm age, above and beyond firm size for firm dynamics.
        Building on this earlier empirical work, a new vein of research has emerged attempting to
better understand the economic significance of firm age and, more broadly, the life-cycle of the
firm.4 Together, these lines of research suggest that recent slowdowns in the rate of business
creation and the shift in economic activity toward older incumbents could exercise significant drags
on aggregate growth and employment dynamics. In this paper, we aim to build on these recent
findings by examining explicitly the systematic relationship between firm age and labor productivity
growth that is bound together with the traditional measures of reallocation. We also stress that
while the focus of our analysis is the effects of the compositional change of firm age, recent work by
Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2014) and Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda
(2017) have highlighted that the majority of changes in employment and productivity dynamics
occur within firm age groups. We view our analysis as complementary to theirs.
        We conduct our investigation using U.S. Census Bureau data encompassing the entire nonfarm
business sector from 1996-2012. As our aim is mainly descriptive, we apply a methodology that
    1
     Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2014) and Hathaway and Litan (2014) also document the same
change in age composition. Reedy and Strom (2012) are the first, to our knowledge, to document a decline in the
aggregate startup rate that long pre-dates the Great Recession.
   2
     See Dent, Karahan, Pugsley, and Şahin (2016). Over the 1987-2012 period, the mature employment share
increases by roughly 17 percentage points. For comparison, over the same period the manufacturing employment
share declines by 11 percentage points and the services employment share increases by 14 percentage points.
   3
     See, again, Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2014), Hathaway and Litan (2014) and Pugsley and Sahin
(2014) for details.
   4
     Arkolakis, Papageorgiou, and Timoshenko (2014) and Pugsley and Sahin (2014) are recent examples.



                                                       2
remains agnostic about the underlying mechanism at work. Instead, we exploit the rich industry
and geographic variation in the Census data to nonparametrically identify any common, underlying
links between productivity growth and firm age. For shorthand, we refer to this relationship as
the age-productivity profile. We find a robust and mostly stable relationship between our measure
of productivity growth and firm age. We submit our main results to a large battery of robustness
checks controlling for price effects, organizational structure of firms, industrial and geographic
composition, and the pattern is little changed.
       Given a robust set of estimates, we then use our results to assess the impact of the startup
deficit has had on aggregate productivity. Our first approach applies the age-productivity profile
results directly and shows how, under some empirically plausible assumptions, the age-productivity
profiles we estimate can be linked directly to average labor productivity growth. While this exercise
allows us to transparently quantify the significance of the shape of our estimated age-productivity
profiles in light of the decline in firm entry, it does not admit any causal interpretation. We there-
fore complement these results with a series of cross-sectional regressions, which exploit plausibly
exogenous variation in startup activity across geographic and industry markets. Using differences
in startup rates across markets generated either by lagged demographics or shocks to the value of
collateral we find markets with higher entry rates show significantly faster productivity growth.
       Our decomposition-based results show that the age composition matters. The estimation pro-
cedure establishes a statistically significant and robust empirical link between the distribution of
firm age and productivity growth which is independent of pricing, compositional, organizational, or
cyclical variation. Our age-productivity profiles suggest that the relationship between firm age and
productivity growth is downward sloping and convex, mirroring similar patterns uncovered in other
work between firm age and employment growth. The differential in growth rates are substantial but
converge quickly; while the youngest firms grow very quickly relative to older incumbents, nearly
two-thirds of the effect is gone after five years and the total effect is nearly gone after ten. The
pattern seems to be remarkably stable across a wide variety of robustness checks for all uncensored
age groups. This stability does not seem to be shared, however, by the oldest age censored firms
for whom we have more limited information. For these firms we document marked declines in
labor productivity growth over our sample, driven primarily by falls in what we will label alloca-
tive efficiency. Quantitatively, our results suggest from 1980 to 2014–even holding constant the
productivity level of the oldest censored firms– the startup deficit and subsequent aging of U.S.
business sector has reduced aggregate productivity by a little more than 4 percent, or roughly
0.12 percentage points per year. Declines in allocative efficiency among the oldest firms, may have
further contributed up to an additional 2 percentage points.
       In order to better understand which economic mechanisms drive the age-productivity profile, we
adapt the Dynamic Olley-Pakes (DOP) decomposition of Melitz and Polanec (2015) and apply it to
the age-productivity profile5 . Using changes in the cross-sectional distribution of productivity, the
   5
    Note that here we are decomposing productivity growth over the life-cycle of a cohort of firms. This in contrast to
the normal manner in which the DOP methodology is employed to decompose the productivity growth of an industry
or economy.


                                                          3
DOP framework decomposes the change in average productivity into into (1) a contribution from
exit of less productive firms, (2) a widespread shift in the average productivity of incumbents, and
(3) the reallocation of market share to more productive incumbents, where the last two encompass
the traditional Olley-Pakes decomposition. We find that the exit and reallocation channels are
primarily responsible for the shape of the age-productivity profile. In appendix C, we demonstrate
that a standard model of firm dynamics with monopolistic competition is broadly consistent with
these patterns. Interestingly, among cohorts of firms founded since the late 1970s, the relative
contributions of each component of productivity growth have been stable. This stability includes
even the contribution from the reallocation channel, which contrasts with other recent work such
as Hyatt and Spletzer (2013) and Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2016b) that show
declines in measures of job and worker reallocation across all age groups and young firms. Among
the oldest firms (formed before the late 1970s), however, we too observe declines in the contribu-
tion of changes in reallocation to productivity growth–consistent with these earlier findings in the
literature.
   Complimenting the counterfactual analysis, our cross-sectional regressions also uncover signifi-
cant drags on productivity growth from declining entry. Across detailed geographic and industrial
market we find that a one percentage point decline in the entry rate implies a roughly 1 to 2 percent-
age point drag on local annual productivity growth. The sign and approximate magnitude of the
effect are preserved even after we employ two distinct instrumental variable approaches exploiting
cross-sectional variation in demographic trends and new business financing conditions. Importantly,
our cross sectional analysis admits both direct and indirect effects of the declines in entry, with the
direct effect following from the compositional change and the indirect effect following from further
within age group changes.
   Our paper contributes to multiple literatures. First, several influential papers have studied the
dynamics of productivity using similar data. Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) is the first
paper, to our knowledge, to use administrative data on receipts to study the dynamics of produc-
tivity outside of the manufacturing sector. They show that receipts per worker is an informative
proxy for labor productivity and provide comparisons with the standard approach of constructing
productivity measures from survey data on inputs and outputs. Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and
Scarpetta (2013) show the importance of the reallocation channel that we capture in our dynamic
Olley-Pakes decomposition, and provide a more structural interpretation in a model that supports
within industry dispersion in labor productivity.
   Second, we contribute to the large and growing literature on the decline of business dynamism.
Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2016a) and Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Mi-
randa (2017) (using the same Revenue-enhanced Longitudinal Business Database developed by
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulick, and Miranda (2016a)) have identified a decline in reallocation as key
factor in the sluggish growth of labor productivity over the last decade.
   Of course, the aggregate productivity implications of shifts in the age distribution of domestic
businesses represents only a fraction of the broad structural changes recently underway in the


                                                    4
economy. The secular increases in market concentration and declines in job flows accompanying the
start-up deficit recently documented in the literature leave ample room for aggregate effects above
and beyond those we uncover here. For example Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson, and Van Reenen
(2017) document increasing concentration of domestic sales, and Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and
Miranda (2017) find that firm’s job creation responses to profitability shocks has declined over
time. Furthermore, while our work focuses on the aggregate implications of between age-group
variation in labor productivity growth, the literature has also highlighted the importance of within
age-group variation as an important determinant of recent declines in business dynamism6 . The
shifts in aggregate productivity reflect both compositional and within age group changes. Although
our focus is primarily on the direct effects of the changes in the age distribution, we view it as
complementary to efforts investigating within age group changes. Moreover, our cross sectional
evidence, linking plausibly exogenous declines in the entry rate to declines in labor productivity
growth, is compatible with both compositional and within-group channels.
    The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows: Section 2 reviews our estimation methodology
and discusses the construction of our main dataset, as well as our decomposition framework linking
aggregate productivity growth to our profile estimates. Section 3 presents the empirical results
and quantifies the macroeconomic significance of our findings. Section 4 presents the battery of
robustness tests we conduct on our final estimates. Section 5 presents the cross-sectional evidence
and our IV approach. Section 6 concludes the paper.


2     Data and Methodology
To begin our analysis we aim to estimate the empirical relationship between firm age and labor
productivity growth. Our starting point is an identifying conjecture that their exists some station-
ary relationship between firm age and productivity growth which is common across industries up
to scale. In this section, we estimate this relationship non-parametrically and evaluate its stability
using rich Census data covering the entire nonfarm business sector.

2.1    Data
We use firm-level measures of labor revenue productivity encompassing the entire U.S. nonfarm
business sector from 1996-2012. Our main data source is the Census Bureau’s Revenue-enhanced
Longitudinal Business Database (ReLBD), first constructed by Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulick, and
Miranda (2016b). The ReLBD merges the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD)
with corresponding administrative records in the Census Bureau’s Business Register (BR) contain-
ing revenues reported to the IRS from business tax filings.
    The LBD provides high quality measures of employment, location, and industry with nearly
universal coverage of the nonfarm business sector which are carefully linked over time at the es-
   6
     For example, Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2016b) find that as much as 70-75 percent of recent
declines in the job reallocation rate can be explained by within age-group variation over time



                                                      5
tablishment level. These longitudinal records may be used to calculate measures of employment
growth, entry, exit and establishment age. Through data gathered in the Cenus Bureau annual
Company Organization Survey and quinquennial Economic Census, the LBD also provides a firm
identifier for each year that groups establishments at the highest level of operational control.7 We
assign an establishment age 0 in the year it hires its first employee. Following the approach of
Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2006) and more recently Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Mi-
randa (2013), we then assign each firm that is comprised of more than one establishment the age
of its oldest establishment The advantage of this approach is that age 0 firms are de novo firms,
composed entirely of new establishments.8 We then merge revenue records from the Census Bu-
reau BR following the methodology of Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulick, and Miranda (2016b).9 These
records are merged at the level of the tax reporting unit (EIN) and aggregated to the firm level.
Unfortunately, matching revenue records are not available for all firms, and the matching is non
random. Revenue records may be incomplete for very large and very small firms. Following Halti-
wanger, Jarmin, Kulick, and Miranda (2016b), after applying a set of filters to remove outliers, we
estimate propensity scores using a set of observable firm characteristics and re-weight observations
by the inverse of the predicted propensity scores to adjust for the non random matching. We then
merge, where available, price indices at the NAICS 4-digit level from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Labor Productivity and Costs database. Finally, to construct real revenues, we deflate nominal
revenues by the GDP implicit price deflator from the BEA.10 Further details on the construction of
the dataset and cleaning process are provided in appendix B. With the merged and cleaned dataset
we construct firm-level measures of real revenues per employee, which may later be aggregated by
firm age, industry and location.

2.2    Age-productivity profiles
Using our firm-level measure of real revenue Rit per worker Eit , we define firm i log labor produc-
tivity φit = log(Rit /Eit ) and aggregate (industry j) log labor productivity as
                                                           X
                                                   Φjt ≡        sit φit ,
                                                            i

where sit is the market share for firm i measured here as employment share. Throughout, labor
productivity always refers to its log level, Φ. To describe the age-productivity profile, we measure
   7
     See Jarmin and Miranda (2002) for additional details on the LBD and its construction.
   8
     There are, however, alternative measures of firm age that may also be relevant for firm productivity. For example,
we might want to classify a firm by the tenure of its ownership and management, since if a firm is acquired by a
private equity company that replaces its management team, its dynamics may more closely resemble a startup than
a well established company. Considering alternative age concepts is an exciting area for future research. We thank
Steve Davis for this insight.
   9
     The details of the merge are nontrivial and described in an internal Census Bureau technical memo. We thank
Javier Miranda and Jim Spletzer for assisting us with this merge.
  10
     Our baseline specification also includes industry and time fixed effects to capture some of the variation that occurs
across industries and time. In the robustness section, we explicitly deflate our series using the most comprehensive
set of price indices that are available.



                                                            6
productivity by age group. We also adapt the Dynamic Olley-Pakes (DOP) decomposition of Melitz
and Polanec (2015) to measure the changing sources of productivity growth over firms’ life-cycles.11
Instead of applying the decomposition directly to the aggregate economy (or an industry) as those
authors do, however, we use the methodology to study how the productivity of a cohort of firms
                                                         P
evolves as they age. Specifically, We let Φajt =              i∈a (sit /sat )φit   be the productivity of a cohort of
age a firms in period t in industry j. The productivity of this group of firms in period t − 1 can be
expressed as the employment share weighted average productivity of those firms that will survive
(s) to period t and those firms that will exit (x) before then such that

                               Φa,t−1 = ssa,t−1 Φsa,t−1 + sxa,t−1 Φxa,t−1
                                       = Φsa,t−1 + sxa,t−1 (Φxa,t−1 − Φsa,t−1 )

where siat for i ∈ {s, x} represents the share of firms i within cohort a (in industry j) at time t.
For simplicity, we suppress the industry subscript j when obvious. Noting then that the cohort’s
productivity in period t will be constituted by survivors alone we can express the productivity
growth rate of the cohort as

                                ∆Φa,t = ∆Φsa,t − sxa,t−1 (Φxa,t−1 − Φsa,t−1 )

which captures growth from survivors and a contribution from selective exit. Applying the Olley-
Pakes decomposition to the first component yields

                                          g sa (sit , ϕit ) − sxa,t−1 (Φxa,t−1 − Φsa,t−1 )
                    ∆at Φa,t = ∆φ̄sa,t + ∆Cov                                                                     (1)
                                | {z }     |        {z          }    |                {z          }
                                 Within    Allocative Efficiency                   Selection

which decomposes the productivity growth of a cohort into its firm dynamic components. The
component ∆φ̄sa,t is the change in the (unweighted) mean productivity across surviving firms
and captures any broad based changes in productivity within firms as they age, such as those
emerging from learning or process innovations. The component ∆Cov ˆ sa (sit , ϕit ) measures the
change in covariances between a firm’s market share (sit ) and its productivity (ϕit ) which captures
the allocative efficiency of the cohort insofar as it increases as higher productivity firms in the
cohort capture larger fractions of the market share.12 The Olley-Pakes distinction between within
and allocation attributes shocks to all firms as within, and shocks either to the market shares or
the productivity of specific firms to allocation. If within firm changes are concentrated rather than
broad based, they will also appear in this covariance term, i.e., the covariance increases if highly
productive firms gain market share or if highly productive become even more productive. The
final term represents the contribution of selection and contributes positively to cohort productivity
  11
    See also Diewert and Fox (2005) for an alternative dynamic decomposition that accounts for entry and exit.
  12
    We use the e· notation to denote that the term is technically a quasi-covariance term between market shares
and productivities since, as in Melitz and Polanec’s decomposition, the 1/N term is embeded in the shares. Stated
more precisely, the term is the inner product of the deviations from the cohort mean of firm market shares and firm
productivity.


                                                          7
growth provided exiting firms are on average less productive than surviving incumbents within the
same cohort.

2.3      Estimation
To estimate the age-productivity growth profile we pool annual cross-section of productivity growth
by firm age and 4-digit NAICS industries measured in the Census data. Our main identifying
assumption is that we can express an age group’s productivity growth as
                                                      a
                                                      X
                             ∆at Φajt = νj + µt +           δl + εajt    a = 1 . . . , A,                         (2)
                                                      l=1

where E[εajt |a, j, t] = 0. We also apply the same decomposition of average productivity growth
into time, industry and age effects to each component of equation (1). This specification imposes
some strong assumptions: first, industry, time, and age effects are additively separable; second,
there are no cohort effects in the growth rate of labor productivity, which is consistent with recent
work by Moreira (2016) who finds persistent cohort effects in the level but not the growth rate of
productivity. Because our specification is in differences, it already removes any level fixed effects
across industries or time. The inclusion of fixed effects in the differenced specification then allows
us to also control for differences in time and industry trends in our estimation procedure.
                                                                                P i Yi
       Additionally, we are assuming that revenue labor productivity,            Li ,    which is what we can mea-
sure since we lack firm specific price information, is informative about physical labor productivity,
Yi
Li .    Previous empirical evidence suggests that this assumption holds in the data (Bartelsman,
Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta, 2013).13
       Given the identifying assumptions implied by our specification and discussed above, we are
able to semi-parametrically estimate the age-group profiles by projecting age group productivity
growth, ∆Φajt , and its components in equation (1), on a full set of industry, time, and age group
fixed effects. Pooling samples from 1996 to 2012, we estimate equation (2) by OLS and WLS
where we weight by an industry average employment share, in order to hold industry composition
constant.
       The full set of estimated age group coefficients δ̂a provide semi-parametric estimates of average
productivity growth across firm ages, which we refer to as age-productivity profiles. In our analysis
of aggregate productivity growth, our foremost focus is the role of firm age on average productivity
growth. Recent works, however, by Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulick, and Miranda (2016b) and Decker,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2016a) have also shed light on how the dispersion in both
productivity and employment growth rates across firms has changed over time, even within age
groups. Although it would not alter our results, recent evidence suggests the stability we find in
the average profile does not extend to higher order moments.
  13
    This paper also points out that most models do not imply that there is any firm-level dispersion in revenue labor
productivity because optimizing firms will set the marginal revenue product to a constant (across firms marginal cost.
The paper also shows that is possible to induce a positive correlation in these labor productivity measures as well as
dispersion by adding overhead labor, adjustment costs or non-CES demand.


                                                            8
   The upper-case A represents the fact that, due to data limitations, our ability to observe
productivity growth by age is right-censored. However, since we are estimating a profile that is
stationary across time, we are able to ameliorate the censoring by conducting estimation on a
triangular panel of firm ages that grows as we gain more year observations that reveal the behavior
of older age groups in later years. This approach allows us to estimate the profile for firms through
age 30, rather than being forced to curtail estimate at age 15 had we worked with a balanced panel.
As a robustness check, we verify that the triangular panel approach does not significantly impact
the precision of early age estimates that we would have gotten with the balanced panel alone.
   The differenced specification above will not be suitable for new entrants. While this is not
crucial for understanding the dynamics of firm age and productivity growth, identifying trends
in the productivity of entering cohorts will be crucial in linking our results to aggregate produc-
tivity in section 2.4. For this purpose, we run an auxiliary regression on the sub-sample of new
entrants, controlling as best as possible for well known issues with industry heterogeneity through
a specification in differences with industry fixed effects. Specifically, we estimate:


                                         ΦE,it = ηt + νi + E,it                                 (3)

where we interpret η as a common deterministic trend in the productivity of new entering cohorts.
In appendix figure A2 we explicitly estimate cohort effects for non-censored age groups and verify
that the assumption of a linear trend is representative of long-term trajectory patterns in the data.

2.4   Aggregating Firm-Level Findings
Given a robust set of estimates of the relationship between firm age and productivity growth, this
section establishes a framework with which to interpret the results and link them to aggregate
productivity. As our ultimate aim is to quantify the aggregate productivity implications of the
startup deficit and subsequent aging, we need to establish a framework linking the latter to the
former. To isolate the aging effects, we derive an aggregation in the absence of any aggregate time
or industry composition contributions. In this case, we can use our estimates in equations (2) and
(3) which indicate that conditional on no time or industry effects we have

                   E [∆Φait |µ = 0, ν = 0] = δa             E [∆ΦE,it |µ = 0, ν = 0] = η

   This in turn allows us to rewrite a cohort’s productivity in any given time period (dropping the
conditional expectation for brevity) as:
                                        a
                                        X
                               Φa,t =         δl + ΦE,t−a     a = 1, . . . , A,                  (4)
                                        l=1

where ΦE,t−a is the initial cohort productivity of firms created in period t − a (corresponding
to the cohort of age a firms in period t). The expression clarifies that once we condition away
aggregate and industry effects, the difference between firms of a given age across time can be

                                                      9
pinned down by differences in initial cohort productivity fed through the life-cycle profiles. Given
this observation, we can isolate the effects of aging on aggregate productivity by decomposing the
latter into contributions across cohorts and within-cohorts as the age distribution shifts. To see
this, consider rewriting aggregate productivity growth in period t, conditional on aggregate and
industry effects, so that:

                                 A
                                 X                    A
                                                      X
                    ∆Φt =            sa,t Φa,t −          sa,t−1 Φa,t−1
                                 a                    a
                                 A
                                 X                                A
                                                                  X
                             =       (sa,t − sa,t−1 )Φa,t +               sa,t−1 (Φa,t − Φa,t−1 )
                                 a                                a
                                 A                                A
                                                                                                                    (5)
                                 X                                X
                             =       (sa,t − sa,t−1 )Φa,t +               sa,t−1 (ΦE,t−a − ΦE,t−a−1 )
                                 a                                    a
                                 A
                                 X           a
                                             X              A
                                                            X
                             =       ∆sa,t         δj − η         ∆sa,t a + η
                                 a           j=1             a


where the third and fourth equalities follow from plugging in equation (4), using the trend in
entering cohorts, and the fact that the age shares are exhaustive. The expression makes clear that,
when one isolates the contribution of changes in the age distribution over time, there are both aging
effects (first term) and cohort-composition effects (the second term). Specifically, the expression
(ΦE,t−a − ΦE,t−a−1 ) captures the differences in the initial productivity of entering cohorts created
in period t − a and t − a − 1.
   Given the framework above, we are now in a position to construct empirical counter-factuals of
the lasting impact of the startup deficit on aggregate productivity. Let sa,t represent the historical
distribution of economic activity across age groups. We can represent the net impact of a counter-
factual path scf
              a,t , holding constant time and industry effects, by:

                                              A                              a              A
                  cf
                                                      (∆scf                                     (∆scf
                                              X                              X              X
            E[∆Φ|sa,t ] − E[∆Φ|sa,t ] =                  a,t − ∆sa,t )             δj − η          a,t − ∆sa,t )a
                                                  a                          j=1            a                       (6)
                                              |                  {z                 }   |            {z         }
                                                             life-cycle                            Cohort


where the expression follows from differencing equation (5) for two different paths of employment
shares. The first term captures the contribution of life-cycle effects captured by our profiles, the sec-
ond term captures the cohort-composition effects due to the trend in entering cohorts productivity.
Note that the two effects work in opposite directions here. As economic activity shifts away from
young firms, aggregate productivity growth will rise as more activity is concentrated at older firms
that have already gone through the crucible of selection and are higher on the age-productivity
profile – this is captured by the first term. At the same time, the shift will push down aggregate
productivity growth as economic activity moves away from the younger firms who are entering
with better vintages of techniques and technology. The shape of the transition and its net effect
therefore depends on the rate of the shifts and the relative size of the trend in new entrants versus


                                                                 10
the steepness in the age profile. Finally, as the counter-factual is defined relative to the historical
evolution of shares, the result is to be interpreted as the net effect on productivity growth had
shares followed the counter-factual path rather than its historical evolution.


3     Results
3.1    Age-productivity profile
Productivity growth varies significantly over the firm life-cycle. Using the ReLBD pooled across
all years 1996-2012 for firms age 1 to 15, we estimate the common age-productivity profile across
4-digit industries for each of the components of the DOP decomposition described above in section
2.2. Figure 2 plots the incumbent firm age-productivity profile for each components of the DOP
decomposition along with its 95 percent confidence set. The upper left panel is net productivity
growth by firm age ∆Φat , which is the sum of the selection, within and reallocation terms. The net
productivity growth profile is convex and downward sloping. Expected revenue productivity growth
at young firms is approximately 15 percent in the first year and falls quickly towards 0 within the first
5 years of a firm’s life. After 5 years, expected productivity growth is statistically indistinguishable
from zero. Looking across the components of net productivity growth, reallocation and selection
account for roughly two-thirds and one-third of net productivity growth, respectively. Interestingly,
almost none of the expected growth is captured by the within term. The significant productivity
gains at young firms stem entirely from the high exit rates of less productive young firms and the
accumulation of additional market share of the already more productive firms. Our benchmark
results, because we control for year and industry fixed effects, express the age-productivity profile
relative to firms age 11 to 15. In practice, the productivity growth for this group is close to zero.14
    Despite the prominence of within firm productivity gains in the economic literature, there are
a number of reasons why we shouldn’t be overly surprised to find such a small contribution in
our empirical result. First, our estimation procedure already allows for differential trend growth
rates in productivity across detailed 4-digit industries15 . If within firm productivity gains are
highly correlated across firms within detailed industries then these will have already been removed
in the first stage of the estimation process and so do not appear prominently in the age profile
decomposition. Furthermore, there are also mechanical reasons related to the DOP decomposition
which might dampen the contributions of the within piece. For instance, if firms that register
large within productivity gains also capture larger market shares then it is possible that the DOP
methodology ascribes these gains to increases in allocative efficiency rather than within firm gains.
Nevertheless, given the popularity of the DOP approach we continue to rely on it in order to
facilitate comparability with results elsewhere in the literature.
  14
     In appendix figure A1 we plot the estimated profile in levels (rather than relative to the 11-15 group) from a
specification without time and industry fixed effects against our benchmark. Year and industry fixed effects do little
to change the shape of the age-productivity profile.
  15
     Captured by the νi in our estimation framework




                                                         11
       Overall, three key findings emerge from our estimate: (i) the age-productivity profile is down-
ward sloping and convex and mirrors patterns estimated between employment growth and age; (ii)
the magnitudes are significant but fade quickly, with nearly 2/3 of the effect disappearing after
five years and nearly the entire effect disappearing after ten; (iii) the higher productivity growth
of young firms is driven nearly exclusively by the forces of selection and reallocation.

3.2      Stability of age-productivity profile
Our counterfactual relies on the shape of the age-productivity profile changing little over time.
Although we include a more exhaustive set of robustness checks in section 4, before constructing a
counterfactual, we verify that the shape of the age-productivity profile we estimate captures fun-
damental dynamics of firm age and productivity and is uncorrelated with any time varying factors
such as business cycles or other lower frequency changes. Our key identifying assumption presup-
poses that to the extent that there are cyclical or non-stationary effects on the age-productivity
profile, these forces enter as level effects and so don’t drive variation across age groups. We test
this supposition by dividing our sample into a high-growth productivity period (1996-2004) and
the more recent period of sluggish productivity growth (2005-2012) and re-run our estimation pro-
cedure including interaction terms that allow the profile to shift between the two periods. We then
test to see if the interaction terms capture statistically significant shifts anywhere in the profile, or
jointly, between the high-growth and low-growth periods.
       Figure 3 plots the results of splitting our estimation across a high and low growth time period.
The figure shows our baseline estimates and the changes captured by the interaction terms for the
low growth period along with a 95 percent confidence set. All the interacted terms suggest small
movements between the high growth and low growth period and are statistically insignificant. The
results suggest the profiles are stationary across time.16

3.3      A no startup deficit counterfactual
To quantify the effects of the startup deficit and subsequent aging of U.S. business on aggregate
productivity we implement the decomposition in equation (6). We use the expression to assess
the net effect on aggregate productivity if, ceteris paribus, the startup deficit had never occurred
and instead the entry rate and age distribution had remained at 1980 levels so that ∆scf
                                                                                      at = 0. To
evaluate the expression we plug in our estimates of the age-productivity profile, δ̂a , and trend in
entrant productivity, η̂, from equations (2) and (3), respectively.17 We then feed through the histor-
  16
     See section 4.1 for evidence on the stability of our estimates across local markets.
  17
     Specifically, we use estimates of the profile from our triangular panel approach in Figure 6. We assign to our
censored 16+ age group a profile estimate equal to 0.005, which is the average of all age groups older than 16 which we
can observe in the triangular approach. For η we use an estimate of 0.9, corresponding to the employment weighted
estimate for the whole sample and very close to the fitted trend line in the non-parametric cohort effects we estimate
in figure A2. See table A0 for various estimates of η over the entire sample as well as with a break in 2005 and
under alternative identifying assumptions. In figure A3 we plot ηt estimated nonparametrically relative to 1997 using
time effects. From equation (6) it should be clear that the effect of using different estimates of η is to scale the
contributions of the cohort effects. To illustrate the point, figure 5 plots the total cumulative effect from our main



                                                          12
ical evolution of employment shares by age derived from the Census Bureau’s Business Dynamics
Statistics (BDS) database versus a counter-factual path where the distribution stays constant at
its 1980 levels.
    Figure 4 displays the cumulative effect on aggregate productivity from 1980-2014 had the startup
deficit and accompanying shifts in the age distribution never occurred. The empirical results show
a 3.1% cumulative reduction in aggregate productivity by 2014 relative to a world where the
distribution of activity remained constant at its 1980 level. While the per annum effect of the
transition is small, roughly 10 basis a year from 1980-2014, the cumulative effect of the process
is large in economic terms. To put things in perspective, the results imply that, in 2014 alone,
real median household income would have been roughly $1,600 higher had the startup deficit
never occurred.18 The cumulative lost income over the 35 year period since 1980 would clearly be
magnitudes larger.
    The decomposition also allows us to assess the contribution of the life-cycle and cohort compo-
nents separately, which are plotted in the same figure. The first channel captures the fact that firms
of different ages are at different points in their life-cycle. Our age-profile results indicate that, due
to the forces of selection and reallocation, surviving firms register large increases in productivity
in the early years of life. Hence, as economic activity shifts toward older firms it is also moving
toward firms that, as a group, are more productive, raising aggregate productivity. The results in
figure 4 suggest that the cumulative effect of these effects is roughly -1% by 2014. In other words,
the startup deficit actually raised aggregate productivity by nearly 1% by reallocating activity from
less productive entrants to more productive, older incumbent firms.
    In addition to differences over the life-cycle of a firm, compositional changes can also induce
changes through differences across cohorts of entrants. This effect is captured by the second channel
in our decomposition which accounts for the fact that entering cohorts start with different techniques
and vintages of capital. This channel is perhaps that which comes to mind most readily when people
think about the importance of entrants in the aggregate economy; namely, that the productivity
of entrants improves over time as subsequent generations of entrants adopt the latest vintages of
techniques and equipment. This channel creates a negative drag on productivity as the startup
deficit reduces the number of firms entering with the latest techniques and technologies. Our
estimates put the cumulative effect of these cohort effects at nearly 4% by 2014, more than offsetting
the negative effect from the life-cycle channel and accounting for the lion’s share of the effects we
capture with our approach.

3.4    Older firms
At older ages the expected productivity growth may become negative. If expected net productivity
growth were always weakly positive and entrants were initially less productive than incumbents, an
increase in entry and its dynamic effects on the share of young businesses would reduce aggregate
results in figure 4 for various η within the range of our estimates.
  18
     Calculated using the Census Bureau’s estimates of real median household income in 2014 of $53,718



                                                       13
productivity growth by reducing the relative market share of older more productive businesses. Our
main profile results only consider firms up to age 15 because we can observe this age group for all
years in the ReLBD.19 By relaxing the requirement that we observe each age group in each year of
our data, we can construct an “unbalanced” triangular panel, where older age groups are included
only in years when that age group is not censored. Figure 6 plots the same components estimated
on the triangular panel. Although for the more advanced ages, standard errors are slightly larger
because of fewer years of data, the point estimates begin to push below zero because of a further
decline in the reallocation and selection terms.20 A decline in productivity for older firms should
not be surprising. In a relatively standard model of firm dynamics with diminishing marginal
revenue product and endogenous exit, older firms are more likely to be close their optimal scale
and thus there are no longer gains from reallocation. Additionally, older firms are more likely to
be sufficiently profitable that idiosyncratic reasons uncorrelated with productivity account for a
greater share of exits than shocks to profitability.
    Our use of the triangular panel leans heavily on the assumption that, conditional on age group,
the productivity growth terms are approximately stationary. As we show above in section 3.2, there
is no change in the average DOP profiles between the early 1996-2004 high growth period to the
later 2005-2012 low growth period.21
    However, when looking at the left censored group, who entered before 1979, we do see declines
over time in the allocation DOP terms. We apply the DOP decomposition from (1) to firms age
16 or more. This includes the left censored group of the very oldest firms. Then for each term
in the DOP decomposition for just the oldest age group by industry and year we project on to
industry fixed effects and a dummy variable for the 2005 to 2012 period. Table 1 reports the
estimated coefficient on this dummy variable, which should be interpreted as the average change,
from 1996-2004 to 2005-2012, in the components of productivity growth for firms at least 16 years
old. Average annual productivity growth for this age group declines by 2.3 percentage points
from the early period to the late period, primarily from a decline in the allocation term. This
finding is consistent with Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2017) who apply the DOP
decomposition to all firms and identify a decline in the allocation term over time. Given the stable
DOP profile we find for firms age 1 to 15 in section 3.2, table 1 reveals that the decline they describe
is driven by the oldest firms, which constitute more than 70 percent of total employment.
    This decline among the oldest firms could be a consequence of the startup deficit. One possibility
is that it reflects compositional changes among the oldest firms from the declining inflows into this
age group: the age-productivity profile may be stable, but employment is shifting further along
   19
      Because age is assigned when a firm hires its first employee, firm age will always be right censored (birth year is
left censored), where the uncensored maximum age increases with each additional year of data. We treat any birth
year before 1979 as left censored.
   20
      Strictly speaking, less than the 11-15 group, because we condition on year and industry fixed effects. However,
note from figure A1 without controls that the growth of the 11-15 group is almost exactly zero.
   21
      We also find no statistically significant differences for older uncensored firms using the triangular panel, however
because older age groups feature fewer observations over time and are observed only for a subset of the early period,
this is necessarily a lower powered test



                                                           14
to a negative part of the profile. An alternative possibility is that, for these firms, the profile
is nonstationary with a worsening of the allocation term over time. This latter possibility may
also be a consequence of the a startup deficit if increasing concentration within industries from
declining entry impedes gains from reallocation. Lacking measures of age for this group we cannot
distinguish these two potential explanations. Nevertheless, if the declining productivity growth
among the oldest firms is a consequence of the declines in entry, then the effects of the startup
deficit on productivity growth we describe above are significantly understated. We leave exploration
of this interesting topic to future work.


4     Robustness
We have shown that firm age matters and that the profile of labor productivity growth is to a first
approximation stable across time. In this section, we review potential threats to the validity and
generality of these findings and discuss how we address them. Specifically, our estimates aim to pin
down variation in growth rates of labor productivity over the life-cycle of a firm. Our identifying
conjecture is that such a stable relationship exists independently of compositional and time effects
so that we can identify it up to some level scale. Even though the results of our estimation procedure
suggest that this is a good characterization of empirical regularities in the data, there are good a
priori reasons to believe this structure is too strong and that alternative approaches to the data may
cause our results to disappear. Below, we address these concerns by testing whether our results
are robust to pricing effects, organizational status, industrial composition, and other sources of
non-stationarity.
    Overall, we find that the convex pattern we uncover in the baseline estimate is robust to a
number of tests. While alternative specifications do induce some twisting of the profile, these
effects are almost always statistically insignificant or otherwise minor. Across all tests the shape of
the profile is always preserved and most meaningful differences emerge only as level effects.

4.1   Stability: across markets
Given the length of our time period, it is be hard to test for cyclical effects in the time-series at
any finer level than the split above. However, we can test our assumption that the profiles are
constant up to a level effect by exploiting variation in business cycles across regions. We define
local markets at the CBSA and CBSA-by-Industry level and then divide local market data into
terciles depending on (i) average startup rates, and (ii) average change in startup rates over our
sample period. We then re-run our estimates with interaction terms to capture changes across high
startup activity locations and low startup activity locations. The idea is that if the shape of our
profile estimates are sensitive to cyclical fluctuations in startup activity we would see meaningful
differences across local markets with high-activity and those with low-activity in the cross-section.
To the extent that patterns are preserved up to levels, we can conclude that our results are robust
to this dimension.


                                                  15
   Figures 12 and 13 show how the estimated profiles change when we restrict attention to high
activity and low activity geographic markets grouped in terms of the level of startup activity and
average growth rates in startup activity, respectively. The changes we find here are the most
substantial in all our robustness tests but are still consistent with their being an underlying convex
relationship between age and productivity growth, as in our baseline model. Moving from the low
tercile to high tercile, we see that the magnitude of growth rates can nearly double at a given
age, which should be expected from the definition of the groups. The more remarkable outcome,
however, is that the curvature of the profile which dictates the differences across age groups is
nearly entirely preserved, suggesting that and consistent with our main identification assumption,
the heterogeneity across market states itself enters mainly as a level shift.

4.2   Price effects: nominal versus real
One of the most well known empirical issues with existing large-scale firm level datasets is that
they often lack reliable firm-level price information. In certain settings, failing to account for this
pricing heterogeneity, even in narrowly defined industries, can result in misleading conclusions about
productivity growth rates (see Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008)). While we cannot directly
control for firm level pricing heterogeneity, we can control for pricing heterogeneity across narrowly
defined 4-digit NAICS industries both indirectly, through the use of fixed effects, and directly,
by using publicly available price indices from the BEA. This cross-industry variation in prices is
likely the biggest source of potential bias as our identification strategy relies on exploiting detailed
cross-industry variation over time. To tackle this directly, we re-run our estimation procedure using
industry measures of output-per-worker calculated by deflating our revenue data using the most
comprehensive set of BLS price indices available. The results are presented in figure 7. Adjusting
our data with BLS price series had almost no noticeable impact on our estimates, suggesting that
variation in prices across industries was already well controlled for by working in log growth rates
and including industry and time fixed effects.
   While in principle it is still possible that their exist differences in pricing strategies between
young and old firms within industries that could be driving our profile estimates, we view this fact
as an interpretation rather than a threat to validity. The extent to which these systematic age-
pricing differences exist across all detailed industries in the nonfarm business sector is an indication
of an important economic mechanism at work causing the distribution of firm age to matter for
aggregate outcomes. As stated above, we remain agnostic as to the underlying mechanism driving
our results and focus instead on establishing a characterization and quantification of the role of
firm age and its distribution in aggregate outcomes. We therefore leave open the possibility that
our results are driven by the evolution of pricing strategies over the life cycle of firms as a potential
mechanisms to rationalize the data. We hope future researchers will bring better data to bear on
this important question.




                                                   16
4.3   Organizational: single-unit versus multi-unit status
Another potential threat to validity is the failure to account for heterogeneity in the organizational
structure of firms. Our concern arises from the fact that there is significant age-bias in the distribu-
tion of organizational status across firm types: most entrants and young firms are single-units and
multi-unit firms are mostly concentrated in the older part of the age distribution. Figure 9 high-
lights the extent to which this occurs in terms of employment and number of firms. Any systematic
differences between these organizational types then might pollute our estimates of age-effects if not
properly controlled for. To address this, we split our sample based on organizational status and
re-estimate the profiles over a sub-sample of single-unit firms only and one of multi-unit firms only.
Comparing the results allows us to assess to what extent organizational status may be confounding
the patterns we uncover between age and productivity growth. Interestingly, the profile estimates
hardly change when we restrict ourselves only to single-unit firms, confirming that heterogeneity
in organizational structure is not driving our results either.

4.4   Compositional: industry representativeness
It is also well known that there is substantial variation in firm dynamics across industries which
makes comparing levels of productivities across industries potentially problematic. In our baseline
analysis, we address this critique by conducting our estimation in growth rates and accounting
for different industry trends through the use of industry fixed effects. Nevertheless, one remain-
ing concern is that there exists a wide variation in the age-productivity profile across industries
and by exploiting this variation for estimation we generate results for a "representative industry"
that displays patterns not present in any given industrial group. To ensure that our findings are
representative within industry groups, and not just across them, we divide our data across 2-digit
NAICS sectors are re-run out estimation procedures across detailed industries within each group.
Doing so allows us to assess the extent to which our aggregate profile represent trends common
across and within industries groups in the nonfarm business sector.
   Figures 10 and 11 summarize the robustness tests for industry composition. Figure 10 super
imposes our baseline estimates over those estimates derived within 11 different 2-digit NAICS
sectors. In this exercise, we include all sectors except those corresponding to raw materials (i.e.
agriculture, mining) or utilities. What the figure makes clear is that the overall profile pattern
is present within each of the industry groups and does not deviate significantly in curvature or
magnitude. Figure 11 plots the profiles separately for each industry group to better identify where
the deviations come from. It is clear that the life-cycle pattern of labor productivity growth is
remarkably constant across industries.
   Despite the robustness of the underlying age-productivity profile’s shape, differences do exist,
particularly at the young tail of the estimates. Moreover, declines in entry rates, and the subse-
quent shifts in the age distributions, have been uneven across sectors. Combined, these between
sector effects continue to suggest the possibility of significant divergences between our representa-
tive sector approach and the outcomes of individual industries. To examine this in more detail,

                                                  17
we compute the counterfactual from section 2.4 using detailed industry variation within NAICS
supersectors. This involves calculating age-productivity profiles, trends in entering cohorts, and
shifts in the age distribution for each sector separately. We plot the new counterfactual in figure
A4. Each line represents the cumulative difference in a sector’s average productivity holding the
sector’s employment by age group constant relative to the actual evolution of those within sector
employment shares. Figures A5 and A6 plot the life-cycle and cohort components, respectively, of
the cumulative difference. While on average these are consistent with our aggregate counterfactual
presented in section 3.3, there are some significant differences between sectors: sectors like the
finance, insurance and real estate sector and the general services sector, where the latter contains
many small scale service businesses such as auto mechanics or nail salons, were little changed by the
startup deficit, whereas our counterfactual identifies sectors such as construction and professional
and business services as changed sharply. These differences coincide somewhat, but not perfectly,
with the pace of further declines in each sector’s young firm share. Nevertheless, the qualitative
results of our analysis remain unchanged.


5         Cross-sectional Evidence
As a complement to our decomposition-based counterfactual, we now explore a different source of
variation to reveal the relationship between startups, aging firms, and productivity growth. Here we
relax the strong identifying assumption of a stable age-productivity growth profile, and instead ask
whether areas with relatively higher startup rates and younger firms also exhibit faster productivity
growth. On its own, this exercise would raise significant concerns of reverse causality: startup rates
could be elevated because of local innovations to productivity rather than the reverse. To address
this possibility, we adopt two different instrumenting strategies to generate plausibly exogenous
shifts across local markets in the level of startup activity. In both cases, we find an economically
and statistically significant effect of changes in the startup rate on labor productivity growth.
Importantly, these effects could follow from the direct compositional changes we characterize in our
counterfactual or from spillovers that change the dynamics of productivity growth even within age
group. This last channel is especially important among older firms, which comprise the bulk of
business sector employment and for which in section 3.4 we observed declines in the contribution
of reallocation to productivity growth.22
         We begin by exploring the reduced form relationship between startup activity and within-
industry labor productivity growth by exploiting the rich geographic variation across local markets:
both states and CBSAs. Our dependent variable is the annual labor productivity growth in year
t for industry j and area k. Pooling all years, we project industry x area productivity growth on
the area startup rate SRkt as well as year, industry and area fixed effects. That is we estimate the
following model:
    22
         See also Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2017) who find similar declines in reallocation.




                                                             18
                                     ∆Φjkt = µt + νj + γk + βSRkt + εjkt .                           (7)

       Column (1) of table 2 reports the estimated β̂ from estimating this specification by OLS. The
model exploits cross state and industry variation in the startup rate (equally weighted) and standard
errors are clustered at the state level, allowing for serial correlation within state.23 There is a clear
and strong correlation between states with relatively high startup rates and productivity growth
within industries in those states. These OLS estimates confirm that states with relative increases in
the entry rate are also ones with relative increases in industry productivity growth. The magnitudes
are sizable: a 1 percentage point decline in the startup rate predicts that industry productivity
growth within the area would decline by 0.796%.
       We can also measure the correlation of within state changes in entry and gross output per worker
growth within the state by using real gross state products published by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. This measure is closer in spirit to the aggregate nonfarm business sector productivity
growth. Column (3) of table 2 reports the estimated β̂ using a state’s GSP/worker growth as
the dependent variable. Here we also observe a strong correlation with the startup rate, although
economically smaller. Gross state product grows relatively faster in states with increasing startup
rates.
       These reduced-form results cannot say whether increasing startup rates lead to higher produc-
tivity or the reverse. Faster productivity growth could also lead to increasing entry as businesses
form to take advantage of the opportunities created by the gains in productivity. To learn about
whether shifts in entry may cause shifts in productivity growth, we look to two different instru-
menting strategies.

Demographic instrument Our first IV relies on the relationship between slow-moving demo-
graphic shifts and the entry rate. Our approach draws on the recent literature studying the deter-
minants of entrepreneurship and startup activity. Karahan, Pugsley, and Şahin (2016) show that
changing demographics play a significant role in the equilibrium startup rate both theoretically
and empirically. Karahan, Pugsley, and Şahin (2016) develop an a demographic instrument, based
on long lags of a state’s fertility rate, to generate shifts in that state’s contemporary growth in
the working age population or labor force. With imperfect mobility, increases in a state’s births
will lead to an increase in the growth rate of the labor supply when that birth cohort enters the
working age population. Arguably, conditional on state and future year fixed effects, forecasts of
future businesses conditions are unrelated to a fertility decision many years in advance. Using
this instrument they find that states with larger declines in the growth rate of their labor force,
predictable only by lagged demographics, also have larger declines in their startup rates. With this
mechanism in mind, we adopt the same demographic instrument to generate plausibly exogenous
shifts in a states startup rate vis-a-vis the demographic channel. The exclusion restriction, that
lagged demographics may change productivity growth only through their effects on labor supply
  23
       Results using employment weights were similar.


                                                        19
growth, is more challenging to defend in this context. Lagged demographics, by changing the age
composition of the workforce, may also change observed labor productivity through its effects on
average worker quality. To the extent this caveat is applicable, it should weigh against any effect
since increases in labor supply growth from fertility would shift the composition by increasing the
share of younger and less experienced workers.
       Table 2 column (2) reports the estimates of equation (7), where SRkt is instrumented with
20 year lags of the state’s fertility rate.24 When a state’s startup rate is increasing because of
demographics and not current business conditions, industry productivity growth increases. This
semi-elasticity is larger than the one estimated in the reduced form results and suggests that a one
percentage point decrease in the startup rate (e.g. from 6% to 5%) lowers labor productivity by
1.46%. Again, standard errors are clustered at the state level. Column (4) presents results when
the outcome is instead state output per work. Again, the IV results are stronger than the OLS
results and highly significant.

Collateral value instrument The second IV approach draws on a growing literature studying
how financing opportunities for new and young firms differ from those of established incumbents.
In particular, we appeal to the finding that a large number of new startups are financed through the
home equity of entrepreneurs in the early years of their operation (See Adelino, Schoar, and Severino
(2015), Robb and Robinson (2014) and references, therein). As a result, exogenous increases in
local housing prices could loosen financing constraints faced by would-be entrepreneurs and young
firms and encourage startup activity through a collateral channel. To identify such variations, we
use the housing price booms caused by speculative activity in the run up to the great recession
identified by Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016).
       The idea behind their identification is that some of the variation in housing prices over the boom
and bust was a result of non-rational changes in house price expectations (speculative bubbles) and
not from changes in income, construction costs or population. This "bubble" component of house
prices can be isolated by identifying structural breaks in local house prices series. The main
identification assumption is that standard drivers of house prices (income, population growth and
housing costs) are smoothly incorporated into house prices while the bubble component induces
breaks in the price series.Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016) provide evidence that these these
“sharp” breaks in house prices are not systematically related to pre-period levels and changes of
income, population and housing costs. Furthermore, they show that this instrument has power:
these break explains a significant portion of MSA level house price variation over the period 2000-
2006.
       One potential challenge with this approach is that the increase in home equity likely also stim-
ulates local demand and might induce local businesses to undertake other productivity enhancing
investments that confound our measurements. To address this issue, we focus these IV regressions
  24
    For additional power, we also include 10 year lags of the shares of pre-working age and pre-retirement population.
These serve to generate additional variation in the growth rate of labor supply by explicitly changing the inflows and
outflows of the working age population across states.


                                                         20
on the growth of young firms in the tradeable sector. By grouping young firms with new entrants
we seek to identify the population of firms that would have benefited most from the collateral chan-
nel25 . By excluding both the construction and non-tradedable sector, we seek to identify firms for
whom the local demand effect is relatively minor and so avoid the confounding effects of increased
local demand.
    Our goal is to estimate the causal relationship between the change in startup activity and
labor productivity growth across local markets. Our dependent variable is the change in log labor
productivity growth in CBSA k over the period 2000-2006. This is the same time horizon over which
the Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016) housing demand instrument is defined. In particular,
we estimate the following equation:


                                             ∆Φk = γk + β∆SRk + εk .                                                     (8)

    Before estimating equation (8), we establish that our housing demand instrument predicts
variation in the startup rate. Columns (5)-(6) of table 2 below report the F-stats from these first
stage results. These show that our housing demand instrument has strong predictive power for
changes in startup activity. We find an F-stat of over 100 when we construct productivity using
all industries (column 5), and an F-stat over 20 even when we exclude the construction and non-
tradeable sectors26 . Thus in all cases the F-statistic is well above 10 indicating that our instrument
is strongly correlated with changes in the startup rate over this time period.
    Table 2 column (5) reports the estimates of equation (8), where ∆SRk is instrumented with
Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016) housing demand instrument. When a state’s startup rate
is increasing because collateral constraints are relaxed, we see a strong increase in MSA level pro-
ductivity. In our baseline semi-elasticity specification, we find that a percentage point decline
in the startup rate leads to 2.8% decline in MSA labor productivity growth over the same pe-
riod that is strongly statistically significant even when standard error clustered at the state level.
Interestingly, despite using a very different identification scheme, we find results similar to our de-
mographic instruments. Column (6) shows this result is robust to excluding both the construction
and non-tradeable goods sectors. This helps alleviate concerns that our results are being driven by
unobserved changes in local demand.27
    Overall, we uncover robust evidence that increases in entry, ceteris paribus, leads to increases in
productivity growth. Because our cross sectional approach does not rely on the strong assumptions
of the counterfactual, it captures both the direct effects of the decline in entry embodied in the
counterfactual as well as any indirect effects from within age group changes induced by the decline
in entry. These indirect effects are compatible with both our observed decline in the reallocation
   25
      Our empirical results below suggest that the age-productivity dynamics we identity are most pronounced from
entry through the first five years of a firm’s life. Therefore, we view grouping young firms together with startups as
still consistent with our underlying approach and an improvement in the identification of the collateral IV.
   26
      We use the classification system of Main and Sufi (2014).
   27
      We also find that our results are stronger when excluding highly density areas. This is consistent with our story
that relaxation of credit constraints is driving our results since less populated areas typically have less access to credit.



                                                             21
component of productivity growth among the oldest firms as well as other recent evidence on the
declines in within age group measures of job reallocation, such as in Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin,
and Miranda (2016b). We should also stress that this does not mean on net productivity growth
must increase. In fact, the robust productivity growth of the late 1990s and early 2000s occurred
even as startup rates were continuing to slow. Instead, our estimates imply that the decline in
entry and its effects on the age distribution restrained the effects of these gains in productivity.


6         Conclusion
This paper studies the link between declining firm entry, the aging of the firm distribution and
productivity growth using U.S. Census data representative of the nonfarm business sector. Consis-
tent with a growing body of research, we find that age composition plays a key role in shaping the
dynamics of labor productivity growth.28
         We show that the relationship between firm age and productivity is downward sloping and
convex. The magnitudes of the differences are substantial but short lived. Conditional on surviving,
new entrants register cumulative productivity growth of roughly 20% in the first 5 years of operation.
After year 5, however, the productivity profile flattens dramatically and is statistically at or near
zero for the remainder of the age distribution we observe.
         Applying the dynamic Olley-Pakes decomposition to the profile, we find that the strong perfor-
mance of young firms is driven nearly exclusively by the forces of selection and allocation. In other
words, the fast gains in productivity of young firms is driven by the fact that inefficient entrants
lose market share and exit quickly, rather than productivity growth which occurs within surviving
firms. In the last section of our paper, we show how the driving forces of selection and allocation
in shaping the age-productivity profile we uncover emerge easily from a variant of the workhorse
Hopenhayn (1992) model of firm dynamics.
         Our results suggest that the start-up deficit and subsequent aging of the U.S. business sector
have had a considerable impact on aggregate productivity. Using a model-free aggregation tech-
nique, we show that our results suggest the start-up deficit and accompanying aging have reduced
aggregate productivity by roughly 0.10 percentage points a year from 1980-2014. While the per
annum rate is small, the cumulative effect over the whole period is substantial, reducing the level
of aggregate productivity by 3.1% by 2014.
         However, this counterfactual may understate the importance of firm ages. We document that
since 2005 mature firms (age 20+) have become an even greater drag on productivity growth. We
apply our DOP decomposition and identify the source of this drag as a slowdown in the allocation
component. In other words, there was a decline in allocative efficiency for the most mature firms in
our sample in the sense that market share was flowing more slowly to the most productive mature
    28
    While we focus our analysis on the effects of the compositional change of firm age, we readily acknowledge
that this is not the whole story. Recent work by Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2014) and Decker,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2017) have highlighted large changes in employment and productivity dynamics
even within firm age groups. Understanding these trends is an important area for future study.



                                                     22
firms.
   Our main results are complemented by a series of cross-sectional IV regressions that, unlike
our decompositions, admit a causal interpretation. By exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in
start-up activity through demographic and collateral channels we are able to show that the local
labor productivity growth does indeed to exhibit a causal link to start-up activity across geographic
and industrial markets.
   Given that our aim is mainly empirical, we hope that this paper provided many useful facts for
applied modelers to explain and calibrate their models to. Going forward, we think there are many
interesting follow up papers to be written. Chief among them is to develop a better understanding of
the economic mechanisms behind the decline in allocation among mature firms since understanding
this phenomenon will be useful for understanding what will happen to labor productivity growth
over the next 5-10 years.




                                                 23
References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2015): “House prices, collateral, and self-
  employment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 117(2), 288–306.

Arkolakis, C., T. Papageorgiou, and O. Timoshenko (2014): “Firm learning and growth,”
  Discussion paper, Yale, mimeo.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2017): “The fall of the
  labor share and the rise of superstar firms,” .

Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2013): “Cross-country differences in
  productivity: The role of allocation and selection,” The American Economic Review, 103(1),
  305–334.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2016): “Housing Booms, Manu-
  facturing Decline, and Labor Market Outcomes,” March. http://faculty. wcas. northwestern.
  edu/noto/research/CHN_manuf_decline_housing_ booms_mar2016. pdf.

Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2006): “Volatility and Dispersion
  in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” NBER macroeconomics
  annual, 21, 107–179.

Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014): “The role of entrepreneur-
  ship in US job creation and economic dynamism,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3),
  3–24.

Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016a): “Declining Business
  Dynamism: Implications for Productivity?,” Brookings Institution, Hutchins Center Working
  Paper.

Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016b): “Where has all
  the skewness gone? The decline in high-growth (young) firms in the U.S.,” European Economic
  Review, 86, 4 – 23, The Economics of Entrepreneurship.

Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2017): “Declining Dy-
  namism, Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slowdown,” American Economic Review,
  Papers and Proceedings.

Dent, R. C., F. Karahan, B. Pugsley, and A. Şahin (2016): “The Role of Startups in
  Structural Transformation,” The American Economic Review, 106(5), 219–223.

Diewert, W. E., and K. J. Fox (2005): “On Measuring the Contribution of Entering and Exiting
  Firms to Aggregate Productivity Growth,” Vancouver School of Economics Discussion Paper,
  05-02.

                                                    24
Dunne, T., M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1989): “The growth and failure of US manu-
  facturing plants,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4), 671–698.

Evans, D. S. (1987): “The relationship between firm growth, size, and age: Estimates for 100
  manufacturing industries,” The journal of industrial economics, pp. 567–581.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): “Reallocation, firm turnover, and
  efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?,” The American economic review, 98(1),
  394–425.

Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001): “Aggregate productivity growth:
  lessons from microeconomic evidence,” in New developments in productivity analysis, pp. 303–372.
  University of Chicago Press.

Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, R. Kulick, and J. Miranda (2016a): High Growth Young
  Firms: Contribution to Job, Output, and Productivity GrowthUniversity of Chicago Press.

Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, R. Kulick, and J. Miranda (2016b): “High growth young
  firms: contribution to job, output, and productivity growth,” in Measuring Entrepreneurial
  Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges. University of Chicago Press.

Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2013): “Who creates jobs? Small versus
  large versus young,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347–361.

Hathaway, I., and R. E. Litan (2014): “Declining business dynamism in the United States: A
  look at states and metros,” Brookings Institution.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992): “Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium,” Economet-
  rica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 1127–1150.

Hyatt, H., and J. Spletzer (2013): “The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics,” .

Jarmin, R. S., and J. Miranda (2002): “The longitudinal business database,” .

Karahan, F., B. Pugsley, and A. Şahin (2016): “Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit,”
  .

Melitz, M. J., and S. Polanec (2015): “Dynamic Olley-Pakes productivity decomposition with
  entry and exit,” The Rand journal of economics, 46(2), 362–375.

Moreira, S. (2016): “Firm dynamics, persistent effects of entry conditions, and business cycles,”
  .

Pugsley, B. W., and A. Sahin (2014): “Grown-up business cycles,” FRB of New York Staff
  Report, (707).



                                                25
Reedy, E. J., and R. J. Strom (2012): Starting Smaller; Staying Smaller: America’s Slow Leak
  in Job Creationpp. 71–85. Physica-Verlag HD, Heidelberg.

Robb, A. M., and D. T. Robinson (2014): “The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 27(1), 153–179.




                                                 26
           .14




                                                                                                                                                                       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                                                          startup firm share (left axis)                                                                                     mature firm share (left axis)




                                                                                                                  .04
                                                                          startup employment share (right axis)                                                                              mature employment share (right axis)




                                                                                                                                                                       .45
                                                                                                                     share of total employment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     share of total employment
                                                                                                                                          .035
                  .12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .75
share of all firms




                                                                                                                                                            share of all firms
                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                               .03
.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .7
                                                                                                                                                                       .35
                                                                                                                  .025
           .08




                                                                                                                  .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .65
                                                                                                                                                                       .3
                        1980        1985                           1990   1995       2000      2005      2010                                                                         1980   1985     1990      1995      2000      2005      2010



                                                               (a) Startups (Age 0)                                                                                                          (b) Mature firms (Age 11+)

                                                                             Figure 1: Employment and Firm Shares, 1979-2012




                                                                                      Total                                                                                                            Selection
                               Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                                                                                                      Contribution to Net LP Growth
                                -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                                                                       -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                               1           2-3         4-5             6-10           11-15                                                           1         2-3        4-5             6-10       11-15
                                                                                    Age Group                                                                                                           Age Group


                                                                                     Within                                                                                                            Allocation
                               Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                                                                                                      Contribution to Net LP Growth
                                -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                                                                       -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                               1           2-3         4-5             6-10           11-15                                                           1         2-3        4-5             6-10       11-15
                                                                                    Age Group                                                                                                           Age Group



                                                                                   Figure 2: DOP Decomposition by Firm Age




                                                                                                                                                 27
                                           Total                                                                  Selection
Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                      Contribution to Net LP Growth
     -.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                                                                    .05 .1 .15
                                                                                                                Early Period
                                                                                                                Change, Slow Growth Period




                                                                       -.05 0



                                1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                    1   2-3        4-5       6-10     11-15
                                          Age Group                                                               Age Group


                                          Within                                                                 Allocation
Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                      Contribution to Net LP Growth
              .05 .1 .15




                                                                           -.05 0 .05 .1 .15
 -.05 0




                                1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                    1   2-3        4-5       6-10     11-15
                                          Age Group                                                               Age Group



Figure 3: DOP Decomposition by Firm Age: Early (’96-’04) vs. Late (’05-’12)




                                                                 28
                            4
                                   Aggregate Effect
                                   Lifecycle Effects
                          3.5
                                   Cohort Effects


                            3


                          2.5
Cumulative Growth Rates




                            2


                          1.5


                            1


                          0.5


                            0


                          -0.5


                           -1
                            1980   1985            1990   1995           2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                                  Year

                                   Figure 4: Empirical Counter-Factual and Components




                                                                 29
                                    6
                                           low eta (0.5)
                                           benchmark eta (0.9)
                                           high eta (1.5)
                                    5
Aggregate Cumulative Growth Rates




                                    4




                                    3




                                    2




                                    1




                                    0
                                    1980   1985           1990    1995          2000    2005       2010   2015
                                                                         Year

                                                  Figure 5: Total Counter-Factual with various η




                                                                         30
                                                            Total                                                                                Selection


         Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                                                 Contribution to Net LP Growth
          -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                  -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2
                                         1   2-3   4-5   6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31+                                        1   2-3   4-5   6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31+
                                                          Age Group                                                                               Age Group


                                                           Within                                                                                Allocation
         Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                                                 Contribution to Net LP Growth
          -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                  -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2
                                         1   2-3   4-5   6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31+                                        1   2-3   4-5   6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31+
                                                          Age Group                                                                               Age Group



                                                          Figure 6: DOP Decomposition by Firm Age


                                                            Total                                                                                Selection
         Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                                                 Contribution to Net LP Growth
                                                                                                               .05 .1 .15
          -.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                                                              GDP
                                                                              Industry
                                                                                                  -.05 0




                                         1         2-3       4-5         6-10       11-15                                        1         2-3       4-5         6-10       11-15
                                                          Age Group                                                                               Age Group


                                                           Within                                                                                Allocation
         Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                                                 Contribution to Net LP Growth
                       .05 .1 .15




                                                                                                               .05 .1 .15
          -.05 0




                                                                                                  -.05 0




                                         1         2-3       4-5         6-10       11-15                                        1         2-3       4-5         6-10       11-15
                                                          Age Group                                                                               Age Group



Figure 7: DOP decomposition by firm age: common GDP deflator and BLS industry-specific price
deflators


                                                                                            31
                                            0.8
                                                         Share of Firms
                                                         Share of Employment
                                            0.7


                                            0.6


                                            0.5
                                    Share




                                            0.4


                                            0.3


                                            0.2


                                            0.1


                                             0
                                                          1          2-3      4-5           6-10                                11-15         16-20   21-25
                                                                                      Age Groups

                                                  Figure 8: Share of multi establishment firms by firm age



                                                          Total                                                                                Selection
    Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                                            Contribution to Net LP Growth
                                                                                                          .05 .1 .15
                .05 .1 .15




                                                                  Baseline
                                                                  Only single units
                                                                                             -.05 0
     -.05 0




                                    1              2-3      4-5        6-10     11-15                                       1           2-3        4-5      6-10   11-15
                                                         Age Group                                                                              Age Group


                                                         Within                                                                                Allocation
    Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                                            Contribution to Net LP Growth
                  .05 .1 .15




                                                                                                          .05 .1 .15
     -.05 0




                                                                                             -.05 0




                                    1              2-3      4-5        6-10     11-15                                       1           2-3        4-5      6-10   11-15
                                                         Age Group                                                                              Age Group



Figure 9: DOP decomposition by firm age: overall and only single establishment firms


                                                                                       32
               Baseline Estimates                                             Construction
0.2                                                      0.2
0.1                                                      0.1
  0                                                        0
      1        2-3        4-5        6-10   11-15              1        2-3        4-5       6-10   11-15
                     Manufacturing                                        Wholesale Trade
0.2                                                      0.2
0.1                                                      0.1
  0                                                        0
      1        2-3        4-5        6-10   11-15              1        2-3        4-5       6-10   11-15
                      Retail Trade                                    Transport & Warhousing
0.2                                                      0.2
0.1                                                      0.1
  0                                                        0
      1        2-3        4-5        6-10   11-15              1        2-3        4-5       6-10   11-15
                      Information                                  Finance, Insurance, Real Estate
0.2                                                      0.2
0.1                                                      0.1
  0                                                        0
      1        2-3        4-5        6-10   11-15              1        2-3        4-5       6-10   11-15
          Professional & Admin Services                               Education & Healthcare
0.2                                                      0.2
0.1                                                      0.1
  0                                                        0
      1        2-3        4-5        6-10   11-15              1        2-3        4-5       6-10   11-15
          Entertainment & Accomodations                                       Other Services
0.2                                                      0.2
0.1                                                      0.1
  0                                                        0
      1        2-3        4-5        6-10   11-15              1        2-3        4-5       6-10   11-15
                        Figure 10: Net age-productivity growth profile by sector




                                                    33
                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                             Baseline Estimates


                                                                0.2
             Labor Productivity Growth

                                                     0.15



                                                                0.1



                                                     0.05



                                                                         0



                                             -0.05
                                                                               1               2-3                        4-5                            6-10            11-15
                                                                                                         Age Groups

             Figure 11: Combined net age-productivity growth profile by sectors




                                                                                    Total                                                                Selection
                                         Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                                                               Contribution to Net LP Growth
                                                                                                                 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1
                                             0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                                                                                                                  Average
                                                                                                                                                                  High SR Tercile
                                                                                                                                                                  Low SR Tercile




                                                                         1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                    1   2-3       4-5      6-10     11-15
                                                                                   Age Group                                                              Age Group


                                                                                   Within                                                                Allocation
                                         Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                                                               Contribution to Net LP Growth
                                                 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                                                                 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                         1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                    1   2-3       4-5      6-10     11-15
                                                                                   Age Group                                                              Age Group




Figure 12: DOP decomposition by firm age: top versus bottom tercile of startup rates by CBSA




                                                                                                          34
                                                           Total                                                                Selection
                Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                                      Contribution to Net LP Growth
                    0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                                        0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1
                                                                                                                                        Average
                                                                                                                                        High dSR Tercile
                                                                                                                                        Low dSR Tercile




                                                1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                    1   2-3       4-5      6-10     11-15
                                                          Age Group                                                              Age Group


                                                          Within                                                                Allocation
                Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                                      Contribution to Net LP Growth
                       0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                                        0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                    1   2-3       4-5      6-10     11-15
                                                          Age Group                                                              Age Group




Figure 13: DOP decomposition by firm age: top versus bottom tercile of change in startup rates
by CBSA




                                                                                 35
Table 1: Change in average productivity growth of mature (age 16+) firms from 1996-2004 to
2005-2012

                                       Change in Average Mature (Age 16+) Firm
                                        Industry Productivity Growth ∆Φ16+jt
                                    Total        Within     Allocation       Selection
                  Late Period        -0.023       -0.006         -0.019          0.002
                  (2005-2012)       (0.018)      (0.004)        (0.017)        (0.002)

Note: U.S. Census Bureau Revenue Enhanced Longitudinal Business Database, 1996-2000 and 2003-2012. OLS
regression of average productivity growth of 16+ group on late period (2005-2012) dummy and NAICS4 industry
fixed effects. Weighted by average industry employment for all years. Standard errors clustered by industry.




                                                    36
                                     Table 2: Productivity growth and startup rates: regional and industry evidence

                                         Industry Productivity                   GSP/Worker                           MSA Productivity
                                            Growth ∆Φjkt                           Growth                                Growth
                                            (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)                         (5)                    (6)
                  Startup Rate            0.796***            1.46**            0.22**         1.71***
                                            (0.209)          (0.620)           (0.108)         (0.480)
                  ∆ Startup Rate                                                                                    2.801***                6.089**
                                                                                                                      (0.908)               (2.603)

                  Fertility IV         No              Yes                No                   Yes

                  Collateral IV                                                                                           Yes                    Yes

                  Year FE                  Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes                          No                     No




37
                  NAICS4 FE                Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes                          No                     No
                  State FE                 Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes                          No                     No
                                          OLS              IV                OLS              IV                 IV                    IV
                                       State x Ind     State x Ind        State x Ind     State x Ind        MSA (All Ind)          MSA (All Ind
                                                                                                                                 Ex-Con and NT)
                  R2                          0.097           0.107                                                     0.042              0.553
                  N                           20000          200000               1200            1200                    300                300

                  F-test statistic                           >10                                 10.35                  105.7                   21.7

     Note: U.S. Census Bureau Revenue Enhanced Longitudinal Business Database, 1996-2000 and 2003-2012. Columns (1-2): OLS and IV regression of average
     change in log net receipts per worker by industry and State on startup rate by area with year, NAICS4 digit industry and area fixed effects. Columns (3-4) OLS
     and IV regression of BEA Annual GSP/worker growth for years 1980 to 2007. Columns (5-6) We regress the change in log net receipts per on the change in the
     startup rate by CBSA over the time period 2000-2006 using the Charles, Noto, and Hurst (2016) housing demand instrument. The time period was chosen for
     comparability. Column 5 includes all industries within an MSA; column 6 excludes construction and non-tradable industries. Standard errors clustered by area.
     Number of observations are rounded to the nearest thousand.
      Table 3: Counterfactual cumulative percent difference in productivity growth by sector

                                                                     Lifecycle     Cohort      Total
                                      Construction (23)               −2.42        10.96       8.55
                                  Manufacturing (31-33)               −0.29         5.64       5.36
                                   Wholesale Trade (42)               −1.24         8.75       7.51
                                    Retail Trade (44-45)              −0.71         7.27       6.56
                     Transport and Warehousing (48-49)                −0.65         6.30       5.65
                                       Information (51)                0.15        −0.85      −0.70
                 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate (52-53)              −0.31         1.85       1.54
                 Professional and Admin Services (54-56)              −1.10        12.06      10.96
                       Education and Healthcare (61-62)                0.02         0.20       0.22
             Entertainment and Accommodations (71-72)                 −0.48         5.80       5.32
                                     Other Services (81)              −0.16         0.64       0.48
Note: U.S.C̃ensus Bureau Revenue Enhanced Longitudinal Business Database. We apply the decomposition described
by equation (6) individually to each two digit sector. We report the cumulative difference in productivity growth for
each component and the total from 1996 to 2012.




                                                         38
A   Additional Tables and Figures




                               39
                                      Table A0: Estimates of trend growth in entrant productivity ΦEt 1997 to 2012

                                                         ΦEt = νi + ηt+it                                               ∆ΦEt = η+it
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)
            Linear Trend             0.00650***                     0.00932***
                                     (0.00122)                      (0.00114)
            1997-2004                                0.0207***                      0.0306***
                                                     (0.00521)                      (0.00490)
            2005-2012                                0.00567***                     0.00810***
                                                     (0.00125)                      (0.00117)

            Stochastic Trend                                                                           0.0131                  0.0146
                                                                                                       (0.0119)                (0.00991)




40
            1997-2004                                                                                              0.0233                    0.0518***
                                                                                                                   (0.0227)                  (0.0190)
            2005-2012                                                                                              0.00925                   0.000603
                                                                                                                   (0.0140)                  (0.0116)

            Weighted                 No              No             Yes             Yes                No          No          Yes           Yes
            N                        3,594           3,594          3,594           3,594              3,032       3,032       3,032         3,032
            R2                       0.008           0.010          0.018           0.024              0.000       0.000       0.000         0.002

     Note: U.S. Census Bureau Revenue Enhanced Longitudinal Business Database, 1996-2000 and 2003-2012. Columns (1) to (4) are OLS/WLS regressions of
     industry entrant productivity (relative to its value in 1997) on a deterministic linear time trend or piecewise linear trend. Columns (2) and (4) are weighted
     across industry by the average industry employment computed over the entire sample 1997-2012. Columns (5) to (8) are OLS/WLS regressions of the change in
     industry entrant productivity on a constant, or time period dummy variable. Columns(6) and (8) are weighted by the industry average employment. Standard
     errors clustered by industry.
                                           Total                                                               Selection



Net Labor Productivity Growth




                                                                     Contribution to Net LP Growth
                                                                                   .05 .1 .15
            .05 .1 .15
                                                                                                                            Baseline
                                                                                                                            Unweighted
                                                                                                                            No Controls




                                                                      -.05 0
 -.05 0




                                1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                   1   2-3       4-5      6-10       11-15
                                          Age Group                                                             Age Group


                                           Within                                                              Allocation
Contribution to Net LP Growth




                                                                     Contribution to Net LP Growth
              .05 .1 .15




                                                                                   .05 .1 .15
 -.05 0




                                                                      -.05 0
                                1   2-3      4-5      6-10   11-15                                   1   2-3       4-5      6-10       11-15
                                          Age Group                                                             Age Group




                         Figure A1: DOP Decomposition by Firm Age: Robustness




                                          Figure A2: Estimated Cohort Effects




                                                                41
                                        0.25
                                                      Unweighted




                         E1997
                                                      Empl. Weighted
                                         0.2
       -                 Et

                                        0.15
       Entrant Relative Productivity




                                         0.1



                                        0.05



                                           0



                                        -0.05
                                            1998    2000      2002       2004          2006     2008    2010   2012
                                                                              Year

                                                     Figure A3: Estimated Cohort Effects




                                       0.12
                                                     Construction
                                        0.1          Manufacturing
                                                     Retail Trade
                                                     Transport and Warehousing
                                       0.08          Finance, Insurance, Real Estate
      Cumulative Growth Rates




                                                     Professional and Admin Services
                                                     Other Services
                                       0.06


                                       0.04


                                       0.02


                                          0


                                       -0.02


                                       -0.04
                                           1996    1998    2000      2002     2004       2006    2008   2010   2012
                                                                             Year

Figure A4: Difference in cumulative productivity growth counterfactual by sector




                                                                            42
                                                        0.01


                                                       0.005


                Cumulative Growth Rates (life-cycle)       0


                                                       -0.005


                                                        -0.01


                                                       -0.015         Construction
                                                                      Manufacturing
                                                        -0.02         Retail Trade
                                                                      Transport and Warehousing
                                                                      Finance, Insurance, Real Estate
                                                       -0.025         Professional and Admin Services
                                                                      Other Services
                                                        -0.03
                                                            1996   1998    2000      2002        2004   2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                              Year

Figure A5: Difference in cumulative productivity growth counterfactual by sector from life-cycle
component



                                                       0.14
                                                                     Construction
                                                       0.12          Manufacturing
                                                                     Retail Trade
              Cumulative Growth Rates (cohort)




                                                        0.1          Transport and Warehousing
                                                                     Finance, Insurance, Real Estate
                                                                     Professional and Admin Services
                                                       0.08
                                                                     Other Services

                                                       0.06

                                                       0.04

                                                       0.02

                                                          0

                                                       -0.02

                                                       -0.04
                                                           1996    1998   2000      2002      2004      2006   2008   2010   2012
                                                                                              Year

Figure A6: Difference in cumulative productivity growth counterfactual by sector from cohort
component



                                                                                            43
B     Data Appendix
To construct our empirical counter-factual we rely on public-use data from the BDS on employment
by firm-age going back to 1980. We choose to define our age categories consistently with the BDS
categorization, as is generally done in the literature. Our counter-factual age groups are therefore
ages 1,2,3,4,5,6-10,11-15, and 16+. In evaluating the cohort trend contribution, we assign each
binned group its midpoint (i.e. 8 for group 6-10). For the top censored age group, we assign an age
of 23, which is roughly the midpoint for this category in 2014, the year where the censoring issue
is least severe.
    The major issue with the BDS data is that age is censored for firms born before 1977 and so
in early years we do not observe the distribution of employment activity across older firms which
is necessary to construct our counter-factual. In addition, age bins employment levels are often
introduced once the youngest age in the bin is observed and so these numbers are partly censored
in the first few years after they are reported, leading to large fluctuations in reported levels.
    To address these issues, we appeal to the fact that employment re-allocations across the age
distribution is a persistent and slow moving process. This allows us to represent changes in em-
ployment by age groups as a long tailed moving average process. To fill in censored observations,
we begin in the first year where an age group is fully observed and calculate the average annual
growth in employment 5-years forward. We then use the growth rate to roll back the process and
fill in censored years. We iterate the process by allowing the 5-year window to roll back as we fill
in censored observations. Specifically, for the employment level of age group a in year t we use

                                                     Ea,t+1
                                            Êat =
                                                     1 + ḡat

where 1 + ḡat is the arithmetic mean of the growth rates in employment for age group a in periods
t + 1 through t + 5. Furthermore, to ensure that aggregate employment levels stay the same, we
define the top censored age category employment level as the residual employment after we’ve
estimated all the younger age groups. We apply this process to the 11-15 age bin for years 1980-
1991, for the 6-10 age bin for years 1980-1986, and for age five firms for 1980-1981 and for age 4
firms in 1980 only. Given that most movement in the age-productivity is concentrated in year 0-3
we choose not to roll back our estimates before 1980 so as to avoid imputing any values for these
age groups. We then convert all employment numbers into shares to get the distributional changes
necessary to evaluate the counter-factual equation 6. The imputations effect less then 7% of our
data on shares and we conduct several robustness tests to confirm that the estimates are sensible
and that our results are not unduly sensitive to the choice of window or imputation process.
    The resulting employment shares used in the counter-factual are shown in Figure A7. The
observations after the dashed vertical line correspond to raw BDS data and the observation pre-
ceeding are imputed contain MA estimates of the shares as described above. As a robustness, we
also explore MA processes ranging from 3-6 year windows and find our final results are not sensitive
to these changes.


                                                  44
                    Employment Shares by Firm Age
 1
        0
        1
0.9
        2
        3
        4
0.8
        5
        6-10
        11-15
0.7
        16+


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


 0
 1980   1985     1990      1995        2000     2005   2010   2015

          Figure A7: Employment Shares by Age Group




                                  45
C        An Illustrative Model
In this section we show how a small modification to the workhorse heterogenous firms model of
Hopenhayn (1992) is able to generate life-cycle growth rates in labor productivity that are roughly
consistent with our empirical findings. The issue with using the standard Hopenhayn (1992) set-up
is that there exists no dispersion in labor productivity across operating firms due to the decreasing
returns to scale production technology. To adapt the model to our purposes then, we replace the
assumptions of decreasing returns to scale and competitive markets with a constant returns to scale
production technology and monopolistic competition. Monopolistic competition is necessary when
linear production technologies are used to guarantee non-trivial distributions of economic activity
across firms in equilibrium. The change leaves a model that is still tractable and easy to compute
while generating a non-degenerate distribution of labor productivity across firms. We keep the
model intentionally simple to highlight the fact that a very standard model of firm dynamics is
able to generate our main empirical findings.29
       We assume there is a single consumption good produced by a competitive final goods sector
which aggregates all varieties of intermediate inputs subject to a constant returns to scale technol-
ogy:
                                                          Z           1
                                                                        γ
                                                 Y =             Yjγ
                                                           j∈Ω
                  1
where γ = 1 −     σ   is function of elasticity of substitution, σ.
       Each intermediate good j is produced by a monopolistically competitive firm which chooses
production to maximize operating profits conditional on deciding to produce output:

                                   πj (Aj , Lj ) = max Pj (Yj )Yj − wLj − cf
                                                     Lj


Here Aj denotes the firm specific stochastic productivity which we assume follows an AR(1) process
log(A0 ) = a0 + ρA log(A) +  and Lj is hired labor. The production technology of all intermediate
producers is linear so that Yj = Aj Lj . To stay in operation, each firms must pay a flow fixed cost
cf each period it produces.
       In contrast to standard competitive industry models where labor productivity is constant across
                                                                                                                    Yj
firms30 , these assumptions imply that there will be dispersion in physical revenue per worker,                     Lj
driven by variation in Aj . Because the model is frictionless, the model does not generate any
                                                       Pj ∗Yj
variation in revenue productivity per worker,           Lj ,     because optimization implies marginal revenue
product of labor is equal to the (common) marginal cost of labor. Our preferred interpretation
  29
     This simplicity is not without loss of generality. Our model generates dispersion in physical productivity per
          Y                              P ∗Y
worker Ljj but not revenue per worker jLj j thus there is some tension between our empirical results, which show
dispersion in revenue per worker, and our model results. For our purposes we do not think this is a big concern
because a) the existing empirical evidence suggests these measures all highly correlated at the firm/plant level and b)
one can induce dispersion in both labor productivity measures by introducing additional frictions such as overhead
labor or adjustment costs (see Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013) for a recent example), without affecting
our main result. We leave these extensions to future work.
  30
     It is proportional to the common output price or wage, whichever is not the numeraire.


                                                           46
is that our empirical age-productivity profile mostly reflects underlying variation in physical labor
productivity across firms31 , nonetheless, we readily acknowledge that our controls are imperfect so
clearly some of this variation is driven by within industry differences in prices.
       That being said, we believe that revenue labor productivity is a useful proxy for physical labor
productivity because empirically these two labor productivity concepts are highly correlated at the
plant/firm level, and, moreover, they both predict plant/firm outcomes such as employment growth.
Still, the fact that our model cannot generate dispersion in both labor productivity measures is
a limitation of our model. We think that a simple extension of it, such as adding overhead labor
(Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013)) would generate this dispersion without changing
our interpretation so one interpretation is that we are assuming that one of these mechanisms is
implicitly. present. Due to our desire to highlight the essential mechanisms that drive the age-
productivity profile (selection and reallocation), we leave the actual incorporation of these features
to future work.
       Consider the problem of a firm who is choosing whether to continue operating or whether to
shut down. Letting π ∗ (Aj ) denote optimal operating profits at L∗j (Aj ), we can write the firm’s
value function as:
                                 V (A) = π ∗ (A) − cf + βmax{EA V (A0 ) , 0}

which captures the endogeneity of the exit decision. Exiting itself is an absorbing state for firms
and so if a firm chooses to leave the market they receive a continuation value of 0 for all time
thereafter.
       Each period there is a mass J of potential entrants of which E actually decide to enter. Before
entering, firms must pay an entry fee cE to get an initial productivity draw from a stationary
productivity distribution ϕ(s) = be−bs and then they can decide whether to produce or exit im-
mediately in the first period. If they do not enter, they earn a zero payoff forever. If they enter,
their problem is identical to the production decision of an incumbent firm which faces shock draws
A and currently employs no workers. Because the entry decision is made before the idiosyncratic
shock is drawn, some entrants choose to exit immediately after receiving their initial shock draw.
Free entry implies that the expected value of entering is equal to the cost of entering:

                                                EV (A) − cE ≥ 0

       To close the model, we assume that there is a single unit of labor supplied inelastically in com-
petitive labor markets by a unit mass of households. We define a stationary recursive competitive
equilibrium in our model as consisting of a (i) value function V (A), (ii) policy functions X(A) and
L(A), (iii) A wage w, incumbent measure µ, and entrant measure M such that

   1. Optimality: V (A), L(A), and X(A) solve incumbent’s problem
  31
    Our baseline empirical specification uses real revenue per worker, our estimates use log differences and includes
time and industry fixed effects in the log difference specification designed to soak up much of the within industry
price variation.


                                                         47
   2. Labor Market Clearing                        Z               Z
                                              1=       L(A)dµ +        L(A)dϕ

   3. Measure of Actual Entrants: ∀t ≥ 0,
                                                         Z
                                                 M =J        [1 − X(A)] dϕ


   4. Model Consistent Dynamics T (µ, J)
                                           Z Z                                  Z
                                                                   0
                         µ = T (µ, J) =          [1 − X(A)] d(A |A)dµ + J           [1 − X(A)] dϕ                  (9)


C.1     Calibration and Simulation
Our model has six parameters for calibration: a0 , ρa , σ , b, ce , cf . To fit these, we follow the literature
in setting calibration target to match the distribution of activity and size of firms in the BDS.
Specifically, we choose parameters to match twenty-two moments: size distribution of incumbent
firm (5 moments), distribution of incumbent employment shares (5 moments), size distribution
of entrants (5 moments), distribution of entrant employment shares (5 moments), average size of
new entrants, and the exit rate. The results are shown in A7. The best fit parameters that fit
our model are (a0 , ρA , σε , b, ce , cf ) = (0, 0.95, 0.40, 0.25, 15, 12.87) and provide a reasonably good
match of moments in the data. footnoteWe also tried calibrated to match the productivity profiles
directly. This approach gave similar qualitative results.
    We now use our calibrated model to simulate life-cycle profiles for firms in the stationary
equilibrium and to assess whether the dynamics of our model are consistent with our empirical
findings. To do so, we calculate the stationary equilibrium and then simulate 500 paths of life-cycle
labor productivity growth for a cohort of firms and average them. For each simulation we calculate
the gains in physical labor productivity by cohort at each stage in life and then also calculate the
associated DOP components contributing to life-cycle growth. Again, notice that we are implicitly
assuming that our empirical age-productivity profile reflects underlying variation in true, physical
labor productivity and does not sole reflect variation in prices across firms.32
    Figure A8 contains the result of the exercise. What is clear from the result is that our modified
version of Hopenhayn (1992) is able to qualitatively replicate most of the empirical patterns. In
particular, it generates a sharply declining and convex patter for the net growth in labor produc-
tivity as a function of age as well as the empirically correct contribution patterns for the allocation
and selection effect components.
    The positive allocation effect comes from two facts: entrants are on average less productive than
survivors and selection. By definition, a positive allocation effect means that on average firms that
are higher productivity, gain market share. In our model firms that receive positive shocks are the
  32
     As noted before, we think this is a reasonable assumption. Still, without detailed data on prices it is impossible
to know for sure.



                                                          48
                          Share   of incumbents         Employment share   Share   of entrants   Employment share
 Estabs Size              Data     Model                Data Model         Data     Model        Data Model
 1-19 emps                0.832    0.781                0.175 0.115        0.928    0.924        0.436 0.400
 20-99 emps               0.134    0.168                0.232 0.256        0.065    0.070        0.323 0.396
 100-499 emps             0.023    0.037                0.183 0.265        0.006    0.006        0.151 0.153
 500-999 emps             0.005    0.008                0.123 0.148        0.001    0.000        0.054 0.033
 1000+ emps               0.001    0.006                0.277 0.216        0.000    0.000        0.036 0.018
 Avg size of entrants     7.40     7.53
 Exit rate                0.087    0.084
 Source: Business Dynamic Statistics. Average of annual, 1977-2014


                                              Table A7: Calibration Targets


ones that grow and those that receive negative shocks are the firms that shrink or exit. For young
cohorts, many firms are near the exit threshold, so conditional on surviving they more than likely
received a positive shock. Thus, conditional on survival, the fraction of positive shocks is greater
than the fraction of negative shocks leading to positive allocation. The reason the allocation effect
dies off is that for older cohorts the distribution of shocks is more symmetric because the mean
productivity level is far away from the exit threshold. The presence of a selection effect is easier to
explain. Many firms start near the exit threshold and the least productive ones exit. Over time,
fewer firms are near the threshold so the selection effect becomes weaker.
   The one component we cannot match with our baseline model is the within effect; the model
suggests this effect is convex and large while the empirical data suggests it is nearly linearly and
mostly flat. The model has a hard time generating a small within effect because our calibrated
shock process is not persistent enough. For young firms, the within effect is positive because firms
that survive likely received a positive shock. For old firms, the opposite is true. The reason is
that while the unconditional distribution shocks is symmetric, the distribution of shocks is not
conditional on selection. If a firm survives long enough to become old, that means the firm is likely
large. Given mean reversion in the shocks, this means that that more likely than not the firm
will shrink next period leading to a negative within effect. Overall, the model performs quite well
suggesting that our facts about the age profile of labor productivity growth can easily be generated
with standard mechanisms.




                                                                 49
                Overall Contribution                          Selection Contribution
0.25                                             0.03

                                             0.025
  0.2

                                                 0.02
0.15
                                             0.015
  0.1
                                                 0.01

0.05
                                             0.005

   0                                               0
        0          5          10       15               0         5          10        15
                        Age                                            Age

                Within Contribution                         Allocation Contribution
0.04                                             0.2

0.02

                                             0.15
   0


-0.02
                                                 0.1
-0.04


-0.06                                        0.05
        0          5          10       15               0         5          10        15
                        Age
                                                                      Age


            Figure A8: Age-Productivity Profile in the Model




                                            50
