                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           A TOUGH ACT TO FOLLOW:
                     CONTRAST EFFECTS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                     Samuel M. Hartzmark
                                         Kelly Shue

                                      Working Paper 23883
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23883


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




We are grateful to Ross Garon at Cubist Systematic Solutions for helpful suggestions. We thank
Yiran Fan, Menaka Hampole, Michael Watson, and Linda Ye for excellent research assistance.
We thank John Beshears, Justin Birru, James Choi, Diego Garcia, Nicola Gennaioli, Wesley
Gray, Terrence Hendershott, Owen Lamont, Bill Mayew, Quoc Nguyen, Josh Schwartzstein,
Andrei Shleifer, Doug Skinner, Eric So, David Solomon, and Boris Vallee as well as seminar
participants at AFA Annual Meeting, AQR Insight Award Meeting, Arrow Street Capital,
BEAM, City University of Hong Kong, Chicago Booth, Colorado Finance Summit, Cubist
Systematic Solutions, FIRN, Frontiers in Finance Conference, FSU Suntrust Finance Conference,
Gerzensee ESSFM, Harvard Economics, Helsinki Finance Summit, IDC, London Business
School, Maastricht University, MIT Sloan JFFC, NBER Behavioral Finance, Tilburg University,
UBC Winter Finance Conference, and the Wharton Jacobs Levy Forum for comments. We thank
Sam Hanson and Adi Sunderam for sharing data. The authors have nothing to disclose. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Samuel M. Hartzmark and Kelly Shue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Tough Act to Follow: Contrast Effects In Financial Markets
Samuel M. Hartzmark and Kelly Shue
NBER Working Paper No. 23883
September 2017
JEL No. D03,D9,D91,G12,G14,G4

                                           ABSTRACT

A contrast effect occurs when the value of a previously-observed signal inversely biases
perception of the next signal. We present the first evidence that contrast effects can distort prices
in sophisticated and liquid markets. Investors mistakenly perceive earnings news today as more
impressive if yesterday’s earnings surprise was bad and less impressive if yesterday’s surprise
was good. A unique advantage of our financial setting is that we can identify contrast effects as
an error in perceptions rather than expectations. Finally, we show that our results cannot be
explained by a key alternative explanation involving information transmission from previous
earnings announcements.


Samuel M. Hartzmark
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
Samuel.Hartzmark@chicagobooth.edu

Kelly Shue
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
kelly.shue@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23883
                                                                                Figure 1
                                                              1




                                                             .5




                                        Return % [t-1,t+1]
                                                              0




                                                             -.5




                                                                   -.0075 -.005 -.0025      0     .0025 .005 .0075
                                                                         Previous day's earnings surprise: Surpriset-1


The value-weighted earnings surprise of large firms that announced earnings in the previous trading day versus the return of
firms that announced earnings today (conditional on own earnings surprise).


           Socrates: Could you tell me what the beautiful is?
           Hippias: For be assured Socrates, if I must speak the truth, a beautiful maiden is beautiful.
           Socrates: The wisest of men, if compared with a god, will appear a monkey, both in wisdom
       and in beauty and in everything else. Shall we agree, Hippias, that the most beautiful maiden is
       ugly if compared with the gods? xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
       xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx -Plato


    People often interpret information by contrasting it with what was recently observed. For ex-

ample, Pepitone and DiNubile (1976) show that subjects judge crimes to be less severe following

exposure to narratives of very egregious crimes. Kenrick and Gutierres (1980) show that male

students rate female students to be less attractive after viewing videos of beautiful actresses. Refe-

rences to such “contrast effects” are also pervasive in our popular culture. People complain about

having “a tough act to follow” when they are scheduled to perform following a great performance.

Writers use literary foils to exaggerate a character’s traits through juxtaposition with a contrasting

character. Fashion designers use shoulder pads and peplum hips to create the illusion of a com-

paratively smaller waist. In all of these cases, contrast effects bias our perception of information.

We perceive signals as higher or lower than their true values depending on what else was recently

observed.

    Contrast effects have the potential to bias a wide variety of important real-world decisions.

They may distort judicial perceptions of the severity of crimes, leading to unfair sentencing. At

firms, comparisons with the previously reviewed candidate could lead to mistakes in hiring and

                                                                                        1
promotion decisions. An unconstrained firm may pass on a positive NPV project because it does

not look as good as other options or invest in a negative NPV project because it looks better than

even worse alternatives. Finally, at the household level, contrast effects could cloud key decisions

such as mate choice and housing search.

   In these examples, contrast effects potentially lead to costly mistakes, but it may be difficult

for researchers to cleanly measure the bias. Measurement is complicated by the possibility that

the decision-makers face unobserved quotas or resource constraints that make comparisons across

multiple cases optimal. In addition, researchers often lack precise data on how decision-makers

perceive information. Possibly because of these challenges, most of the existing research about

contrast effects has focused on controlled laboratory experiments. Evidence from the field is more

limited. Outside of the lab, Bhargava and Fisman (2014) show contrast effects in mate choice using

a speed dating field experiment, and Simonsohn and Loewenstein (2006) and Simonsohn (2006)

show contrast effects in consumer housing and commuting choices.

   Our paper tests whether contrast effects operate in another important real world setting: finan-

cial markets. The financial setting is particularly interesting because we can test whether contrast

effects distort equilibrium prices and capital allocation in sophisticated markets. Full-time profes-

sionals making repeated investment decisions may be less prone to such a bias than individuals

making infrequent dating or real estate decisions. Moreover, the limited field evidence exami-

nes contrast effects in household decision-making, but prices in financial markets are determined

through interactions among many investors. Thus, cognitive biases among a subset of investors may

not affect market prices given the disciplining presence of arbitrage. And yet, if contrast effects

influence prices in financial markets, they would represent an important form of mispricing: prices

react not only to the absolute content of news, but also to a bias induced by the relative content

of news.

   In this paper, we test whether contrast effects distort market reactions to firm earnings an-

nouncements. Quarterly earnings announcements represent the main recurring source of news

released by publicly-traded US firms. Prior to the announcement, financial analysts and investors


                                                 2
form expectations of what they believe earnings will be. Earnings surprises, i.e., the extent to

which actual earnings exceed or fall short of those expectations, are associated with stock price

movements because they represent new information that shifts expectations of firm prospects. Ear-

nings announcements are typically scheduled weeks beforehand, so whether a given firm announces

following positive or negative surprises by another firm is likely to be uncorrelated with the firm’s

fundamentals.

   The theory of contrast effects predicts a negative relation between yesterday’s surprise and

the return reaction to today’s earnings surprise, holding today’s earnings surprise constant. The

intuition is that today’s news will seem slightly less impressive than it would otherwise if yesterday’s

earnings surprises were positive and slightly more impressive if yesterday’s earnings surprises were

disappointing. While an earnings surprise is a concrete number (e.g., earnings per share was $0.14,

beating analyst forecasts of $0.10, translating to a positive surprise of $0.04), there is significant

subjectivity in translating a surprise into a return response. A positive surprise is good news, but

how much the price goes up depends on the interpretation of what the surprise implies for the

future of the firm. We test whether the perception of “how good” the good news is (or “how bad”

the bad news is) is biased by contrast effects.

   The downward sloping pattern in Figure 1 illustrates our main finding. The figure shows a local

linear plot of returns surrounding a firm’s earnings announcement relative to the value-weighted

average earnings surprise announced by large firms in the previous trading day, hereafter referred to

as surpriset−1 . The figure demonstrates a strong negative relation: controlling for today’s earnings

news, the return reaction to today’s earnings announcement is inversely related to surpriset−1 .

The effect is sizable—a change in yesterday’s earnings surprise from the worst to the best decile

corresponds to a 53 basis point lower return response to today’s earnings announcement.

   We find evidence of a simple directional effect whereby a high surprise yesterday makes any

surprise today (even more positive surprises) look slightly worse than it would appear if yesterday’s

surprise had been lower. In other words, the magnitude of the return distortion depends strongly

on yesterday’s surprise and not significantly on the interaction between today’s and yesterday’s


                                                   3
surprise. Visually, this manifests as a vertical shift downward in the return response curve to the

firm’s own earnings surprise if yesterday’s news was good rather than bad (see Figure 3).

   While our findings are consistent with the theory of contrast effects, one may be concerned

that we are capturing a reaction to information transmitted from earlier earnings announcements.

Rational reaction to information released at time t − 1 implies that the information is quickly

incorporated into prices, and therefore will have no predictive power for future returns. We can

reject such explanations by showing that surpriset−1 negatively predicts the future returns of firms

scheduled to announce on day t, without conditioning on day t earnings news. This allows us to

create a simple trading strategy where we go long (short) firms scheduled to announce today if

yesterday’s surprise was low (high). Executing this trading strategy for firms in the top quintile

of size yields abnormal returns of roughly 15% per year, suggesting that, unlike many anomalies,

contrast effects can distort the returns of large firms. We also show that the market does not

respond as if surpriset−1 contains information that is relevant for firms scheduled to announce the

following day. The prices of firms scheduled to announce on day t do not move on day t − 1 in

response to day t − 1 news. Further, surpriset−1 does not predict the next day’s announcements

after controlling for slower moving time trends.

   We also find that the return distortions caused by contrast effects reverse over the next 50

trading days, consistent with mispricing that is eventually corrected. This reversal also helps

us to reject an alternative explanation in which investors have a delayed reaction to information

transmitted from earlier announcements. Rational processing of information, with or without a

delay, should not lead to the return reversals observed in the data.

   We explore a variety of other alternative potential explanations and do not find support for them

in the data. After examining a number of proxies for limits to arbitrage capital, we find no evidence

that it is a dominant mechanism underlying the empirical patterns. Fixed firm-specific loadings on

risk factors are also unlikely to explain our results because we use characteristic-adjusted returns

in our analysis. Further, we find that daily changes in risk loadings, return volatility, volume,

and other measures of trading frictions do not vary by surpriset−1 . A final potential concern is


                                                   4
that firms strategically advance or delay their earnings announcements or manipulate the earnings

announcement itself (e.g., Sloan, 1996; DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009; and Johnson and So, 2017),

but we find similar results within subsamples of firms that are unlikely to have engaged in this

behavior.

   In supplementary analysis, we explore the timing and boundaries of how contrast effects manifest

in financial markets. In much of the experimental evidence concerning sequential contrast effects,

recency (i.e., the signal seen in the most recent experimental period) is the dominant factor for

contrast effects (e.g., in speed dating Bhargava and Fisman, 2014; olympic judging Damisch et al.,

2006; and ratings of attractiveness Kenrick and Gutierres, 1980). However, it is an open question

whether the same recency predictions apply to investor perceptions of earnings, and what time

interval investors treat as “recent.” When examining contrast effects across one or more trading

days, we find that investor perceptions of earnings announced today are negatively affected by

earnings surprises released by other firms on t − 1, but are not significantly affected by lagged

earnings surprises on t − 2 and t − 3 or future earnings surprises on t + 1 and t + 2. Within a

trading day, we find that contrast effects from morning salient announcements significantly bias

return reactions to announcements made in the afternoon. Finally, we find suggestive evidence that

investors in smaller firms pay more attention to previous announcements by other firms in the same

industry. Meanwhile, investors in larger firms pay attention to the recent earnings announcements

of other large firms, but pay relatively more attention to same-industry announcements if such a

comparison is available.

   One of the main contributions of our paper is to further the understanding of how psychological

biases found in the lab manifest in real-world settings (e.g., Levitt and List, 2007a,b). Our analysis

shows that contrast effects persist in a market setting where prices are determined by interactions

among many investors, including potentially deep-pocketed arbitrageurs. Our findings also high-

light a cognitive bias that has not previously been explored in the behavioral finance literature and

that predicts distinct patterns for mispricing. A large branch of the existing behavioral finance li-

terature focuses on limited attention, in which investors underreact to news that is hidden, difficult


                                                  5
to process, or obscured by other more attention-grabbing events (e.g., Barber and Odean, 2008).1

Contrast effects differ sharply from limited attention because contrast effects are strong only if

investors pay attention to the signals being contrasted. In other words, salience increases rather

than decreases contrast effects bias. This helps explain why we find a strong contrast effects bias

even for large firms with salient earnings announcements, while the previous literature on limited

attention applies primarily to small firms, or news obscured in footnotes or released after hours on

Fridays.

    A second large branch of the behavioral finance literature studies expectational errors, such as

over-extrapolation or the gambler’s fallacy (e.g., Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014). We are able to

identify contrast effects as a perceptual error rather than an expectational error. The distinction

is mainly in regard to when an agent makes a quality assessment. Under a perceptual error such

as contrast effects, agents hold a biased quality assessment about the next case only after seeing

the next case. Under an expectational error, seeing one case causes agents to hold mistaken beliefs

about the quality of future cases, before the future cases are directly observed. For example, in

the context of earnings, Thomas and Zhang (2008) show an expectational bias in which investors

overreact to industry-specific news released early in an earnings season. This expectational error

is corrected when a firm announces its actual earnings. Since we find evidence of price distortions

for the second firm to announce only after it announces its own earnings, our evidence is consistent

with a perceptual bias rather than an expectational bias. Distinguishing between these two types

of errors is important because they imply distinct return patterns. Expectational errors lead to

mistaken predictions about future outcomes that can be corrected once the outcome is realized.

Perceptual errors lead to persistent mispricing even after the outcome is realized and news is

revealed.

    Our evidence also underscores how important decisions are distorted by comparisons to ben-

chmarks that should be irrelevant. Thus, our research is related to a large theory literature on
   1
     Much of the existing research on biased reactions to earnings announcements is also related to limited attention.
It has been shown that investors underreact to a firm’s own earnings news (Ball and Brown, 1968; Bernard and Tho-
mas, 1989, 1990; and Ball and Bartov, 1996), predictable seasonal information (Chang et al., 2016), and information
in the timing of announcements (DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009; Johnson and So, 2017; Boulland and Dessaint, 2017).


                                                          6
context-dependent choice and reference points (e.g., Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Koszegi and

Rabin, 2006, 2007; Kamenica, 2008; Cunningham, 2013; Bordalo et al., 2015; and Bushong et al.,

2015).2 Finally, our findings are related to research in household finance examining investor be-

havior based on how positions performed since they were purchased (Shefrin and Statman, 1985;

Odean, 1998) and how a position compares to the other holdings in an investor’s portfolio (Hartz-

mark, 2015). Relative to this literature which focuses on the trading patterns of individual investors,

we test how contrast effects in the perception of news affect equilibrium market prices for large cap

stocks.



1       Data

1.1     Sources

We use the I/B/E/S detail history file for data on analyst forecasts as well as the value and dates of

earnings announcements. The sample is restricted to earnings announced on calendar dates when

the market is open. Day t refers to the date of the earnings announcement listed in the I/B/E/S

file.3 Day t − 1 refers to the most recent date prior to t when the market was open. We examine the

quarterly forecasts of earnings per share and merge this to information on daily stock returns from

CRSP and firm-specific information from Compustat. Data on the market excess return, risk-free

rate, SMB, HML, UMD, and short term reversal portfolios as well as size cutoffs come from the

Kenneth French Data Library.

    To account for standard risk-based return movements, we use characteristic-adjusted returns,

i.e., raw returns in excess of the return of a portfolio of stocks with similar characteristics. We

follow the procedure in Daniel et al. (1997) and sort stocks into NYSE quintiles based on size, book

value of equity divided by market value of equity (calculated as in Fama and French, 1992), and
    2
      While closely related to this literature, contrast effects (as typically described in the psychology literature) refer
to a simple directional phenomenon in which the value of the recently observed signal inversely affects perception
of the next signal. Most descriptions of contrast effects do not require discontinuous or kinked responses around a
reference point (as in prospect theory, with recent empirical applications in, e.g., Baker et al., 2012 and DellaVigna
et al., 2016) or a choice framework to identify which reference points to use or where to allocate attention.
    3
      DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) highlight a potential concern regarding earnings announcement dates as reported
in I/B/E/S. We address this in Section 4 and show that alternative date adjustments lead to similar results.


                                                             7
momentum calculated using returns from t − 20 to t − 252 trading days (an analogue to a monthly

momentum measure from months m − 2 to m − 12). We then match each stock’s return to the

portfolio of stocks that match these three quintiles of characteristics.

    We introduce one modification to ensure that there is no mechanical relation between the returns

of the characteristic-matched portfolio and surpriset−1 , our measure of the salient surprise released

on day t − 1. We remove from the characteristic-matched portfolio a stock’s own return and the

return of firms included in the calculation of surpriset−1 . This ensures that the characteristic-

adjusted return is not distorted by potential earnings-related drift in the return of stocks that

announced on the previous day.4 Our measure of return on day t is a stock’s raw return on day

t minus the day t return of this characteristic-matched portfolio. In the remainder of the paper,

unless otherwise noted, we refer to these characteristic-adjusted returns as returns.

    We measure the close-to-close return for day t as the return from market close on day t − 1 to

market close on day t. We measure the open-to-open return for day t as the return from market open

on day t to market open on day t + 1. The analysis uses close-to-close returns unless open-to-open

is specified.


1.2    Measuring earnings surprise

A key variable in our analysis is the surprise for a given earnings announcement.5 Broadly defined,

earnings surprise is the difference between announced earnings and the expectations of investors

prior to the announcement. We follow a commonly-used method in the accounting and finance

literature and measure expectations using analyst forecasts prior to announcement. This measure

is available for a long time-series and does not require us to take a stand on specific modeling

   4
      We thank James Choi for suggesting this modification to the calculation of characteristic-adjusted returns. In
the Internet Appendix, we show that using raw returns in excess of the market or standard characteristic-adjusted
returns without this correction yields similar results.
    5
      We follow the literature on earnings announcements in characterizing earnings news as the surprise relative to
expectations. We focus on surprise rather than levels because whether a given level of earnings is good or bad news
depends on the level relative to investor expectations. In addition, stock prices should reflect current information—the
stock market return response to an earnings announcement represents the change in a firm’s valuation, which should
depend on the difference in earnings relative to expectations. Moreover, the financial press typically reports earnings
announcement news in terms of how much earnings beat or missed forecasts. Therefore, the earnings surprise is likely
to be the measure of earnings news that is most salient to investors.


                                                           8
assumptions (for example, assuming that expectations follow random walk with drift as in Bernard,

1992). Analysts are professionals who are paid to forecast future earnings. While there is some

debate about how unbiased they are (e.g., McNichols and O’Brien, 1997; Lin and McNichols, 1998;

Hong and Kubik, 2003; Lim, 2001; and So, 2013), our tests only require that such a bias is not

correlated with the surprises of other firms in the day before a firm announces earnings. Given that

we only use forecasts made before the t − 1 firm announces (forecasts from day t − 2 or earlier),

such a bias is unlikely to exist.

   Similar to DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), we take each analyst’s most recent forecast, thereby

limiting the sample to only one forecast per analyst, and then take the median of this number

within a certain time window for each firm’s earnings announcement. In our base specification, we

take all analyst forecasts made between two and fifteen days prior to the announcement of earnings.

We choose fifteen days to avoid stale information yet still retain a large sample of firms with analyst

coverage. To show that these assumptions are not driving the results, we present variations of this

measure in the Internet Appendix utilizing longer windows of 30 and 45 days prior to announcement

and also using the return reaction to the announcement as a measure of earnings surprise.

   We follow DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) and scale the difference between the actual surprise

and the median analyst forecast by the share price of the firm from three trading days prior to the

announcement. Thus, our estimate of the earnings surprise for firm i on day t can be written as:

                                                                                     
                                    actual earningsit − median estimatei,[t−15,t−2]
                  surpriseit =                                                            .        (1)
                                                        pricei,t−3

Scaling by price accounts for the fact that a given level of earnings surprise implies different magni-

tudes depending on the price per share. For example, a five cent surprise represents a bigger positive

surprise if the stock price is valued at $10/share than $100/share. However, many media outlets

report earnings surprises as the unscaled difference between actual earnings and analyst forecasts,

and investors may pay attention to the unscaled surprise. In Section 4, we find qualitatively similar

results using the unscaled earnings surprise.



                                                    9
    To test the contrast effects hypothesis, we need a measure of the surprise occurring on the

previous day taking into account that multiple firms may have announced earnings. The ideal

variable would focus on the earnings announcements in t − 1 that were salient, as this would be

the comparison group in the minds of investors when they evaluate the current day’s announced

earnings. While we do not have an exact measure of the salient surprise in t − 1, we utilize a

number of proxies and focus most of our analysis on large firms. A firm’s market capitalization

is related to how much attention that firm receives. One measure we use is simply the surprise

of the largest firm to announce on day t − 1. A second measure, which we use as our baseline, is

the value-weighted surprise, using each firm’s market capitalization three days prior to the firm’s

announcement, among all large firms announcing on day t − 1. We define large firms as those

with market capitalization (measured three days before the firm’s announcement) above the NYSE

90th percentile of market capitalization in each month.6 Thus, our baseline measure of yesterday’s

salient surprise is:

                                              N
                                              X
                                                    (mkt capi,t−4 × surprisei,t−1 )
                                              i=1
                            surpriset−1 =                N
                                                                                                             (2)
                                                         X
                                                               mkt capi,t−4
                                                         i=1

To reduce the influence of outliers, we winsorize surpriseit at the 1st and 99th percentile and

take the weighted average to create surpriset−1 . After creating surpriset−1 , we again winsorize at

the 1st and 99th percentiles. In later regression analysis, each observation represents an earnings

announcement by firm i on day t. When we discuss surpriset−1 , we refer to the salient earnings

surprise released by large firms on the previous trading day.


1.3    Summary statistics

Table 1 describes the data used in our baseline specification. Our sample begins in 1984 and ends in

2013. For our main analysis, we examine how the return reaction for a firm that announces earnings
   6
    The robustness of the results to this somewhat ad hoc cutoff is explored in Section 4. We present alternative
formulations for surpriset−1 in which we use size cutoffs at the 85th and 95th percentiles or weight firms that
announced in t − 1 by volume or analyst coverage.


                                                        10
on day t relates to the salient earnings surprise of other firms released on day t − 1, controlling for

the firm’s own earnings surprise. Thus, to be included in the sample, a firm must have at least

one analyst forecast in our dataset between days t − 2 and t − 15 prior to the announcement. In

addition, we require a non-missing measure of surpriset−1 , which means at least one firm above

the 90th percentile of market-capitalization announced their earnings on day t − 1 and at least one

analyst forecasted earnings for this firm between days t − 16 and t − 3. After applying these filters

and requiring the firm with an announcement on day t to have non-missing returns, we are left

with 75,897 unique earnings announcements.

   We see that days with an earnings announcement are associated with positive returns (in ex-

cess of the matched characteristic portfolio), with a mean and median of 18 and 7 basis points,

respectively. This is the earnings announcement premium described in Beaver (1968), Frazzini and

Lamont (2007), and Barber et al. (2013). Table 1 also shows that the typical earnings surprise is

approximately zero (a mean of -0.0003 and a median of 0.0002). The market cap row shows the

mean market capitalization in our sample is roughly $7.7 billion, while the 25th percentile of market

cap is $440 million, implying that we have many small firms in our sample. Our baseline analysis

will focus on larger firms because we value-weight each observation. We find a similar pattern when

examining analyst coverage (number of forecasts from t − 15 to t − 2). For many firms, we see

only one analyst forecast and the median number of forecasts is two, while the mean number of

forecasts is nearly four. Thus, a small number of firms are covered heavily by many analysts. The

final row describes the number of firms used to construct surpriset−1 , that is firms above the 90th

percentile that announced on the previous trading day. The median is 6 with a mean of 7.6, so in

general multiple firms comprise the surpriset−1 measure.




                                                  11
2       Results

2.1     Baseline results

In our simplest specification, we test how the return response to a given earnings surprise is impacted

by the earnings surprise announced by large firms on the previous trading day. Under the null

hypothesis of frictionless efficient markets, it is not possible to predict future returns using past

publicly available information. On the other hand, the theory of contrast effects predicts that the

salient surprise on t − 1 (surpriset−1 ) will negatively affect the return reaction to announcements

made on day t. Therefore, we estimate the following regression:



                                returni,[t,t+1] = β0 + β1 · surpriset−1 + εit .                                 (3)


    The dependent variable is the characteristic-adjusted return from market open on day t to

market open on day t + 2 for a given firm i that announces its earnings on day t. In all regressions,

unless otherwise noted, we value-weight each observation using firm i’s market capitalization three

days prior to the firm’s announcement, scaled by the average market capitalization in that year,

in order to focus on the more economically meaningful firms.7 We cluster the standard errors by

date.

    Surpriset−1 is our measure of yesterday’s salient earnings surprise and β1 is our main coefficient

of interest. All information contained in surpriset−1 is announced prior to when our left hand side

return measure begins. Thus, in a frictionless efficient market, β1 should be equal to zero. The

contrast effects hypothesis instead predicts that a high surprise yesterday makes any surprise today

look slightly worse than it would appear if yesterday’s surprise had been lower. Thus, contrast

effects predict a negative coefficient on β1 .

    In Table 2, we estimate that β1 is negative and highly significant. For our first estimate of

yesterday’s salient surprise in Column 1, we use the earnings surprise of the largest firm to announce


    7
     Average market capitalization has increased over time. To avoid mechanically overweighting recent observations,
we scale market capitalization by the average in each year.


                                                        12
in the previous day. To make sure this firm is salient, we include only observations where the firm

is above the 90th percentile of NYSE market capitalization. We estimate a significant β1 of -

0.526. Examining only the largest firm is a coarse measure of the salient earnings surprise from

the previous day if there were multiple large firms that announced. For example, if both Apple

and Goldman Sachs announced earnings on the same day, both announcements may be salient to

investors. Column 2 of Table 2 measures surpriset−1 using the equal-weighted mean of all firms that

announced in the previous day and were large (above the 90th percentile of market capitalization).

We estimate a significant β1 of -0.846. Finally, Column 3 uses the value-weighted mean of the

earnings surprise of all large firms that announced yesterday, leading to a significant β1 of -0.780.

This value-weighted measure implicitly assumes that the relative market cap of large firms that

announced on t−1 is a good proxy for the relative salience of their announcements. The results in the

first three columns of Table 2 show that returns are predictable based upon publicly available past

information. This return predictability allows us to reject a model of frictionless efficient markets

in which investors rationally process any information from earlier earnings announcements.

   The negative β1 coefficient is consistent with the contrast effects hypothesis, but Equation 3

is not the most direct test for contrast effects. In particular, a negative β1 in Equation 3 is also

consistent with an alternative behavioral explanation where investors have mistaken beliefs about

what surpriset−1 implies for a firm announcing earnings on day t. Investors may over-infer that a

positive surpriset−1 is good news for this firm, leading to positive returns on day t − 1 and then

a negative return correction on day t when the firm’s earnings are actually announced. To more

directly test the contrast effect hypothesis, we estimate the following regression:



                 returni,[t−1,t+1] = β0 + β1 · surpriset−1 + own surprise bin + εit              (4)


   This regression modifies Equation 3 in two ways. First, we extend the return window for firm i

to include the period prior to when surpriset−1 is announced (returni,[t−1,t+1] is measured starting

at market close on t − 2). Given this longer return window, a negative coefficient β1 cannot be



                                                 13
caused by overreaction to news on day t − 1 and a subsequent correction when firm i0 s news is

released on day t. An additional benefit of extending the return window to before surpriset−1 is

announced is that we can use standard close-to-close returns data, which is available for a longer

time period than open-to-open returns. Second, we control for firm i0 s own earnings surprise. A

major determinant of the return response to any earnings announcement will, of course, be the

earnings surprise that the firm actually announces. Contrast effects predict that, conditional on

the actual earnings surprise, perception of that news will be too high or low depending on the

salient surprise released the previous day.8 We flexibly control for the firm’s own earnings surprise

with own surprise bin, which represents twenty equally-sized bins based on the size of the earnings

surprise with an additional indicator for a surprise of zero. By using dummy variables for each bin,

we non-parametrically allow each magnitude of surprise to be associated with a different level of

average return response. With these changes, β1 < 0 is direct evidence of contrast effects.

    Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Table 2 show the estimates of β1 , using the modified regression with the

extended return window and own surprise controls. In all specifications, we estimate a significant

and negative β1 that is of similar magnitude to earlier estimates. For the remainder of the paper,

we refer to Column 6, which utilizes the value-weighted measure of surpriset−1 as our baseline

specification. Using the β1 of -0.924 from Column 6, we estimate that an increase in yesterday’s

salient surprise from the average in the worst decile (-0.21%) to the average in the best decile (0.38%)

is associated with lower returns of 55 basis points, holding i0 s actual news constant. Alternatively,

a one standard deviation increase in surpriset−1 is associated with a decrease in returns of 16 basis

points. To get a sense of magnitudes, we can compare this result to a robust anomaly in asset

pricing: the earnings announcement premium (Frazzini and Lamont, 2007; Barber et al., 2013).

In our sample, with no information other than that earnings will be announced on a given day,

an equal-weighted strategy long stocks with earnings announcements earns abnormal returns of 17

    8
      Controlling for firm i’s actual news allows for a direct test of the contrast effects hypothesis: previous signals
inversely bias perception of the next signal relative to its true value. Note that the contrast effects hypothesis does
not require zero autocorrelation in true signal values, just that perceptions of the next signal are inversely biased by
the previous signal. In practice, we will show that earnings surprises display no significant day-to-day autocorrelation
after accounting for slower moving time trends.


                                                          14
basis points from t − 1 to t + 1. If we value-weight, as we do for our estimates of contrast effects, the

earnings announcement premium is 8 basis points from t − 1 to t + 1. Thus, the impact of contrast

effects is of a similar magnitude to, if not greater than, the earnings announcement premium.

   Figure 2 shows the graphical analogues to the regressions in Table 2. Panel A mirrors Equation

3 and shows that surpriset−1 strongly negatively predicts future returns of firms scheduled to

announced the next day. Panel B mirrors Equation 4 and shows that the same negative relation

exists if we use an extended return window and control for the firm’s own earnings surprise. Both

panels are consistent with contrast effects inducing a negative relation between yesterday’s salient

surprise and the return reaction to today’s earnings surprise.

   The contrast effects hypothesis predicts that the return response to a given earnings surprise

today will be higher when yesterday’s news was bad than when yesterday’s news was good. In

its simplest form, the magnitude of the bias depends on the value of yesterday’s surprise, but not

on whether today’s surprise is better or worse than yesterday’s surprise. This simple directional

effect can be seen in Figure 3, which shows how surpriset−1 shifts the return reaction curve to

the firm’s own earnings surprise. The blue and red lines show the return response for firms that

announce following a very positive (top decile) or negative (bottom decile) surpriset−1 , respectively.

Unsurprisingly, for both groups, there is a strong positive relation between a firm’s returns around

announcement and the firm’s own earnings surprise. More importantly, the figure shows that the

blue line is consistently below the red line, demonstrating that the return response to a firm’s own

earnings surprise is shifted down significantly if yesterday’s surprise was in the highest decile as

compared to the lowest decile. The figure also shows that the magnitude of the contrast effect,

i.e., the vertical distance between the two lines, does not vary substantially across the support

of earnings surprises released today. In other words, good salient surprises yesterday makes all

earnings surprises today (even more positive earnings surprises) look slightly less impressive than

if they had followed bad salient surprises yesterday, and the magnitude of this difference does not

differ substantially based on the level of surprise released today.

   We test directly for potential interaction effects in Table 3 by interacting surpriset−1 with


                                                   15
various measures of the firm’s own earnings surprise: the raw level, 20 bins, and quintiles for the

firm’s own earnings surprise. We find that the magnitude of contrast effects may be slightly larger

when the surprise today is more negative, but the interaction effects are all insignificantly different

from zero. Further, we continue to find a strong negative direct relation between returns and the

previous day’s salient surprise, even after we allow for interaction effects. In other words, yesterday’s

salient surprise negatively impacts the return reaction to today’s earnings announcement, and the

extent of this distortion does not depend significantly on the level of today’s earnings surprise.

Therefore, we focus on the direct effect, but do not claim to reject potential interaction effects

which may be too noisy to estimate within our sample.


2.2   Long run reversals

If the return patterns represent mispricing due to the psychological bias of contrast effects, then

the negative coefficient on surpriset−1 should reverse over time if prices eventually converge to

fundamental values. Table 4 examines returns subsequent to the earnings announcement and finds

evidence of significant reversals within 50 trading days. The first column replicates our baseline

specification which focuses on immediate return reactions. Columns 2-4 in the top row looks at the

overall impact of surpriset−1 on longer run return windows, starting at t − 1 up to t + 75. We find

that the contrast effect persists up to 25 trading days but becomes insignificantly different from

zero by 50 trading days after announcement.

   In the Columns 5-7, we focus directly on the reversal period by examining return windows

starting at t + 2, after the initial reaction period. Looking only at the post-event window means

that a reversal should manifest itself as a positive coefficient on surpriset−1 . In the initial 25

trading days, we don’t see significant movements in prices. Examining the period from t + 26 to

t + 50, we see strong significant positive effects of roughly the same absolute magnitude as the

baseline effects from t − 1 to t + 1. Finally, examining the next period from t + 51 to t + 75 we find

no significant further reversal. Thus, the evidence suggests that contrast effects lead to mispricing

that is reversed in approximately 50 trading days after announcement.


                                                   16
2.3   Trading strategy

One important implication of the initial results that do not condition on a firm’s own earnings

surprise is that we can predict day t and future returns using information available on day t − 1.

Thus, it would be possible to trade based on the previous day’s salient earnings surprise and earn

predictably higher or lower returns for firms that are scheduled to announce earnings the next

day. We construct a simple calendar-time trading strategy based on contrast effects. The purpose

of this analysis is not to find the maximum alpha attainable to traders, but rather to show the

results are robust to a different specification. Calendar time asset pricing offers a different risk

adjustment than the characteristic-adjusted returns used elsewhere in the paper. In addition, the

trading strategy uses daily diversified value-weighted portfolios that more closely resemble what

investors might hold. The strategy equal-weights trading days (and value-weights multiple earnings

announcements within the same day) while the baseline regressions value-weight each earnings

announcement.

   The trading strategy is a daily long-short strategy. On days where the salient surprise at t − 1 is

below the 25th percentile of surpriset−1 (relative to the distribution of surpriset−1 in the previous

quarter), we buy firms with an earnings announcement on day t. On days where surpriset−1 is

above the 25th percentile of surpriset−1 over the previous quarter, we short stocks with an earnings

announcement on day t. The position is held for days t to t + 1 beginning at market open on day

t. If this strategy is only active in the long (short) leg on a given day, we short (long) the market

for the other leg. The portfolios are value-weighted based upon the market capitalization at t − 3

of the firms announcing earnings on day t. We form portfolios using only large firms, in the top

quintile of the market, that account for our findings (see Table 11). We regress portfolio returns

on the market, size, book to market, momentum, and short term reversal factors.

   Table 5 presents the results. Column 1 shows that the strategy yields a five-factor alpha of 19

basis points with a t-statistic greater than 3. We can compound these daily alphas to estimate the

annual alpha of a contrast effects trading strategy. If the trading strategy could be implemented



                                                 17
every trading day (which is not the case), 19 basis points per day would yield an annual abnormal

return of over 45%. However, earnings announcements cluster within each quarter, and not all

trading days contain earnings announcements. Further, the strategy can only be implemented if

there is a non-missing salient surprise in the top or bottom quartile of surpriset−1 in the previous

trading day. In our sample, we can implement the strategy for an average of 76 trading days per

year (roughly 30% of total trading days), which yields an abnormal annual return of 15%.

    Whether the trading strategy continues to yield positive abnormal returns after accounting for

trading costs depends heavily on assumptions regarding these costs, an issue that we do not take

a strong stand on in this paper. Following the procedure from Breen et al. (2002) (which serves as

the basis for Mitchell and Pulvino, 2001) to estimate direct and indirect trading costs, we find that

trading costs for the average position are roughly equal to the level of the alpha, and would wipe out

the gains from the trading strategy.9 In contrast, Frazzini et al. (2012) directly examine trading

costs for a large institutional trader during a time period that overlaps more with our sample

and estimate much lower trading costs. Using their median estimates of 8 to 10 basis points, the

contrast effects trading strategy would remain profitable. However, we caution that the estimates

in Frazzini et al. (2012) are based on the implementation of a different set of anomaly strategies

and may not account for the decrease in liquidity prior to earnings announcements, which could

raise trading costs (So and Wang, 2014). Finally, institutional investors would likely engage in

more detailed analysis to further increase the alpha and minimize trading costs, while our analysis

intentionally uses a very simple trading rule to form portfolios.

    In addition to a trading strategy exploiting the direct impact of contrast effects on short run

return reactions, we can also form portfolios to demonstrate the robustness of the long run reversal.

We implement the same strategy described above, but hold for a longer return window excluding


   9
     The trading strategy holds each position for two days, leading to one trade per day for each position. Thus, we
can compare the daily alpha of the trading strategy to the estimated trading costs to see if the alpha would survive
adjustments for transaction costs. Following Breen et al. (2002), we estimate that a block trade of 1,000 shares for
the average position in our sample would incur a cost of more than 20 basis points. This estimate coincides with
the average cost from Breen et al. (2002) because the reduction in trading costs from investing only in large-cap
firms in our strategy is offset by the increased trading costs associated with trading directly before the earnings
announcement, consistent with So and Wang (2014).


                                                        18
the days immediately after announcement. Specifically, we sort stocks into portfolios based on

surpriset−1 but hold the stocks from days t + 2 to t + 50 after the announcement. Thus, on a given

day, the portfolio is long stocks that announced earnings from 2 to 50 days ago where surpriset−1

was below the 25th percentile of the surpriset−1 distribution in the previous quarter and is short

all stocks where surpriset−1 was above the 75th percentile of the surpriset−1 distribution. If there

is a reversal of mispricing in the long run, we expect this trading strategy to yield negative alphas.

     Column 2 of Table 5 shows that this reversal strategy yields a significant daily alpha of negative

2.6 basis points. As expected, the daily alpha for the reversal trading strategy is much smaller in

absolute magnitude than the daily alpha for the direct trading strategy presented in Column 1,

because the direct impact is measured over two trading days while the reversal occurs over the next

48 trading days.10 In earlier regression analysis (see Table 4), we found that the reversal appears

concentrated in the later portion of the trading window. Similarly, if we form portfolios active from

t + 26 to t + 50, we see a slightly stronger effect, with a daily alpha of roughly negative 4 basis

points. Extending the window further, from t + 51 to t + 75 we find no evidence of a reversal.

Overall, we find evidence for both the direct impact of contrast effects as well as the reversal using

calendar time asset pricing methods.



3        Alternative explanations

3.1      Information transmission

The results presented so far strongly support the contrast effects hypothesis. We now discuss

potential alternative explanations involving rational, biased, and/or delayed reaction to information

    10
      The direct trading strategy has an alpha of 19 bp per day for a two-day strategy, yielding a total
                                                                                                      effect of roughly
38 bp. To reverse this over the next 48 trading days necessitates -0.8 bp per day (− 1.0038 /48 − 1 ). The daily alpha
                                                                                             1


for the reversal strategy should be roughly double this, as the direct strategy is typically active on only one of the
long or short legs on a given day (holding the market on the other leg), while the reversal is typically active on both
legs. Thus, we expect a daily alpha of -1.6 bp in Column 2 which is not statistically different from our point estimate
of -2.6 bp (p-value of 0.44). The Column 3 reversal strategy involves 24 trading days. Using a similar argument,
we expect an alpha of -3.2, which is not significantly different from our point estimate of the -4.1 (p-value of 0.66).
Further, the same position can receive more or less weight in the direct and reversal strategies. The regressions in
Table 4 weight each position in the reversal in the same way as in the baseline analysis and thus offer the more direct
test of whether the reversal offsets the direct effect.


                                                          19
transmission. To focus the discussion, we will use a simple example. Suppose that firm A announces

a positive earnings surprise on day t − 1 and firm B is scheduled to announce earnings on day t.

Our empirical evidence implies that following A’s positive surprise, B is likely to experience low

returns conditional on its actual earnings surprise. Can a story involving information transmission

explain this empirical pattern?

    The baseline tests have already ruled out two major classes of information transmission expla-

nations. First, the evidence of return predictability in Columns 1 through 3 of Table 2 rules out

any explanations involving rational information transmission in efficient markets. If information

is released at time t − 1 and it is quickly and properly incorporated into prices, the information

should have no predictive power for future returns. As further evidence against a rational informa-

tion transmission story, we show in Table 6 that A’s earnings surprise does not predict B’s earnings

and the market does not behave as though A’s announcement conveys any information relevant for

B, earnings-related or otherwise. Columns 1 and 3 show that surpriset−1 positively predicts the

earnings surprises of firms scheduled to announce in the following day, but Columns 2 and 4 show

this correlation goes to zero after we control for year-month fixed effects. In other words, day t − 1

surprises do not predict day t surprises after accounting for month-level time trends. Of course A’s

surprise could contain non-earnings related news relevant for B. If markets are efficient, then B’s

stock price should change on t − 1 when this information is first released. In Columns 5 and 6, we

find no significant relation between surpriset−1 and the t − 1 returns of firms that are scheduled

to announce the next day. The market does not behave as if A’s good news conveys good or bad

news on average for firm B.11

    Second, our baseline results show that the empirical patterns cannot be explained by overre-

   11
     In Internet Appendix Table 1, we also check that the results are not due to aggregation of subcases where
positively or negatively correlated information is transmitted with other cases in which no information is transmitted.
We look only at cases where the market reacted as if no information was transmitted in t − 1. In this subsample,
we expect to find no evidence consistent with contrast effects if the results are driven by information transmission.
First, we examine only firms that announce on day t with a small open-to-open return in absolute magnitude on day
t − 1 (either below 1% or 0.5%). Within this subsample, we continue to find a strong contrast effect on day t. Next,
we restrict the sample to observations for which no negatively-correlated information was transmitted on t − 1 (i.e.,
we exclude negative return reactions to positive surpriset−1 and positive return reactions to negative surpriset−1 ).
We focus on negatively-correlated information transmission because positively-correlated information predicts the
opposite empirical pattern observed in the data. We again find similar results.


                                                          20
action to positively correlated news.12 Using the above example, investors may mistakenly over-infer

that A’s positive surprise is good news for B. This over-reaction would lead to positive returns

for B on day t − 1 and then a negative return correction on average on day t when B’s news is

actually announced. However, A’s positive surprise should not negatively affect B’s cumulative

return from t − 1 to t + 1 (measured starting at market close in t − 2, before A announces) which

is what we examine in Columns 4-6 of Table 2. In general, positive correlation in news implies a

positive correlation between A0 s surprise and B’s cumulative returns, not the negative relation we

observe in the data.

    Thus, for information transmission to explain our results, investors must believe there is negative

correlation in news, so A’s positive surprise is bad news for B (e.g., A competes with B for

resources). Further, investors must not fully react to this information until day t, otherwise we

wouldn’t observe return predictability. In general, rational investors should not react to information

with a delay.13 However, one may wonder whether a trading friction or bias other than contrast

effects causes a delayed reaction. For example, boundedly rational investors may react to A’s

information about B with a delay because investors do not think about firm B until day t, when B

becomes more salient due to news coverage surrounding its earnings announcement. We show that

a delayed reaction to negatively correlated news is unlikely to explain our results for two reasons.

First, we find no evidence of negative correlation in earnings news, so there is no obvious reason

why investors should believe (with or without a delay) that A’s positive earnings surprise is, on

average, bad news for B. Second, delayed processing of information should not lead to the long-run

reversals we observe in the data.

    Altogether, we show that most plausible variants of the information transmission story cannot

explain our results. While it is impossible to rule out all information explanations, what remains


   12
      Most studies of information transmission in firm news announcements focus on the case of positive correlation
in news, in which A’s positive surprise is good news for B. For example, Anilowski et al. (2007) and Barth and So
(2014) study “bellwether” firms whose news convey similar information for other firms.
   13
      Fully rational investors in efficient markets should not react with a delay even if the interpretation of A’s news
for B’s prospects depends on B’s earnings surprise. For example, A’s good news may be bad news for B, but only if
B’s earnings surprise is high. If investors are rational, they should realize that the average expected impact of A’s
positive news implies negative returns for B and react on day t − 1.


                                                          21
is a very specific and complex story which must contain the following elements:


  1. Investors believe that A0 s t−1 positive surprise contains negative information for B (contrary

      to the evidence in Table 6 showing that earnings surprises are positively serially correlated

      without accounting for time trends and not correlated after accounting for time trends).


  2. The negative information relates to B’s prospects other than just B’s earnings.


  3. Rational investors should not wait until day t to react to information released on day t − 1.

      Nevertheless, the market does not react to this information until day t.


  4. When the market does react to this information on day t, it reacts in a biased manner, leading

      to a long run reversal.


While this complex information transmission explanation is impossible to reject, we feel that the

contrast effects hypothesis offers a more parsimonious explanation of the empirical results that is

based on a well-known and intuitive psychological phenomenon.


3.2   Expectations vs. perceptions

A unique advantage of our financial setting is that we can identify contrast effects as an error in

perceptions rather than an error in expectations. An expectational error occurs when exposure to

a previous case biases expectations about the quality of the next case. For example, a gambler’s

fallacy is an expectational error in which, after seeing a high quality case, a judge mistakenly

believes that the next case is more likely to be low quality, and this prior belief clouds the ultimate

decision on the next case (Chen et al., 2016; Rabin and Vayanos, 2010). A perceptual error, such as

a contrast effect, occurs if after viewing a high quality case, the judge examines the characteristics

of the next case and perceives the case as lower in quality. The distinction is mainly in regard

to when the judge makes a biased quality assessment. Under an expectational error, the judge

holds mistaken beliefs about the quality of the next case before seeing the next case, whereas a

perceptual error leads to a biased quality assessment only after seeing the next case. As highlighted


                                                  22
in Chen et al. (2016), these two biases can generate observationally equivalent sequences of decision

outcomes, making it difficult to distinguish between perception and expectation errors in most field

settings.

    Our financial setting allows us to distinguish between expectational and perceptual biases be-

cause it offers continuously traded prices. At each point in time, prices reflect current market beliefs

about each firm. To see how continuously traded prices allow us to distinguish these two classes of

biases, return to our example in which firm A announces a positive earnings surprise on t − 1 and

firm B announces on t. If A’s announcement changes expectations about B’s announcements or

value, we should see B’s price change on t − 1. If these beliefs are biased, we would see a partial or

full reversal on day t when B’s information is revealed.14 If A’s announcement biases perceptions of

B’s announcements without changing expectations, B’s price will not move on t − 1, but will move

in a biased manner on day t. Since we find evidence of price distortions only after B has announced

(see Table 6), our evidence is consistent with a perceptual bias rather than an expectational bias.

    Our focus on a perceptual bias also offers a novel contribution to the behavioral finance litera-

ture, which has largely focused on expectational biases. For example, in the context of earnings,

Thomas and Zhang (2008) show an expectational bias in which the market overreacts to industry-

specific news released early in an earnings season. This expectational error is corrected when a

firm announces its actual earnings later in the same season. More broadly, investors form biased

expectations by overextrapolating from past information (Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014; Barberis

et al., 2015). These are expectational errors, as they manifest themselves upon receiving signals

about a future outcome (e.g., a mistaken belief that past positive returns forecast positive future

returns) rather than when the future outcome is observed (e.g., a firm’s earnings announcement).15

    Understanding how perceptual errors impact financial markets and decision-making more bro-


  14
      Whether there is a full or partial reversal on day t depends on whether the news released on day t is fully
revealing about B’s value.
   15
      Loh and Warachka (2012) document an expectational error in which investors suffer from the gambler’s fallacy
and expect streaks in the firm’s own earnings over past quarters to reverse. Other research has shown how price
responses depend on mood, sentiment, or weather (e.g., Mian and Sankaraguruswamy, 2012; Gulen and Hwang,
2012; Hirshleifer and Shumway, 2003). These return patterns may represent errors in expectations or perceptions.
However, the settings usually lack the specific timing necessary to disentangle the two types of errors.


                                                       23
adly is important because perceptual biases can imply very different patterns than those implied

by expectational biases. Expectational errors lead to mistaken predictions about future outcomes.

Perceptual errors can lead to persistent mispricing even after the outcome is realized and news is

revealed. As we discuss later in the Conclusion, perceptual errors may also motivate non-standard

preferences such as internal and external habits, which are the basis of many influential models in

macroeconomics and finance. Finally, firms can potentially exploit contrast effects as a perceptual

error by timing the release of their own news to follow bad news released by other firms.16


3.3     Risk, trading frictions and capital constraints

Another possible concern is that the return reaction represents compensation for the impact of

surpriset−1 on risk or trading frictions. Stable firm-specific loadings on risk factors are unlikely to

explain our results because we use characteristic-adjusted returns. A risk- or friction-based expla-

nation thus requires that a more negative earnings surprise yesterday increases day-specific trading

frictions or betas on risk factors, leading investors to demand a higher return as compensation.

    Table 7 Panel A tests for such a channel. We modify our base specification so the return is re-

gressed on four factors (market excess return, SMB, HML, and momentum) along with interactions

of those factors with surpriset−1 . If a firm’s covariation with market factors is systematically larger

when there are more negative surprises on the previous day, we would expect to see large negative

coefficients for the interaction terms. Examining characteristic-adjusted returns in Column 1 and

raw returns in Column 2, we find no support for this hypothesis. Two coefficients are significant

at the 10% level, but they are positive. None of the coefficients are significantly negative. Thus,

fixed or time-varying loadings on standard risk factors are unlikely to account for our results.17

    Another possible concern is that our findings are due to a liquidity premium. In general,


   16
      Suppose a firm’s news announcement is fully informative about firm value. In a simple model with expectational
errors, the same strategic scheduling motives would not apply if managers only care about share price after the firm’s
news is released. Under an expectational error, the firm’s share price would reflect the true value once the firm’s
news is announced, regardless of whether the announcement follows good or bad news released by another firm.
   17
      In the Internet Appendix, we also check that our results are not capturing a risk premium associated with tail
risk. We do not find a significant difference in the tails of return distributions split based on surpriset−1 , suggesting
that the results are not due to a rational fear of extreme negative returns based on the previous day’s salient surprise.


                                                           24
liquidity is known to be low around earnings announcements (Lee et al., 1993; So and Wang, 2014).

However, for a liquidity premium to explain our results, it must be that a more negative surpriset−1

predicts lower liquidity for firms announcing today, so that the higher return is compensation for

the lower liquidity. In Table 7 Panel A Columns 3 and 4, we show that yesterday’s salient surprise

is not correlated with today’s volume or bid-ask spread, two proxies for liquidity.

   Next, we consider explanations related to limited capital. Institutional investors may heavily

invest their available capital after a positive surpriset−1 and thus have less capital at their disposal

to invest the next day. If there is additional good earnings news the next day, these investors may

again wish to invest, but may be constrained in their ability to do so. This could cause the price of

firms announcing on day t to be lower than it would have been otherwise and result in the negative

relation we previously documented. While we cannot rule out limited capital effects entirely (and

indeed, we believe that limited capital can play some role in our setting), we show that the main

results of the paper do not seem to be driven by limited capital among institutional investors.

   We first note that limited capital is unlikely to be a major factor because even a large firm

announcing on t − 1 is small relative to the amount of liquid capital invested in US large cap stocks.

Further, if a high surpriset−1 causes investors to have limited capital to invest in a firm scheduled

to announce the next day, we would expect that firm to have abnormally low trading volume and

liquidity following a high surpriset−1 . We instead find that surpriset−1 has no effect on the volume

or bid-ask spread of firms scheduled to announce the following day.

   If capital constraints apply to investors undertaking broad marketwide strategies, a positive

surpriset−1 should lead to lower returns for all firms on day t, not only for firms announcing

earnings on day t. In untabulated results, we find that, if anything, there is a positive correlation

between surpriset−1 and the market return on day t. It could also be that surpriset−1 is correlated

with market returns on t − 1, and it is the market performance on t − 1 rather than surpriset−1

that is responsible for limiting capital. Table 7 Panel B shows that the coefficient on surpriset−1 is

approximately unchanged after controlling for the market return on day t − 1. Market returns on

t−1 do have a marginally significant negative effect on the returns of firms scheduled to announce on


                                                  25
day t (which could be due to capital constraints or a market-based contrast effect), but it appears

to be a separate effect from that captured by surpriset−1 . In Column 4, we also find that the

coefficient on surpriset−1 remains approximately unchanged after controlling for market returns

on both day t−1 and day t, as well as the interactions between the market returns and surpriset−1 .

   Perhaps the most likely version of a capital constraints story relates to the limited capital

of investors focused on earnings arbitrage. The marginal investor in firms around their earnings

announcements may be funds that specialize in earnings-related trading strategies. This increases

the plausibility of a limited capital explanation, as the capital need only be limited for a smaller

pool of investors. In Table 7 Panel C, we examine an explanation related to limited earnings

arbitrage capital by using three proxies for arbitrage capital constraints. One possibility is that

arbitrage capital is more limited during market downturns. For example, the largest positive bar in

Figure 4 occurs during the fourth quarter of 2008, which experienced a market return of -22%. High

returns for our contrast effects trading strategy during this quarter could be due to limited capital

during this period (although high returns are also consistent with the contrast effects hypothesis, as

investor attention to earnings may be greater in times of greater uncertainty). Regardless, we find

that excluding quarters with market returns below -5% still yields a significant contrast effect, with

a slightly larger point estimate than in our baseline sample. Next, we examine the impact of VIX

on our measure of contrast effects because Nagel (2012) shows that liquidity evaporates when the

VIX is high. In Columns 2 and 3, we find that surpriset−1 continues to have a significant negative

effect on the return reactions of announcing firms, after controlling for VIX and the interactions of

VIX with surpriset−1 . Finally, Hanson and Sunderam (2014) create a measure of the amount of

arbitrage capital directed at earnings strategies. Columns 4 and 5 control for this measure and its

interactions with surpriset−1 . We continue to find a significant negative coefficient on surpriset−1 .

We further find no significant relation between return reactions and earnings arbitrage capital.

Overall, we do not find any strong evidence that limited capital is a major driver of our results.




                                                  26
3.4   Strategic timing of earnings announcements

Previous research has shown that firms may advance or delay earnings announcements relative to

the schedule used in the previous year or manipulate the earnings announcement itself (e.g., through

adjustment of discretionary accruals). However, these types of strategic manipulation will only bias

our results if they alter firm earnings announcements as a function of the earnings surprises released

by other firms on day t − 1. Such short-run manipulation within a single trading day is unlikely.

Firms typically publicly schedule when they will announce their earnings more than a week before

they actually announce (Boulland and Dessaint, 2017). The earnings surprises of other firms are, by

definition, difficult to predict because they measure surprises relative to expectations. Therefore,

it is unlikely that firms can strategically schedule to follow other firms with more or less positive

surprises. Further, manipulation of the earnings number itself takes time and is unlikely to occur

within a single day as a reaction to the earnings surprises made by other firms on day t − 1.

   To directly test strategic timing, we separately examine earnings announcements that moved

or stayed the same relative to the calendar date of the announcement for the same quarter the

previous year. Firms typically report their earnings on roughly the same day every year, with small

changes, e.g., to announce on the same day of the week (Johnson and So, 2017). Thus, in order for

strategic timing to explain our results, it must be the firms that deviate from their normal earnings

announcement date that drive our results. We categorize firms as having moved their earnings

date forward or backward if it differs from their previous same-quarter date by five or more days.

Roughly 80% of firms keep the date the same, 10% move it forward by more than 5 days and 10%

move it backwards.

   We examine these sets of firms in Table 8 and find that strategic timing cannot account for the

negative relation between return reactions and salient surprises at t − 1. Firms that did not greatly

move their announcement date have a large and significant negative coefficient of -0.965. Firms that

moved their announcements forward or backwards have insignificant estimates of contrast effects

with large standard errors. Under the strategic timing hypothesis, we should have found that firms



                                                 27
that shifted their earnings announcement data accounted for the negative relation.



4        Robustness

This section examines whether our results are robust to alternative choices in the construction

of variables. Our main analysis measures the earnings surprise as earnings relative to consensus

analyst forecasts. One potential concern is that analyst forecasts may be stale or that analysts may

be biased or uninformed when they make forecasts.18 To show that our results are not caused by

biases in analyst forecasts, we estimate regressions that do not utilize any analyst information. We

estimate Equation 3, which does not condition on the firm’s own earnings surprise, and measure

the salient surprise in t − 1 as the value-weighted return reaction for large firms that announced on

day t − 1. Our returns-based measure of the salient surprise on t − 1 is:

                                                 N 
                                                 X                                      
                                                       mkt capi,t−4 × returni,[t−2,t]
                                                 i=1
                        return surpriset−1 =                N
                                                                                                             (5)
                                                            X
                                                                  mkt capi,t−4
                                                            i=1

     In Table 9 Column 1, we find a significant coefficient of -0.052 on the new return surpriset−1

measure. In Column 2, we further limit the sample to observations for which we also have analyst-

based surprise measures for the firm announcing today and large firms announcing on t = 1,

leading to a coefficient of -0.049. To get a sense of magnitudes, the average return responses in

the lowest and highest deciles of salient return surprise are -3.6% and 3.9%, respectively. Thus,

an increase from the lowest to the highest decile for return surpriset−1 in Column 1 is associated

with a decrease in returns of 47 basis points, similar to the 53 basis points we find in our baseline

specification.

     The remaining columns of Table 9 examine additional variations of the surpriset−1 measure. In

our baseline analysis, we value-weighted the earnings surprises of large firms that announced in the


    18
     Despite these shortcomings, we believe that the analyst-based measure represents the most salient measure of
earnings surprise. The measure is typically what is reported in the popular and financial press.


                                                       28
previous day to calculate surpriset−1 . This measure implicitly assumes that size is a good proxy

for the relative salience of firms that announced yesterday. In Columns 3 and 4, we find similar

results if we weight the firms that announced on t − 1 using their volume or analyst coverage. In

Column 5, we measure each firm’s earnings surprise (and calculate surpriset−1 ) using the difference

between actual earnings and the median analyst forecast, without scaling by the share price. While

we believe that scaling by share price is a reasonable way to compare earnings across firms with

different share prices, many media outlets report earnings surprises as the unscaled difference

between actual earnings and analyst forecasts, and investors may pay attention to the unscaled

surprise. Using the unscaled measure, we continue to find a similar negative relation. In Column 6,

we find similar results after scaling our baseline measure of surpriset−1 by the sum of the squared

size weights of each firm comprising the weighted-mean calculation. This accounts for the fact that

the weighted average over a greater number of firms has a smaller standard deviation. We again

find a highly significant negative relation.

    In the Internet Appendix, we show the results are robust to a variety of other empirical spe-

cifications. We examine alternative size cutoffs and expanded analyst forecast windows. We also

examine alternative weighting schemes, measures of returns, and date adjustments following Del-

laVigna and Pollet (2009). In addition, we estimate regressions controlling for day of the week,

quarter of the year, firm, and/or calendar year-month fixed effects. In all specifications, we find

evidence consistent with contrast effects, suggesting that our specific choices in terms of variable

construction do not account for our results.



5    Further exploration of contrast effects

This section explores the specific timing and boundaries of contrast effects. In our baseline analysis,

we showed how the perception of today’s earnings surprise is distorted by salient surprises announ-

ced in the previous trading day. By focusing on these day-to-day sequential contrast effects, we

were able to rule out many potential alternative explanations involving information transmission



                                                  29
or expectational errors by looking at the timing of when prices changed. Since earnings announ-

cements are scheduled several weeks in advance, we were also able to rule out strategic timing

explanations by looking at contrast effects across sequential trading days. However, contrast effects

do not necessarily need to manifest across sequential trading days. In theory, contrast effects could

occur sequentially within the same day or even contemporaneously. Contrast effects could also

occur across lags of longer than a single day and investors may even revise their perceptions of the

current earnings announcement after observing salient earnings announcements in the future.

   Previous empirical tests of contrast effects in laboratory or non-financial settings have shown

that individuals react strongly only to recent observations and do not revise their perceptions of

the current case in light of future signals. For example, Bhargava and Fisman (2014)’s study of

speed dating finds that the appearance of the person whom you spoke with most recently has

the largest impact on the current dating decision (see also Damisch et al., 2006 and Kenrick and

Gutierres, 1980). However, it is an open question whether the same recency predictions will apply

to investor perceptions of earnings and what time interval investors will consider to be “recent.”

Finally contrast effects could be stronger if the previously viewed signal is more salient or believed

to be more relevant or comparable to the current signal. In this section, we explore the timing of

how contrast effects manifest themselves in financial markets and additional heterogeneity effects.


5.1   Lead and lag effects across days

We begin by exploring whether further lags of salient surprises released on days t−2 and t−3 impact

the perception of today’s earnings surprise. The first column of Table 10 Panel A regresses the

return reaction to today’s announcement on surpriset−1 as well as further lags of surprises on t − 2

and t−3. To ensure that our return measure allows for a response to information covering the entire

time period (see Section 3.1), we examine the return from t − 3 to t + 1 as the dependent variable.

We find a strong and significant negative relation between the previous day’s salient surprise and

the return response to firms announcing today. Meanwhile, we find a smaller, insignificant, and

inconsistently signed relation between returns and earlier surprises on t − 3 and t − 2. We can reject


                                                 30
that the return reaction to t − 1 surprises is equal to the reactions to t − 2 or t − 3 surprises with a

p-value below 0.01. These results suggest that investors react more to recent salient surprises than

those further in the past, although we do not rule out the possibility of a small lagged effect from

t − 2 or t − 3, which we lack the power to estimate precisely.

   Next, we examine how return reactions to firms announcing today are affected by future sur-

prises announced on days t + 1 and t + 2. We use returns from t − 1 to t + 3 as our dependent

variable, to allow for the return reaction of a firm that announces on day t to respond to these

future earnings announcements. Such a response would require that investors revise their initial

perceptions of day t announcements in light of subsequent earnings announcements released in the

following two days. In Column 3 of Table 10 Panel A, we find the relations between return respon-

ses and salient surprises on days t + 1 and t + 2 are small, vary in sign, and are insignificant. This

suggests that investors do not significantly revise their perceptions of earnings announcements in

light of subsequent announcements, although we again do not reject the possibility of small effects

given that we cannot estimate precise zero coefficients.

   One possible concern is that the longer lags and leads are more likely to extend over a weekend,

and the weekend may impact how contrast effects manifest. In Columns 2 and 4, we repeat

the analysis after limiting the sample to observations in which today’s announcement occurs on

a Thursday and Friday or Monday and Tuesday, such that the lag and lead measures of salient

surprises released by other firms occurred within the same week without a weekend break. The

results remain materially similar.

   Almost any empirical exercise involves the worry that there is a mechanical relation due to

specification choice. In addition to providing suggestive evidence of the transitory nature of contrast

effects, these results offer a placebo test for this concern. If the negative coefficient on surpriset−1

is mechanically due to our specification, then the coefficients on t − 2 or t + 1 should be similarly

biased. Given that we do not find such a relation, we feel confident that our empirical choices are

not mechanically driving the results.




                                                  31
5.2    Within-day contrast effects

The analysis so far has examined contrast effects across trading days. We can also examine contrast

effects within the same day. We present the following analysis as supplementary to our baseline

estimates because data on the within-day timing of earnings announcements is only available for a

subset of announcements and for years after 1995. Further, some firms do not preschedule the time

of announcement even though they do pre-commit to the date of announcement.19 Nevertheless,

we can explore whether the data is consistent with contrast effects occurring within the same day.

    We categorize firms as announcing in the morning (before market open at 9:30 am) or afternoon

(after market close at 4:00pm).20 We then test whether perceptions of the afternoon announce-

ments are biased by the salient morning announcements and vice versa. We also test for potential

contemporaneous contrast effects induced by announcements in the same half or full day period.

Overall, we find that contrast effects from earlier morning salient announcements significantly bias

return reactions to announcements made later in the afternoon.

    We also do not rule out the possibility of contrast effects from other announcements in the same

half-day period or later in the day, and indeed find some suggestive evidence that these effects may

exist. However, we lack the statistical power to estimate these effects precisely, because we only

observe time stamps for a limited set of announcements. Further, our measures of the salient

surprises released by other firms in each half-day window suffer from noise, because there may be

other large firms that announced salient surprises in the same half-day window, but which cannot

be identified, because their announcements lack time stamps. Finally, investors may become aware

of earnings announcements in a different sequential ordering than the ordering in which the earnings

are actually announced.

    To test within-day contrast effects, we estimate Equation 4, but with three modifications. First,

for each day t, we calculate two half-day salient surprises: the surprise of large firms that announced

before market open (AM surpriset ) and the surprise of large firms that announced after market

  19
    Bagnoli et al. (2005) present evidence that firms with bad news strategically choose to announce in the afternoon.
  20
    We exclude firms announcing in the interim time period (roughly 8% of the value-weighted average of firms with
known announcement times).


                                                         32
closure (P M surpriset ). Second, when we test for contemporaneous contrast effects, we exclude

the current announcing firm from the calculation of the salient surprise, so that the salient surprise

refers only to the announcements of other firms. Third, for our return measure, we examine returns

from the close on t−1 to the close on t+1, as this window includes both the response to the morning

or afternoon surprises of other firms as well as the response to the firm’s own announcement.

   We begin by examining whether return reactions to firms announcing on day t are distorted by

the announcements of other firms that also announce on day t, regardless of the timing within each

day. In Table 10 Panel B Column 1, we estimate a negative coefficient on the same-day measure

of salient surprise of -0.587 that is significant at the 10 percent level. This result is consistent with

contrast effects operating approximately contemporaneously among earnings announcements made

in the same day. However, we caution that any evidence of “contemporaneous” contrast effects

may be driven by investors who actually observed news coverage of the earnings announcements

sequentially within a given time interval rather than simultaneously. Next, we show in Column 2

that return reactions to afternoon announcements are inversely affected by AM surpriset . This

same-day measure of sequential contrast effects is slightly larger than the across-day measures

estimated in earlier tables, consistent with more recent observations leading to larger contrast

effects. We also explore whether salient PM surprises have a negative impact on the return reaction

to AM announcements. Note, the return window (which extends to t + 1) does not preclude such

an effect, as investors could revise their response to AM announcements due to announcements

released in the PM. In Column 5, we find a negative but noisy coefficient on the P M surpriset .

Thus, we do not reject the possibility that perceptions of AM announcements are inversely affected

by announcements made later in the day, although we lack the power to estimate such effects

precisely.

   Finally, we test whether return reactions to earnings announcements in each half day interval

are inversely affected by other salient surprises in the same half day interval, or previous half-day

interval (including the most recent half day on the previous trading day). The results in Columns

3, 4, and 6 suggest that we lack the statistical power to strongly conclude in favor or against the


                                                   33
existence of such effects. In Table 5 in the Internet Appendix, we also test whether return reactions

to announcements in the AM or PM on day t are biased by salient surprises released by other

firms with known time stamps in the current and up-to-four lagged half day intervals (including

those on days t − 1 and t − 2). Overall, we find significant evidence of return reactions to PM

announcements being distorted by AM announcement in the same day. We also continue to find

evidence that return reactions to today’s announcements (AM or PM) are inversely affected by

salient surprises released in the previous trading day, particularly those released in the morning

on t − 1. While the difference is insignificant, the stronger effect for surpriset−1 AM than for

surpriset−1 P M is consistent with the fact that larger firms tend to announce in the morning, so

morning announcements may be more salient to investors.


5.3   Day of the week and quarter of the year

Surpriset−1 typically occurs on the previous calendar day, except when the current announcement

occurs on a Monday. The salience of surpriset−1 may decay over the weekend, leading to less

of a contrast effect when the current earnings surprise is announced on a Monday. Alternatively,

the salience of surpriset−1 may increase over the weekend, perhaps because investors have more

time to think about Friday announcements. Finally, it could be that ordering is the only aspect

of timing that matters for attention (as in classic studies of recency, e.g., Murdock Jr, 1962), in

which case, contrast effects on Mondays will be similar to that of other days. In Table 10 Panel

C, we examine contrast effects separately for announcements on each of the five days of the week.

While we lose significance once we divide our main sample into five subsamples, we find negative

coefficients on surpriset−1 for each of the five days of the week, including Monday. We estimate

the largest contrast effect when the current announcement occurs on a Friday, although the Friday

sample also includes the smallest number of observations, and we are not able to reject the null

hypothesis that contrast effects are equal across the five days. The estimates suggest that our

baseline results are not driven by unusual behavior on any particular day of the week.

   One may also be concerned that earnings surprises differ systematically by day of the week. For


                                                 34
example, Penman (1987), Damodaran (1989), and Bagnoli et al. (2005) find that earnings surprises

are slightly higher on non-Fridays and lower on Fridays. We can rule out that our results are

driven by simple differences in mean responses across days by controlling for day of the week fixed

effects (the results are reported in the Internet Appendix, Table 4). In addition to differences in

means, there may be differences in the variation around these fixed effects, especially with respect to

Friday announcements. To address this concern, we only examine how return reactions to earnings

announcements on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday are affected by surpriset−1 (the results are

reported in Table 10 Panel C). We find a significant coefficient of -0.686, which is slightly smaller

than but insignificantly different from our baseline estimate. Thus, systematic differences in means

and variances in earnings surprises across days of the week are unlikely to explain our findings.

   We also explore how the magnitude of contrast effects varies by quarter of the year in Panel

D. We find negative coefficients on surpriset−1 for all four quarters, with the largest absolute

magnitudes in Q1. The larger effect in Q1 could potentially be caused by investors paying more

attention to fiscal year end earnings announcements, which are concentrated in calendar year Q1.

While suggestive, we are not able to reject the null hypothesis that contrast effects are equal across

the four quarters. However, the estimates suggest that our baseline results are not driven by unusual

behavior in any particular quarter.


5.4   Heterogeneity

In our baseline analysis, we focus on large firms both in the measurement of yesterday’s salient

surprise and the weighting of observations for firms announcing earnings today. In Table 11, we

explore how the magnitude of the contrast effect varies with the size of the firm announcing earnings

today. The first column breaks the coefficients down by size quintile of the firm releasing earnings

on day t. We find that the smaller quintiles have the expected negative coefficients, but these

coefficients are smaller in magnitude and sometimes insignificant, while the largest (fifth) quintile

is driving the results. These results show that our early findings are not driven only by small firms

as is the case with many other asset pricing anomalies.


                                                  35
    However, these results do not prove that contrast effects are weak for small firms. Rather, we

could measure strong contrast effects for large firms announcing today because investors tend to

contrast large firms releasing earnings today with other large firms that released earnings yesterday.

Investors of smaller firms may contrast the earnings of small firms with that of other similar firms

that released earnings yesterday. However, because multiple firms release earnings on t − 1, it is

difficult for us, as econometricians, to identify which firms are salient to investors for each small firm

announcing earnings today. This is a point that we explore in detail in Section 5.5, where we show

that contrast effects are sizable and significant for smaller firms once we look within industries.

    The second column explores heterogeneity in the number of analysts covering firms that release

earnings today. In general, the more interest the market has in a given firm, the more analysts will

cover that firm’s earnings announcement. We examine contrast effects separately for firms covered

by one, two, and three or more analysts. We find that contrast effects are driven by observations

in which the current announcing firm has analyst coverage of two or more. This shows that our

findings are not driven by small firms with little analyst coverage. However, we again caution that

these results do not imply that investors in firms with little analyst coverage do not suffer from

contrast effects. Rather, these investors may contrast these smaller, niche firms with a specific set

of other similar small firms that we have difficulty identifying.21

    Finally, we explore how our results vary over time. We find evidence consistent with contrast

effects in each decade of our sample: we estimate a contrast effect of -0.663 in the 1980s, -1.024 in

the 1990s, -0.542 in the 2000s, and -1.001 after 2010. The large and significant estimate of contrast

effects in the 2010s shows that our results are unlikely to be driven by date recording errors in the

early period in I/B/E/S (we present additional tests exploring potential date recording errors in the

Internet Appendix). It may also seem puzzling that the magnitude of the contrast effect remains

large in the 2010s when the costs of conducting arbitrage are likely to have declined. However, we

note that arbitrageurs may not have been aware of the mispricing induced by contrast effects prior

  21
     We face the additional measurement challenge that the earnings surprises of small firms are measured with
greater error because our measure of market expectations is likely to be noisier due to reduced analyst coverage. This
implies that we may control for the actual earnings surprises of small firms with more error.


                                                         36
to the circulation of this paper. Further, financial media coverage of earnings seasons has increased

over time, which may have made the earnings surprises released by other firms more salient in the

minds of investors, thereby exacerbating the contrast effects bias.


5.5     Industry contrast effects

As discussed in the previous section, while we measure stronger contrast effects among larger firms,

contrast effects could also affect the returns of smaller firms. Investors may compare smaller firms

to a subset of similar firms that announced in the previous day. If so, our baseline empirical

specification will underestimate the true magnitude of contrast effects for small firms announcing

on day t because we measure the salient surprise in t − 1 as the value-weighted average of earnings

surprises among all large firms that announced in t − 1.

    It is difficult to know what the right comparison group is for any firm, but one reasonable

possibility is other firms in the same industry. In this section, we explore how contrast effects depend

on whether the firms announcing today and yesterday belong to the same industry. We find that

contrast effects for large firms can be strong both within and across industries. However, across-

industry contrast effects are only strong if there is no same-industry comparison firm available. If

the previous day had announcements from large firms in both the same and different industries, we

find a larger effect for the same-industry announcement. In addition, for smaller firms announcing

today, we find that contrast effects primarily operate through within-industry comparisons.

    In Table 12, we modify our baseline specification to include two measures of surpriset−1 : one

based on other firms announcing in the same industry as the firm announcing on day t and one based

on other firms in different industries. To form these two salient surprise measures, we continue to

use the value-weighted average surprises of firms above the 90th percentile of market capitalization,

under the assumption that, even within industry, larger firms are more likely to be more salient.22

We present results using the very broad Fama French 5 industry classification, because a limited

set of firms announce earnings on t − 1, and if we use narrower industry definitions, we often lack
   22
     In untabulated results, we find a similar pattern if we expand the definition of salient surprise to allow for the
inclusion of smaller firms that announced on t − 1.


                                                          37
another firm announcing within the same industry. We also caution that companies may be related

in a variety of ways that matter to investors, and these relations will be imperfectly captured by

any industry classification system. Thus, the results are based on a noisy proxy of what investors

are paying attention to.

   A limited number of large firms (median of 6) announce earnings on t − 1, and there are

usually fewer firms in the same industry as the firm announcing on day t than firms in different

industries. This implies that the standard deviation of the different-industry salient surprise will

be relatively smaller, as the average of a larger sample has a smaller standard deviation. To make

the magnitudes of the coefficients on the t − 1 salient surprises in the same- and different-industry

samples comparable, we scale each salient surprise by the sum of the squared size weights of each

firm comprising the weighted-mean calculation. While this scaling makes the coefficients for the

same and different industry salient surprises comparable to one another, the magnitude of these

coefficients should not be compared to those in other tables (with the exception of Table 9 Column

6). In addition, if no firm announced within the same (different) industry on t − 1, we set the

relevant surpriset−1 variable to zero and include a dummy variable equal to one when the same

(different) industry surpriset−1 is missing.

   Table 12 modifies our baseline specification to use the two separate measures of salient surprise

on day t − 1. Column 1 is value-weighted by the market capitalization of the firm announcing

earnings today while Column 2 is equal-weighted. Thus, Column 1 overweights larger firms relative

to Column 2. We find that, when large firms are weighted more heavily, the magnitude of the

contrast effect is similar within and across industries. When smaller firms are weighted more

heavily as in Column 2, the contrast effect is more than twice as large within the same industry. In

Column 3, we again value-weight the regression to focus on large firms, but include only days where

both same industry and different industry surpriset−1 are not missing. On such days, large firms

exhibit a stronger and more significant contrast effect in response to firms in the same industry.

However, the same and different industry coefficients are not statistically different from one another.

   The final four columns separately examine the sample of small firms (below median market


                                                  38
capitalization in each year) and large firms (above the median in each year) announcing on day t. We

find that small firms exhibit stronger contrast effects with same industry firms than with different

industry firms, particularly when both same and different industry firms announced earnings in

the previous trading day. Large firms tend to be contrasted with other large firms regardless of

industry. However, if there was a same industry announcement in the previous trading day, the

contrast effect within the same industry dominates that of different industry. Again, the differences

are not statistically significant, as indicated by the p-values at the bottom of the table.

    Overall, these results are consistent with a world in which investors in smaller firms pay more

attention to previous announcements by other firms in the same industry. Meanwhile, investors

in larger firms pay attention to the recent earnings announcements of other large firms, but pay

relatively more attention to same-industry announcements if such a comparison is available. This

suggests that the magnitude of contrast effects depend on whether agents consider signals to belong

to the same category. In this paper, we have shown that industry and size affect relative compa-

risons among earnings announcements. We leave the important question of how the boundaries of

comparison sets are formed more generally for future research.



6    Conclusion

We present evidence of contrast effects in sophisticated financial markets: investors mistakenly per-

ceive information from earnings announcements in contrast to what preceded it. The scheduling of

when earnings are announced is usually set several weeks before the announcement, so whether a

given firm announces following positive or negative surprises by other firms is unlikely to be corre-

lated with the firm’s fundamentals. We find that the return reaction to an earnings announcement

is inversely related to the level of earnings surprise announced by large firms in the previous day.

This implies that market prices react to the relative content of news instead of only reacting to the

absolute content of news.

    The existing empirical literature on contrast effects mainly comes from laboratory settings, and



                                                  39
the limited field evidence focuses on households making infrequent dating or real estate decisions.

Our results show that contrast effects impact equilibrium prices and capital allocation in sophisti-

cated markets with professionals making repeated investment decisions. In our financial setting, all

investors are likely to have observed similar earnings news prior to interpreting the current earnings

surprise. Thus, investor perceptions will generally be biased in the same direction based on the

common salient event. If investors instead each viewed different events, some investors might be

positively biased while others are negatively biased, leading to no strong net impact on market

prices. A variety of other market news events are also likely to be viewed by investors as a com-

mon sequence and thus lead to contrast effects distorting market prices. Possible examples include

recent market performance, macroeconomic news announcements, a firm’s own previous earnings

announcements, or non-earnings related firm announcements. We leave the exploration of whether

contrast effects also apply to perceptions of these other types of financial events for future research.

   Our results also suggest that contrast effects have the potential to bias a wide variety of im-

portant real-world decisions outside of financial markets, including judicial sentencing, hiring and

promotion decisions, firm project choice, and household purchase decisions. Within financial mar-

kets, we find that the mispricing induced by contrast effects reverses within approximately 50

trading days. Such corrections are less likely to occur in other non-traded settings such as hiring

decisions or firm project choice. Thus, contrast effects can potentially lead to even more costly

mistakes in non-financial settings.

   While we focus on showing that contrast effects bias perceptions of news, contrast effects may

also provide a psychological basis for non-standard preferences, such as internal habit formation,

that are the basis of many influential models in macroeconomics and finance. Under internal

habit formation, individuals value gains in consumption relative to previous experience rather than

its absolute level. These preferences could arise because past high levels of consumption lead

individuals to perceive any amount of current consumption as lesser in comparison. Similarly, a

large literature has studied external habits and the role of relative earnings or “keeping up with

the Joneses” preferences. This literature has generally assumed that individuals are motivated by


                                                  40
feelings of envy and jealousy, but contrast effects may be another important contributing factor.

Even if individuals do not directly desire to consume as much or more than their peers, contrast

effects may lead individuals to perceive their own consumption as lesser than its true level if the

high consumption of peers is very salient.

   Finally, to attain a clean measure of contrast effects, we chose a financial setting in which

firms cannot strategically use contrast effects to their advantage because they pre-commit to when

they will announce earnings. However, in other settings, agents with discretion over the timing

of information disclosure may schedule the release of news in order to take advantage of contrast

effects bias. For example, a firm with very bad news to release may try to release that news after

another firm releases bad news, so that the perception of its own news is not as negative. Such

strategic manipulation of market biases may be a promising direction for future research.




                                                41
References
Anilowski, Carol, Mei Feng, and Douglas J Skinner, 2007, Does earnings guidance affect market returns?
  the nature and information content of aggregate earnings guidance, Journal of Accounting and Economics
  44, 36–63.

Bagnoli, Mark, Michael B Clement, and Susan G Watts, 2005, Around-the-clock media coverage and the
  timing of earnings announcements .

Baker, Malcolm, Xin Pan, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2012, The effect of reference point prices on mergers and
  acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 49–71.

Ball, Ray, and Eli Bartov, 1996, How naive is the stock market’s use of earnings information?, Journal of
  Accounting and Economics 21, 319–337.

Ball, Ray, and Philip Brown, 1968, An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers, Journal of
  Accounting Research 159–178.

Barber, Brad M, Emmanuel T De George, Reuven Lehavy, and Brett Trueman, 2013, The earnings announ-
  cement premium around the globe, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 118–138.

Barber, Brad M, and Terrance Odean, 2008, All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying
  behavior of individual and institutional investors, Review of Financial Studies 21, 785–818.

Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2015, X-capm: An extrapolative
  capital asset pricing model, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 1–24.

Barth, Mary E, and Eric C So, 2014, Non-diversifiable volatility risk and risk premiums at earnings announ-
  cements, The Accounting Review 89, 1579–1607.

Beaver, William H, 1968, The information content of annual earnings announcements, Journal of Accounting
  Research 67–92.

Bernard, Victor L, and Jacob K Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price response
  or risk premium?, Journal of Accounting Research 1–36.

Bernard, Victor L, and Jacob K Thomas, 1990, Evidence that stock prices do not fully reflect the implications
  of current earnings for future earnings, Journal of Accounting and Economics 13, 305–340.

Bernard, Victor Lewis, 1992, Stock Price Reactions to Earnings Announcements: A Summary of Recent
  Anomalous Evidence and Possible Explanations, in: R. Thaler, ed., Advances in Behavioral (Russell Sage
  Foundation, New York, NY).

Bhargava, Saurabh, and Ray Fisman, 2014, Contrast effects in sequential decisions: Evidence from speed
  dating, Review of Economics and Statistics 96, 444–457.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, 2015, Memory, attention and choice, Working Paper
  .

Boulland, Romain, and Olivier Dessaint, 2017, Announcing the announcement, Journal of Banking & Fi-
  nance .

Breen, William J, Laurie Simon Hodrick, and Robert A Korajczyk, 2002, Predicting equity liquidity, Mana-
  gement Science 48, 470–483.

Bushong, Benjamin, Matthew Rabin, and Joshua Schwartzstein, 2015, A model of relative thinking, Working
  Paper .




                                                     42
Chang, Tom Y, Samuel M Hartzmark, David H Solomon, and Eugene F Soltes, 2016, Being surprised by the
  unsurprising: Earnings seasonality and stock returns, The Review of Financial Studies 30, 281–323.

Chen, Daniel L, Tobias J Moskowitz, and Kelly Shue, 2016, Decision making under the gambler’s fallacy:
  Evidence from asylum judges, loan officers, and baseball umpires, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  131, 1181–1242.

Cunningham, Tom, 2013, Comparisons and choice, Working Paper .

Damisch, Lysann, Thomas Mussweiler, and Henning Plessner, 2006, Olympic medals as fruits of comparison?
  assimilation and contrast in sequential performance judgments., Journal of Experimental Psychology:
  Applied 12, 166.

Damodaran, Aswath, 1989, The weekend effect in information releases: A study of earnings and dividend
  announcements, The Review of Financial Studies 2, 607–623.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund perfor-
  mance with characteristic-based benchmarks, The Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.

DellaVigna, Stefano, Attila Lindner, Balázs Reizer, and Johannes F Schmieder, 2016, Reference-dependent
  job search: evidence from hungary, The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M Pollet, 2009, Investor inattention and friday earnings announcements,
  The Journal of Finance 64, 709–749.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, The Journal of
  Finance 47, 427–465.

Frazzini, Andrea, Ronen Israel, and Tobias J Moskowitz, 2012, Trading costs of asset pricing anomalies .

Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A Lamont, 2007, The earnings announcement premium and trading volume,
  Working Paper .

Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2014, Expectations of returns and expected returns, Review of
  Financial Studies 27, 714–746.

Gulen, Huseyin, and Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, 2012, Daily stock market swings and investor reaction to firm-
  specific news, Available at SSRN 1934873 .

Hanson, Samuel G, and Adi Sunderam, 2014, The growth and limits of arbitrage: Evidence from short
  interest, Review of Financial Studies 27, 1238–1286.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., 2015, The worst, the best, ignoring all the rest: The rank effect and trading behavior,
  Review of Financial Studies 28, 1024–1059.

Hirshleifer, David, and Tyler Shumway, 2003, Good day sunshine: Stock returns and the weather, The
  Journal of Finance 58, 1009–1032.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeffrey D Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns and biased earnings
  forecasts, Journal of Finance 313–351.

Johnson, Travis, and Eric So, 2017, Time will tell: Information in the timing of scheduled earnings news,
  Forthcoming Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis .

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk, Econo-
  metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society 263–291.

Kamenica, Emir, 2008, Contextual inference in markets: On the informational content of product lines, The
  American Economic Review 98, 2127–2149.


                                                     43
Kenrick, Douglas T., and Sara E. Gutierres, 1980, Contrast effects and judgments of physical attractiveness:
  When beauty becomes a social problem, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 38, 131–140.

Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin, 2006, A model of reference-dependent preferences, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121, 1133–1165.

Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin, 2007, Reference-dependent risk attitudes, American Economic Review
  7, 1047–1073.

Lee, Charles MC, Belinda Mucklow, and Mark J Ready, 1993, Spreads, depths, and the impact of earnings
  information: An intraday analysis, Review of Financial Studies 6, 345–374.

Levitt, Steven D, and John A List, 2007a, Viewpoint: On the generalizability of lab behaviour to the field,
  Canadian Journal of Economics 40, 347–370.

Levitt, Steven D, and John A List, 2007b, What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences
  reveal about the real world?, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 153–174.

Lim, Terence, 2001, Rationality and analysts’ forecast bias, The Journal of Finance 56, 369–385.

Lin, Hsiou-wei, and Maureen F McNichols, 1998, Underwriting relationships, analysts’ earnings forecasts
  and investment recommendations, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 101–127.

Loh, Roger K, and Mitch Warachka, 2012, Streaks in earnings surprises and the cross-section of stock returns,
  Management Science 58, 1305–1321.

McNichols, Maureen, and Patricia C O’Brien, 1997, Self-selection and analyst coverage, Journal of Accoun-
 ting Research 167–199.

Mian, G Mujtaba, and Srinivasan Sankaraguruswamy, 2012, Investor sentiment and stock market response
  to earnings news, The Accounting Review 87, 1357–1384.

Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino, 2001, Characteristics of risk and return in risk arbitrage, the Journal of
  Finance 56, 2135–2175.

Murdock Jr, Bennet B, 1962, The serial position effect of free recall., Journal of experimental psychology 64,
 482.

Nagel, Stefan, 2012, Evaporating liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2005–2039.

Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, The Journal of Finance 53, 1775–1798.

Penman, Stephen H, 1987, The distribution of earnings news over time and seasonalities in aggregate stock
  returns, Journal of financial economics 18, 199–228.

Pepitone, Albert, and Mark DiNubile, 1976, Contrast effects in judgments of crime severity and the pu-
  nishment of criminal violators., Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 33, 448.

Rabin, Matthew, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2010, The gambler’s and hot-hand fallacies: Theory and applications,
  The Review of Economic Studies 77, 730–778.

Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers too long:
  Theory and evidence, The Journal of Finance 40, 777–790.

Silverman, Bernard W, 1986, Density estimation for statistics and data analysis, volume 26 (CRC press).

Simonsohn, Uri, 2006, New yorkers commute more everywhere: Contrast effects in the field, Review of
  Economics and Statistics 88, 1–9.



                                                     44
Simonsohn, Uri, and George Loewenstein, 2006, Mistake 37: The effect of previously encountered prices on
  current housing demand, Economic Journal 116, 176–199.

Sloan, R, 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about future earnings?,
   Accounting Review 71, 289–315.

So, Eric C, 2013, A new approach to predicting analyst forecast errors: Do investors overweight analyst
  forecasts?, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 615–640.

So, Eric C, and Sean Wang, 2014, News-driven return reversals: Liquidity provision ahead of earnings
  announcements, Journal of Financial Economics 114, 20–35.

Thomas, Jacob, and Frank Zhang, 2008, Overreaction to intra-industry information transfers?, Journal of
  Accounting Research 46, 909–940.




                                                    45
                                                                       Figure 2
                                              Return Reaction to Earnings Surpriset−1
This graph shows the relation between return reactions to firm earnings announcements on day t and the
salient surprise (surpriset−1 ) announced by other firms on day t − 1 (calculated as the value-weighted
earnings surprises of large firms that announced earnings on day t − 1), estimated using a value-weighted
local linear regression with the epanechnikov kernel and the rule-of-thumb bandwidth (Silverman, 1986).
We define a “large” firm as a firm with market capitalization at t − 4 exceeding the 90th percentile cutoff
of the NYSE index in that month. Gray areas indicate 90 percent confidence intervals. Panel A reports
unconditional returns without controlling for the firm’s own earnings surprise, demeaned by the value-
weighted average return in the sample. The return is the open-to-open return measured over the interval
[t, t + 1], from market open on t to market open on t + 2. Panel B reports return residuals after controlling
for 20 bins in terms of the firm’s own earnings surprise. The return is measured over the interval [t − 1, t + 1],
the period from market close on t − 2 to market close on t + 1.
                                       Panel A: Unconditional Predictive Relation

                                                   1




                                                  .5
                             Return % [t,t+1]




                                                   0




                                                  -.5




                                                        -.0075 -.005 -.0025      0     .0025 .005 .0075
                                                              Previous day's earnings surprise: Surpriset-1


                           Panel B: Conditional on Own Earnings Surprise

                                                   1




                                                  .5
                             Return % [t-1,t+1]




                                                   0




                                                  -.5




                                                        -.0075 -.005 -.0025      0     .0025 .005 .0075
                                                              Previous day's earnings surprise: Surpriset-1
                                                                            46
                                                               Figure 3
                                  Return Reaction to Own Earnings Surprise
This graph shows the returns of firms that announced earnings on day t against the percentile ranks of the
firm’s own earnings surprise, estimated using a value-weighted local linear regression with the epanechnikov
kernel and the rule-of-thumb bandwidth (Silverman, 1986). The graph shows two subsamples: return reacti-
ons following surpriset−1 in either the lowest or highest deciles. Gray areas indicate 90 percent confidence
intervals. The vertical line indicates zero earnings surprise.


                                              3

                                              2
                           Return % [t,t+1]



                                              1

                                              0

                                              -1

                                              -2

                                              -3
                                                   0      20      40         60        80       100
                                                       Firm's own surprise (percentile rank)

                                                                   Surpriset-1 lowest decile
                                                                   Surpriset-1 highest decile




                                                                    47
                                                              Figure 4
                                              Distribution of Returns by Surpriset−1
This graph shows the average daily return (in %) of the trading strategy described in Table 5 Column 1
based on positions held on days t and t + 1.



                         2
                Average Daily Return
                0        -1       1




                                       1995            2000              2005      2010




                                                                 48
                                                  Table 1
                                           Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the main variables used in our analysis using data from 1984
to 2013. The earnings surprise is measured as (actual − f orecast)/pricet−3 where f orecast is the median
of each analyst’s most recent forecast that is released within 15 days of the announcement, excluding t
and t − 1. Returns are the return of a firm minus the return of a portfolio matched on quintiles of market
capitalization, book-to-market ratio, and momentum (excluding firms used in the calculation of surpriset−1
and the announcing firm). Surpriset−1 is our baseline measure of the salient surprise released by other
firms in the previous trading day. It is calculated as the value-weighted earnings surprise of all large firms
that announced in the previous trading day. We define a “large” firm as a firm with market capitalization
three days before its earnings is announced that exceeds the 90th percentile cutoff of the NYSE index in
that month.




                                                     49
                                                       Table 2
                                             Baseline Results
This table explores the relation between return reactions for firms that announce earnings today and the
earnings surprises of other firms that announced in the previous trading day. Columns 1-3 measure returns
for announcing firms from market open on day t to market open on day t + 2 while Columns 4-6 examine
returns from market close on t − 2 to market close on t + 1. This return for announcing firms is regressed on
various measures of the salient earnings surprise from t−1. Returns are the return of a firm minus the return
of a portfolio matched on quintiles of market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, and momentum (excluding
firms used in the calculation of surpriset−1 and the announcing firm). Surprises for the firms announcing
today and in the previous trading day are measured as (actual − f orecast)/pricet−3 where f orecast is
the median of each analyst’s most recent forecast that is released within 15 days of the announcement,
excluding t and t − 1. We define a “large” firm as a firm with market capitalization three days before its
earnings is announced that exceeds the 90th percentile cutoff of the NYSE index in that month. Columns
1 and 4 measure surpriset−1 as the earnings surprise of the largest firm (conditional on it being a large
firm) the announced in the previous trading day. Columns 2 and 5 measure surpriset−1 using the equal-
weighted earnings surprise of all large firms that announced in the previous trading day. Columns 3 and 6
measure surpriset−1 as the value-weighted earnings surprise of all large firms that announced in the previous
trading day. Columns 4-6 include controls for 20 equally sized bins in terms of the earnings surprise of the
firm that announced today, plus a dummy for zero earnings surprise. We refer to Column 6 as our baseline
specification in later tables. Observations are value-weighted by the t − 3 scaled market capitalization of the
firm announcing earnings today. Standard errors are clustered by date and reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                          Open-to-open return [t, t + 1]        Close-to-close return [t − 1, t + 1]
                                           (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)
                                                 ∗∗∗                                     ∗∗∗
 Surpriset−1 of largest firm            -0.526                                  -0.608
                                         (0.199)                                 (0.178)
 Surpriset−1 large firms, EW mean                       -0.846∗∗∗                              -1.041∗∗∗
                                                         (0.289)                                (0.254)
 Surpriset−1 large firms, VW mean                                   -0.780∗∗∗                              -0.924∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.240)                                (0.229)
 Own surpriseit controls                   No              No          No         Yes            Yes         Yes
 R2                                     0.000584        0.000753    0.000841     0.0596         0.0600      0.0600
 Observations                             61640          61640       61640       75897          75897       75897




                                                         50
                                                      Table 3
                                         Potential Interaction Effects
This table examines whether contrast effects are related to an interaction between surpriset−1 and the firm’s
announced surprise on day t. Column 1 measures the surprise today using the level, Column 2 measures it
using 20 equally sized bins, and Column 3 uses quintiles. For brevity, we report only the interaction effects,
but all direct effects are included in the regressions. All other variables and weights are as defined in Table
2. Standard errors are clustered by date and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                              Return [t − 1, t + 1]
                                                             (1)                        (2)                        (3)
                                                                   ∗∗∗                        ∗∗∗
 Surpriset−1                                            -0.703                       -1.468                     -1.442∗∗
                                                         (0.227)                      (0.529)                    (0.722)
 Surpriset−1 x own surprise                               14.56
                                                         (40.05)
 Surpriset−1 x own surprise (20 bins)                                                 0.0581
                                                                                     (0.0497)
 Surpriset−1 x own surprise quintile 2                                                                            0.257
                                                                                                                 (0.909)
 Surpriset−1 x own surprise quintile 3                                                                            0.682
                                                                                                                 (0.929)
 Surpriset−1 x own surprise quintile 4                                                                            0.844
                                                                                                                 (0.831)
 Surpriset−1 x own surprise quintile 5                                                                            0.893
                                                                                                                 (1.082)
 R2                                                       0.0123                      0.0555                     0.0562
 Observations                                             75897                       75897                      75897


                                                      Table 4
                                             Long Run Reversals
This table examines the relation between surpriset−1 and long run return reactions. Return windows are
as indicated in column headers. All other variables and weights are as defined in Table 2. Standard errors
are clustered by date and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

 Return window:              [−1, +1]      [−1, +25]    [−1, +50]        [−1, +75]   [+2, +25]      [+26, +50]     [+51, +75]
                                (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)             (6)              (7)
 Surpriset−1                 -0.924∗∗∗      -0.860∗       0.365            0.100       0.112          1.152∗∗         -0.316
                              (0.229)       (0.515)      (0.686)          (0.776)     (0.431)         (0.475)        (0.522)
 Own surpriseit controls       Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
 R2                           0.0600        0.0222       0.0115          0.00862      0.00189         0.00236        0.00270
 Observations                 75897         75428        74122            73478        75428           74122          73478




                                                        51
                                                 Table 5
                                            Trading Strategy
This table examines the returns of a contrast effects trading strategy. For the strategy in Column 1, on days
where surpriset−1 is below the 25th percentile of surpriset−1 over the previous quarter, we long stocks with
an earnings announcement on day t. On days where surpriset−1 is above the 25th percentile of surpriset−1
over the previous quarter, we short stocks with an earnings announcement on day t. The position is held
for days t to t + 1 beginning at market open on day t. If this strategy is only active in the long (short)
leg on a given day, we short (long) the market. The returns correspond to a strategy that trades directly
on the short-term contrast effect. In Columns 2, 3 and 4, the position is held for days t + 2 to t + 50,
t + 26 to t + 50 and t + 51 to t + 75, respectively, using close-to-close returns. These returns correspond
to strategies that trade on potential reversals. For example, in Column 2, on a given day, the portfolio is
long stocks that announced earnings from 2 to 50 days ago where surpriset−1 was below the 25th percentile
of the surpriset−1 distribution in the previous quarter and is short all stocks where surpriset−1 was above
the 75th percentile of the surpriset−1 distribution. For all strategies, we include only stocks with a market
capitalization above the 80th percentile of the NYSE. Each portfolio is value-weighted based on market
capitalization on t − 3. We compute abnormal returns by regressing daily portfolio returns on the market,
SMB, HML, UMD, and short term reversal risk factors. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                         [t, t + 1]         [t + 2, t + 50]         [t + 26, t + 50]         [t + 51, t + 75]
                            (1)                  (2)                      (3)                      (4)
                               ∗∗∗                     ∗∗                       ∗∗
 Alpha [%]               0.189                 -0.0257                 -0.0407                   -0.0104
                         (0.0558)               (0.0127)                (0.0196)                (0.0226)
 Mkt                      -0.0371              0.0311∗∗∗                0.0415∗∗                0.0462∗∗
                         (0.0461)               (0.0115)                (0.0180)                (0.0206)
 SMB                      0.0693                 0.0238                 -0.00250                 -0.0381
                         (0.0871)               (0.0216)                (0.0333)                (0.0382)
 HML                     -0.182∗∗                -0.0107               -0.0700∗∗                  0.0222
                         (0.0825)               (0.0222)                (0.0340)                (0.0390)
 UMD                     0.000897               0.00143                  0.0336                -0.0846∗∗∗
                         (0.0597)               (0.0147)                (0.0227)                (0.0261)
 ST Reversal              -0.0909            0.000462∗∗∗             0.000834∗∗∗              -0.000517∗∗
                         (0.0716)             (0.000149)              (0.000230)               (0.000263)
 Observations              1525                 5064                     4781                     4773




                                                       52
                                                       Table 6
                                          Information Transmission
This table examines whether surpriset−1 predicts earnings surprises on day t or conveys other information
relevant for stocks with earnings announcements scheduled on day t. The dependent variable in Columns 1
and 2 is the surprise of the firm that announces on day t. The dependent variable in Columns 3 and 4 is
the bin (1 through 20, equally sized) for the surprise of the firm that announces on day t. Columns 2 and
4 include year-month fixed effects. Columns 5 and 6 explore the t − 1 return reaction of the firm scheduled
to announce on day t to surpriset−1 . The dependent variable is the t − 1 return for the firm scheduled to
announce on day t, measured as close-to-close returns in Columns 5 and open-to-open returns in Columns 6.
All other variables and weights are as defined in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by date and reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                        Surpriseit          20 surpriseit bins     Close-to-close ret [t − 1]   Open-to-open ret [t − 1]
                      (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)                (5)                         (6)
                         ∗∗∗                     ∗∗∗
 Surpriset−1       0.153       0.00660      134.2         -30.33            0.0366                       0.117
                   (0.0565)    (0.0563)      (32.86)     (27.47)            (0.135)                     (0.161)
 Year-month FE        No        Yes           No          Yes                No                           No
 R2                 0.00194    0.0325       0.00286      0.0649           0.0000122                    0.000125
 Observations        75897     75897         75897       75897              75897                       61640




                                                         53
                                                         Table 7
                             Risk, Trading Frictions, and Limited Capital
This table tests whether the negative relation between return reactions and surpriset−1 is driven by changes
in risk or trading frictions. Panel A Columns 1 and 2 test whether the negative relation is driven by changes
in risk, as measured by the betas of the market, SMB, HML, and UMD risk factors. We regress our baseline
return measure (Column 1) or the raw return (Column 2) on the four factors, surpriset−1 , and the interaction
between surpriset−1 and the four factors. Columns 3 and 4 test whether the negative relation is driven by
changes in liquidity, measured as the log of daily dollar volume in Column 3 and the log of the bid-ask spread
in Column 4. Measures of liquidity vary greatly across firms, so Columns 3 and 4 include firm fixed effects.
Panel B examines how return reactions to firm announcements on day t vary with market performance on
t − 1 and t as well as interactions of surpriset−1 with each of these measures. Panel C examines how contrast
effects vary with various proxies for limited capital. Column 1 excludes quarters with a market return below
-5%. Column 2 includes a control for the VIX and Column 3 adds an interaction between the VIX and
surpriset−1 . Column 4 and 5 examine contrast effects after controlling for the Hanson and Sunderam (2014)
measure of arbitrage capital directed at earnings strategies as well as its interaction with surpriset−1 . Note
that the Hanson and Sunderam (2014) measure is based on standardized unexplained earnings (SUE) rather
than the earnings surprise relative to analyst forecasts, as used in this paper. All other variables and weights
are as defined in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by date and reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                       Panel A: Risk and Liquidity
                              Return [t − 1, t + 1]        Raw ret [t − 1, t + 1]    Log(volume)     Log(bid-ask)
                                       (1)                            (2)                 (3)            (4)
 Surpriset−1                        -0.975∗∗∗                      -1.149∗∗∗             2.717          1.634
                                     (0.211)                         (0.221)            (4.965)        (5.513)
 Mkt-rf x surpriset−1                 5.027                           5.149
                                     (8.949)                         (8.692)
 SMB x surpriset−1                    -9.881                          -10.40
                                     (20.27)                         (22.88)
 HML x surpriset−1                    25.44                           30.12
                                     (25.35)                         (26.35)
 UMD x surpriset−1                   27.74∗                         43.43∗∗∗
                                     (14.71)                         (14.35)
 Own surpriseit controls              Yes                            Yes                  Yes            Yes
 R2                                  0.0616                         0.196                0.891          0.754
 Observations                        75897                          76062                75734          68750

                                   Panel B: Potential Market Effects
                                                                      Return [t − 1, t + 1]
                                             (1)                     (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                                   ∗∗∗                                         ∗∗∗
 Surpriset−1                           -0.923                                         -0.921            -0.965∗∗∗
                                         (0.233)                                        (0.231)           (0.226)
 M arkett−1                            -0.0641∗                 -0.0644∗              -0.0748∗          -0.0721∗
                                        (0.0369)                (0.0357)               (0.0420)          (0.0421)
 Surpriset−1 x markett−1                                                                 6.141             7.882
                                                                                        (12.32)           (12.39)
 M arkett                                                                                                 0.0457
                                                                                                         (0.0500)
 Surpriset−1 x markett                                                                                     14.39
                                                                                                          (15.09)
 Own surpriseit controls                 Yes                        Yes                 Yes               Yes
 R2                                     0.0603                     0.0591              0.0603            0.0606
 Observations                           75897                      75897               75897             75897
                                                           54
                                                   Table 7
                         Continued: Risk, Trading Frictions, and Limited Capital
                                        Panel C: Limited Capital
 Return [t − 1, t + 1]          Excl quarters ret< −.05                VIX               Earnings arb capital
                                          (1)                 (2)              (3)           (4)        (5)
 Surpriset−1                           -1.060∗∗∗           -0.968∗∗∗         -1.004∗     -0.916∗∗∗   -0.855∗∗∗
                                        (0.248)             (0.252)          (0.596)      (0.250)     (0.294)
 VIX                                                       0.0000564       0.0000550
                                                          (0.0000724)     (0.0000778)
 Surpriset−1 x VIX                                                          0.00161
                                                                            (0.0266)
 Arb capital                                                                               -0.231     -0.207
                                                                                          (0.282)    (0.293)
 Surpriset−1 x arb capital                                                                            -41.40
                                                                                                     (116.1)
 Own surpriseit controls                 Yes                  Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes
 R2                                     0.0643               0.0646          0.0646        0.0602     0.0602
 Observations                           63730                70964           70964         67127      67127



                                                   Table 8
                              Strategic Timing of Earnings Announcements
This table tests whether the negative relation between return reactions and surpriset−1 is driven by chan-
ges in the scheduling of announcements. ∆date is the difference between the day of the current earnings
announcement and the previous year’s same-quarter earnings announcement (e.g., for a firm announcing on
March 15, 2004 that previously announced on March 12, 2003, ∆date = 3). All other variables and weights
are as defined in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by date and reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                             Return [t − 1, t + 1]
                                                                 (1)                                    (2)
 Surpriset−1 x abs(∆ date) ≤ 5                                -0.945∗∗∗
                                                               (0.240)
 Surpriset−1 x abs(∆ date) > 5                                  -0.716
                                                               (0.753)
 Surpriset−1 x ∆ date < −5                                                                              0.797
                                                                                                      (0.982)
 Surpriset−1 x abs(∆ date) ≤ 5                                                                       -0.945∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.240)
 Surpriset−1 x ∆ date > 5                                                                              -1.213
                                                                                                      (0.924)
 Own surpriseit controls                                        Yes                                    Yes
 R2                                                            0.0608                                 0.0612
 Observations                                                  70091                                  70091




                                                     55
                                                    Table 9
                           Robustness to Different Measures of Surpriset−1
This table shows robustness to alternative measures and sample restrictions. All variables and weights are
as defined in Table 2, except for the following changes. Columns 1 and 2 present regressions that do not use
any variables derived from analyst forecasts. We measure the salient surprise in t − 1 as the value-weighted
average of the return response to the t − 1 earnings announcements of large firms above the 90th percentile
of market capitalization, and do not control for the analyst-based measure of own earnings surprise (similar
to the unconditional regressions in Columns 1-3 of Table 2). Column 1 uses the full sample for which we
have return-based data and Column 2 limits the sample to observations for which we also have analyst-
based surprise measures for both surpriset−1 and the firm announcing today. In Column 3, surpriset−1
is calculated as the volume-weighted mean earnings surprise of firms that announced on t − 1 above the
90th percentile of volume (cutoff measured over the prior year) on the announcement day. In Column 4,
surpriset−1 is calculated as the weighted mean surprise of firms that announced on t − 1 above the 90th
percentile of market capitalization, with weights equal to the number of analysts covering the firm. Column
5 examines a measure of surpriset−1 equal to actual earnings minus median forecast, without scaling by
lagged price. Column 6 scales surpriset−1 by the sum of the squared size weights of each firm comprising the
weighted-mean calculation of surpriset−1 . Standard errors are clustered by date and reported in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                  Return [t − 1, t + 1]
                                        (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                                              ∗∗∗            ∗∗
 Return surpriset−1 , VW mean       -0.0520         -0.0492
                                     (0.0197)        (0.0247)
 Surpriset−1 , volume-weighted                                    -0.285∗∗
                                                                   (0.130)
 Surpriset−1 , analyst-weighted                                              -0.915∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.218)
 Surpriset−1 , no price scaling                                                           -0.0310∗∗∗
                                                                                           (0.00667)
 Surpriset−1 , scaled std dev                                                                          -0.486∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.130)
 Own surpriseit controls               Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 R2                                   0.0172         0.0254       0.0580       0.0600      0.0596       0.0600
 Observations                         136056         74897        73472        75897       75923        75897




                                                       56
                                                  Table 10
                                       Timing of Contrast Effects
This table provides further analysis of the timing of contrast effects. Panel A examine the impact of t − 3,
t − 2, t − 1, t + 1, and t + 2 salient surprises on return reactions to earnings announcements on day t.
The dependent variable in Columns 1 and 2 is the return over the window [t − 3, t + 1]. The dependent
variable in Columns 3 and 4 is the return over the window [t − 1, t + 3]. Column 2 limits the sample to
own firm announcements released on Thursday and Friday while Column 4 limits the sample to Monday
and Tuesday. Dummy variables are included for instances where there is a missing salient surprise of the
indicated day. p-values are for the test of whether the t − 1 coefficient is equal to the indicated coefficient.
Panel B explores contrast effects within the same day. In Column 1, we re-estimate our baseline specification
using surpriset instead of surpriset−1 . In Columns 2-6, we classify an earnings announcement as “AM” or
“PM” based on whether it was released before market open or after market close. Column 2 and 3 regress
the [t, t + 1] returns of firms that released PM announcements on the value-weighted surprises of large firms
that released AM and PM announcements, respectively. Columns 4 and 5 repeat the analysis using firms
with AM announcements. Column 6 measures the salient surprise as the surprise released by large firms in
the previous half day (the same-day morning for PM announcers and the previous trading day afternoon
for AM announcers). The firm’s own earnings surprise is always excluded from the calculation of the salient
surprise measure within a contemporaneous time window. In Panel C, the baseline specification is estimated
separately for earnings announcements on each day of the week as indicated in the column labels. In Panel
D, the baseline specification is estimated separately for each quarter of the year as indicated in the column
labels. All other variables and weights are as defined in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered by date and
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                    Panel A: Further Lags and Leads
                                           Return [t − 3, t + 1]                     Return [t − 1, t + 3]
                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
 Surpriset−3                            -0.223                -0.133
                                       (0.227)               (0.266)
 Surpriset−2                             0.260               0.0664
                                       (0.270)               (0.871)
 Surpriset−1                          -0.728∗∗∗             -1.198∗∗            -1.045∗∗∗             -0.778∗∗
                                       (0.247)               (0.480)             (0.279)               (0.314)
 Surpriset+1                                                                     0.0689                 -0.143
                                                                                 (0.393)               (0.494)
 Surpriset+2                                                                      -0.395                -0.263
                                                                                 (0.379)               (0.681)
 p-value: (t-3) = (t-1)                 0.117                0.0398
 p-value: (t-2) = (t-1)                0.00894                0.216
 p-value: (t+1) = (t-1)                                                           0.0219              0.278
 p-value: (t+2) = (t-1)                                                            0.172              0.487
 Days                                     All                Th Fr                  All               Mo Tu
 Own surpriseit controls                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes
 R2                                     0.0575               0.0741               0.0530              0.0577
 Observations                           75844                29376                75859               25408




                                                      57
                                                      Table 10
                              Continued: Timing of Contrast Effects
                               Panel B: Same-Day Contrast Effects
Own announcement time:            Today                       PM                               AM                  AM or PM
                                   (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)            (5)               (6)
Others’ announcement time:        Today               AM            PM                AM             PM            Prev halfday
Others’ surprise                 -0.587∗         -1.263∗            0.426             -0.417         -0.444           -0.479
                                 (0.307)         (0.664)           (0.694)           (0.408)        (0.343)          (0.375)
Own surpriseit controls            Yes                Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes
R2                                0.0558             0.0900        0.0805            0.0641         0.0586            0.0738
Observations                      79886              19300         20059             21824          17899             36901


                                        Panel C: Day of the Week
Own announcement:            Monday        Tuesday            Wednesday              Thursday             Friday       Tu-Th
                               (1)              (2)                (3)                  (4)                (5)           (6)
Surpriset−1                  -1.170∗∗      -0.583∗                -0.706              -1.005∗         -2.578∗∗∗       -0.686∗∗∗
                              (0.460)      (0.298)               (0.623)              (0.541)          (0.896)         (0.248)
Own surpriseit controls       Yes           Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes          Yes
R2                           0.0875        0.0702                0.0407               0.0735              0.104        0.0577
Observations                  7743         17677                 21083                23577               5817         62337


                                     Panel D: Quarter of the Year
Quarter (calendar year)                  Q1                              Q2                         Q3                    Q4
                                         (1)                             (2)                        (3)                   (4)
                                               ∗∗∗                             ∗∗∗
Surpriset−1                           -1.331                       -0.857                        -0.757                 -0.848∗
                                       (0.483)                      (0.330)                     (0.739)                 (0.456)
Own surpriseit controls                  Yes                         Yes                         Yes                     Yes
R2                                      0.0513                      0.0714                      0.0717                  0.0594
Observations                            16185                       20935                       18783                   19994




                                                            58
                                                 Table 11
                                              Heterogeneity
This table shows how contrast effects vary by the size, analyst coverage, and decade of the firm announcing
today. In Column 1, surpriset−1 is interacted with indicators for five quintiles for the size (as measured in
t − 3, using quintile cutoffs of the NYSE index in that month) of the firm announcing today. In Column 2,
surpriset−1 is interacted with indicators for the number of analysts covering the firm announcing earnings
today (the number of distinct analysts that released forecasts in the past 15 days excluding day t and t − 1).
In Column 3, we estimate separate effects for each decade in the sample. All direct effects of size quintiles
or number of analysts are included in the regression. All other variables and weights are as defined in Table
2. Standard errors are clustered by date and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                      Return [t − 1, t + 1]
                                                      (1)                      (2)                     (3)
 Surpriset−1 x size quintile 1                       -0.527
                                                    (0.480)
 Surpriset−1 x size quintile 2                      -0.792∗
                                                    (0.475)
 Surpriset−1 x size quintile 3                       -0.324
                                                    (0.443)
 Surpriset−1 x size quintile 4                       0.179
                                                    (0.304)
 Surpriset−1 x size quintile 5                     -1.028∗∗∗
                                                    (0.255)
 Surpriset−1 x (num analysts = 1)                                             0.0428
                                                                              (0.607)
 Surpriset−1 x (num analysts = 2)                                            -1.048∗∗
                                                                              (0.508)
 Surpriset−1 x (num analysts ≥ 3)                                           -1.020∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.256)
 Surpriset−1 x 1980s                                                                                  -0.663
                                                                                                     (0.455)
 Surpriset−1 x 1990s                                                                                 -1.024∗
                                                                                                     (0.545)
 Surpriset−1 x 2000s                                                                                  -0.542
                                                                                                     (0.346)
 Surpriset−1 x 2010s                                                                                -1.001∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.462)
 Own surpriseit controls                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 R2                                                  0.0604                  0.0604                  0.0631
 Observations                                        75897                   75897                   75897




                                                     59
                                                      Table 12
                                                   Industry Match
This table explores how contrast effects vary with the industry match between the firm announcing earnings
today and the firm announcing in the previous trading day. Surpriset−1 same ind is the salient earnings
surprise in t − 1, calculated using only firms in the same industry as the firm announcing today. Surpriset−1
dif ind is the salient earnings surprise in t − 1, calculated using only firms in a different industry as the firm
announcing today. To make the magnitudes of the coefficients on the t − 1 salient surprises comparable, we
scale each salient surprise by the sum of the squared size weights of each firm comprising the weighted-mean
calculation. Small (large) firm is a dummy variable equal to one if the t − 3 size of the firm announcing
earnings today is below (above) the median NYSE market capitalization in that month. Columns with
“both surpriset−1 non-missing” listed as Yes only include observations where same and different industry
surpriset−1 measures are non-missing. p-values are for the test of whether a given same-industry coefficient
is equal to its different-industry analogue. All other variables and weights are as defined in Table 2. Standard
errors are clustered by date and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

 Return [t + 1, t − 1]                             Full sample                        Small firms                   Large firms
                                       (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
                                             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 Surpriset−1 same ind               -0.507          -0.421         -0.520         -0.746         -0.794         -0.497         -0.511∗∗∗
                                     (0.180)         (0.133)        (0.184)         (0.228)       (0.239)        (0.184)        (0.189)
 Surpriset−1 dif ind                -0.489∗∗∗        -0.171∗        -0.321∗        -0.440∗∗        -0.214       -0.487∗∗∗       -0.321∗
                                     (0.161)         (0.104)        (0.184)         (0.206)       (0.248)        (0.166)        (0.189)
 Both surpriset−1 non-missing          No              No             Yes            No             Yes            No             Yes
 Regression weights                  Value           Equal          Value          Value          Value          Value          Value
 p-value: same=dif                    0.944          0.181           0.462         0.355           0.123         0.970           0.495
 Own surpriseit controls               Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes
 R2                                  0.0605          0.0682         0.0557         0.0833         0.0873         0.0595         0.0544
 Observations                        75897           75897          49343          33831          20847          42066          28496




                                                             60
