NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL REGULATION WITH EXEMPTIONS
Louis Kaplow
Working Paper 23887
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23887

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

Harvard University and National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Nathan
Hendren, Carl Shapiro, Steven Shavell, Andrei Shleifer, Joel Slemrod, Robert Stavins, and
participants in workshops at Chicago, Harvard, Michigan, MIT, NBER, Northwestern, Stanford,
and ETH/Zurich for discussion and comments, David Choi, Jodie Liu, Andrea Lowe, and Nick
Warther for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business
at Harvard University for financial support. Disclaimer: I occasionally consult on antitrust cases,
and my spouse is in the legal department of a financial services firm. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Louis Kaplow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Regulation with Exemptions
Louis Kaplow
NBER Working Paper No. 23887
September 2017
JEL No. D61,D62,H23,J88,K20,K23,K32,K42,L51,Q58
ABSTRACT
Despite decades of research on mechanism design and on many practical aspects of cost-benefit
analysis, one of the most basic and ubiquitous features of regulation as actually implemented
throughout the world has received little theoretical attention: exemptions for small firms. These
firms may generate a disproportionate share of harm due to their being exempt and because
exemption induces additional harmful activity to be channeled their way. This article analyzes
optimal regulation with exemptions where firms have different productivities that are
unobservable to the regulator, regulated and unregulated output each cause harm although at
different levels, and the regulatory regime affects entry as well as the output choices of regulated
and unregulated firms. In many settings, optimal schemes involve subtle effects and have
counterintuitive features: for example, higher regulatory costs need not favor higher exemptions,
and the incentives of firms to drop output to become exempt can be too weak as well as too
strong. A final section examines the optimal use of output taxation alongside regulation, which
illustrates the contrast with the mechanism design approach that analyzes the optimal use of
instruments of a type that are not in widespread use.

Louis Kaplow
Harvard University
Hauser 322
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
meskridge@law.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
China recently decided to shut down small businesses that contribute a vastly
disproportionate amount to water pollution,1 an action that is unsurprising in light of the findings
of Jiang, Lin, and Lin (2014) on the importance of pollution from small Chinese manufacturing
firms that had been subject to less regulatory intensity. Indeed, in many realms throughout the
world, regulation exempts or accords other preferences to small business in a fashion that often
has outsized consequences. Garicano, Lelarge, and Van Reenen (2016) and Gourio and Roys
(2014) examine distortions due to French labor regulations that are applicable only to firms with
at least fifty employees. Braguinsky, Branstetter, and Regateiro (2011) offer evidence
suggesting that labor regulations produce substantial firm size distortions in Portugal. Guner,
Ventura, and Xu (2008) estimate large output and productivity reductions and potentially
significant welfare costs due to lower firm sizes in Europe and Japan that arise from sizedependent policies. For the United States, Becker and Henderson (2000) present evidence
suggesting that shifts of production to new small-scale plants (subject to a de facto policy of rare
inspections) contributed to air quality degradation.2 Gao, Wu, and Zimmerman (2009) show that
firms remained small to avoid more stringent securities law reporting requirements, and Holder,
Karim, and Robin (2013) indicate that such firms’ reporting quality suffered relative to firms
only moderately larger than the exemption threshold.
Regulation across the globe most often employs a command-and-control approach that
exempts or otherwise favors small firms, a treatment often rationalized by economies of scale in
regulatory compliance.3 Small firms may cause a disproportionate share of harm precisely
because of these preferences and because this favoritism induces additional harmful activity to
be channeled their way.4 Note further that a given small business is not exempt from just one or
two regulations but from myriads of them — regarding the environment, workplace safety,
hiring, employee benefits and other labor regulation, information disclosure, and much more.
The aggregate can cause both greater harm and larger production distortions.5 These effects may

1

“Beijing Clean-Water Plan to Shut Polluters,” Wall Street Journal (April 18, 2015).
Regarding the extensive margin, Snyder, Miller, and Stavins (2003) find that the main channel by which
the regulation of chlorine manufacturing reduced pollution was by inducing exit by firms using the dirtier
technology. An analogous type of shifting involving differentially intensive regulation is illustrated by Whitefoot
and Skerlos’s (2012) simulations that document likely shifts to larger vehicles induced by their being subject to
lighter fuel economy standards, resulting in worse mileage, greater carbon dioxide emissions, and possibly reduced
safety.
3
For information on the small business sector, exemption from regulation and taxation, and the magnitude
(if any) of scale economies in regulatory compliance, see Becker, Pasurka, and Shadbegian (2013), Bradford (2004),
Brock and Evans (1986), Brown, Hamilton, and Medoff (1990), Crain (2005), Dey and Sullivan (2012), Hurst and
Pugsley (2011), IMF (2007), and Pierce (1998).
4
Another problem is that ex post fines and tort liability may be less effective against small firms because
they tend to be judgment proof and are less susceptible to reputational sanctions (hence the notion of “fly by
nights”), which in turn gives such firms a socially inefficient competitive advantage. Ringleb and Wiggins (1990)
find a large increase in small companies in hazardous sectors subject to liability. Ironically, these features are a
standard justification for regulation (Shavell 1993) even though, in practice, firms for which this consideration is
most forceful are often exempt.
5
Braguinsky, Branstetter, and Regateiro (2011, p. 23) observe: “As productive firms in Portugal grow, they
do not run into a solid wall of greater employment protection costs at some particular size. Instead, the growth
momentum may be undermined by a gradual accumulation of costs that are individually small but collectively
2

-1-

be exacerbated by tax exemptions (often from the VAT and, in the U.S., from a new $2000-peremployee health mandate penalty) and other benefits (government contract preferences,
subsidized loans).6
Despite the ubiquity and practical importance of this phenomenon, it has received little
attention in the substantial and often highly refined literatures on cost-benefit analysis and
optimal regulatory design. The requisite analysis is not entirely straightforward because
exemptions affect entry and exit as well as the output decisions of firms that do operate and also
because the production of both regulated and exempt firms typically causes harm, albeit at
different levels. Among the implications are that sometimes the incentive of firms to discretely
drop output to become exempt is too small rather than too large, and that higher regulatory
compliance costs, including greater fixed costs, need not favor higher exemptions. (Indeed,
compliance costs do not even appear directly in the pertinent first-order condition, due to an
envelope condition, which means that they have no mechanical effect on the optimal exemption.)
Section 2 presents a model of conventional command-and-control regulation like that
employed in many realms throughout the world. This regulation applies to firms with different
productivities, which differences are unobservable to the government. Regulation consists of
imposing a supplemental production technology that entails both fixed and variable costs of
compliance, and this technology reduces but does not eliminate the external harm caused by
firms’ output.7 The section characterizes the first best, analyzes firms’ behavior under regulation
and no regulation, and then compares the two taking into account output effects, including the
decision whether to produce at all. Last, the section examines an output tax and compares it to
regulation. The analysis here serves mainly as a benchmark for that which follows.
Section 3 introduces an exemption under which firms are subject to regulation if and only
if their output exceeds a quantity threshold.8 In one case, no firm chooses output above the
exempt level yet regulation binds in the sense that the most efficient firms would otherwise have
produced higher outputs but now produce less in order to be exempt. Such schemes can
dominate no regulation because unregulated firms’ output is socially excessive due to the
external harm they cause. In another, more interesting case, the most efficient firms have
outputs above the exemption threshold, thereby subjecting themselves to regulation; firms of
intermediate efficiency have outputs clustered at the exemption threshold; and firms of lower
efficiency produce output below the threshold. Raising the exemption, which causes some
regulated firms to jump down (discretely reduce their output) to the exempt level, has ambiguous

amount to a significant disincentive to growth.”
6
Capital market imperfections, competition policy concerns, or other factors that may justify certain forms
of preferential treatment for small business are set to the side in this investigation.
7
It is immaterial whether the harm is caused by the production process or output itself. For some purposes,
however, it is important whether the harm is a conventional externality (what is modeled here), a so-called
internality, or one that is deemed in need of regulation (rather than relying solely on optimal contracting between
firms and either employees or customers) due to various information problems. In the latter cases, as a very rough
first cut, one might view the degree of individuals’ discounting or other underestimation of harm as corresponding to
the magnitude of an externality. See Gruber and Köszegi (2001).
8
Brock and Evans (1985, 1986) differs in many respects, including that their “regulations” are output taxes
and that the government is assumed to be able to observe firms’ types, which greatly changes the analysis (and, if
they had not restricted available instruments, the regulator could in essence have dictated efficient behavior). Keen
and Mintz (2004) and Dharmapala, Slemrod, and Wilson (2011) model tax exemptions, where the relevant questions
(focused on the deadweight loss of taxation) are largely different.

-2-

effects on social welfare. Although their output is now unregulated and thus more harmful, their
quantity of output is also lower than was their regulated quantity level, and we must keep in
mind that regulated output is also harmful (although less so per unit of output). The optimal
exemption can be zero (tantamount to simple regulation without an exemption), and this may be
so regardless of how high are the costs of regulatory compliance (again, due to output effects).
Relatedly, higher fixed or marginal costs of regulatory compliance do not necessarily favor a
higher exemption level. In all, cost-benefit analysis of a simple regulation with an exemption —
the very sort of regulation often employed — is notably more complex than usually imagined.
Although not the core focus of this article, which emphasizes regulation of the type
typically employed, the aforementioned entry and output distortions and our general
understanding of mechanism design suggest the value of relating the main analysis to results
when output taxes can be employed as well.9 Section 4 does this in three steps. It first examines
taxation of exempt output (only), motivated by the fact that this output is more harmful and the
concern that firms jump down to bunch at the exempt level of output. When the optimal regime
involves some firms producing above-exempt quantities, some bunching at the exemption, and
some producing less, the optimal tax on exempt output is strictly below the harm caused by such
output because the incentive of regulated firms to jump down is otherwise too small, and it is
even possible that this tax is optimally set equal to zero. Second, a tax on (only) regulated
output is considered. Once again, when the optimal regime involves masses of firms in all three
output categories, the optimal tax is strictly less than the harm caused by such output because the
incentive of regulated firms to jump down is otherwise too large, and it is possible that this tax is
optimally set equal to zero. Third, separate taxes on unregulated and regulated output are
considered. It is not surprising that these instruments, not generally in use, do enable
implementation of the first best, which highlights the sharp contrast between optimal design of
the sort of command-and-control regulation usually employed and the unconstrained mechanism
design approach that takes advantage of different, more flexible instruments.10
2. Set-Up
2.1. Model
In the absence of regulation, a firm of type γ produces output q at cost γc(q), where

9

Indeed, exemptions and related preferences are usually predicated on the observability of output or related
measures such as revenue or employment. For prior work on tax-like instruments, regulation, and administrative
costs (typically, only two of the three, and without exemptions), see Glaeser and Shleifer (2001, 2003), Polinsky and
Shavell (1982, 1992), Shavell (1993), and Shleifer (2012). Christiansen and Smith (2012) consider regulation and
taxes when different units of consumption cause different external harm and when some consumption escapes
taxation; Eskeland (1994) supplements a common abatement requirement with an output tax; Montero (2005)
assumes that technology choice is observable but output is not; and Spulber (1985) compares effluent taxes and
permits, which achieve the first best, to output taxes (when harm is caused by an input) and to regulation that takes
the form of a per-firm effluent ceiling.
10
On regulation more generally (the typical application involving monopoly pricing), see Baron (1989),
Baron and Myerson (1982), and Laffont and Tirole (1993); see also Baron (1985) and Laffont (1994), extending the
analysis to a monopolist that pollutes, and Dasgupta, Hammond, and Maskin (1980), examining in the pollution
context the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves mechanism and also instruments with no communication from firms.

-3-

c(·)N > 0, c(·)O > 0, c(0) = 0, and cN(0) > 0.11 Firms’ types are distributed according to the
positive density function g(γ) on the interval [γE, 4), where γE > 0.12 The government observes
firms’ outputs but not their types. Consumers buy output at the constant price p.13
Each unit of output causes external harm of hi, with hN > hR > 0; Δh / hN ! hR, where the
superscripts N and R denote production with no regulation and with regulation, respectively. As
mentioned in the introduction, the assumption that hR > 0 is often realistic and also tends to hold
when regulatory stringency is chosen optimally. It will be obvious which results below would
differ, and how, for the case in which hR = 0.
Regulation also involves compliance costs. Specifically, regulated firms (of every type)
incur a positive fixed cost K and a positive marginal cost of k per unit of output. The
government is assumed to bear no administrative costs. An equivalent interpretation is that the
government does in fact bear such costs (fixed and/or variable), but it charges each firm a fee
equal to these costs, and this fee is included in firms’ regulatory compliance costs.
2.2. Benchmark Results
The first best is as follows: Taking as given whether a firm of type γ is subject to
regulation, its (conditionally) optimal output is that which equates its marginal cost to p ! hi,
although if its marginal cost exceeds this level at q = 0, it optimally does not produce in regime i.
A firm of type γ should be regulated if and only if its contribution to welfare (profits minus the
external harm it causes) is higher in that regime.14 Four types of optima can arise: no firms
produce (suppose hR > p); all firms that produce are unregulated (suppose k $ Δh and hN is
small); all firms that produce are regulated (suppose k and K are near zero, hN > p, and hR is
small); and only some firms that produce are regulated (in which case those regulated will be all
types γ below some γ*, on account of scale economies).15
As further background for the analysis of exemptions in section 3, it is useful to state
briefly the conditions under which simple regulation is preferable to no regulation and also when
it is superior to a pure, linear output tax. (Most of the analysis is relegated to the appendix.) In
the regime with no regulation, a firm of type γ, in choosing qN(γ) to maximize profits, equates its

11

This formulation is similar to Lucas’s (1978) model where heterogeneity in managerial talent, which is
subject to diminishing returns, underlies the size distribution of firms. One could instead assume that firms incur a
fixed cost to enter, after which they learn their productivities, as in Hopenhayn (1992) and Melitz (2003). See also
the adaption thereof in Dharmapala, Slemrod, and Wilson (2011). Such models generate zero profits in expectation
for each firm, a size distribution of firms analogous to that here, and similar comparative statics regarding the
entry/exit decision.
12
In many of the cases examined below, it will be assumed that γE is sufficiently small that the firm of this
type earns positive profits; the pertinent conditions in such cases will be obvious. In any event, in regimes in which
no firms operate, social welfare will be zero, and comparisons with other regimes would be simplified accordingly.
Furthermore, it will be supposed throughout that cN rises at a sufficient rate that qN(γE) (determined by expression
A2) is finite.
13
If one made prices endogenous, as in Dharmapala, Slemrod, and Wilson (2011), then the resulting
quantity effects examined below would tend to be of the same sign but smaller magnitude. In addition, most results
would have additional terms that reflect the change in the composition of output between regulated and unregulated
production, but the direction of any such shift is ambiguous.
14
In a regime in which a firm does not produce, its contribution to welfare is zero, so we need not separately
require that welfare be nonnegative.
15
See Figure 2 and Proposition 6, below.

-4-

marginal cost, γcN(q), to price, p. In contrast, under regulation, qR(γ) is chosen to equate γcN(q) to
p ! k. Note that the marginal cost of regulatory compliance, k, has an output effect akin to that
of a tax, although of course it constitutes a real resource cost. Under each regime, there will
exist a marginal type, denoted γN and γR, respectively, such that more efficient firms (with a
lower γ) are the ones that operate. Due to both the marginal and fixed costs of regulation, γR <
γN.
Regulation is socially optimal if the difference between welfare under regulation
(expression (A8) in the appendix) and that that under no regulation (A4) — each being the
integral over all firm types that operate of the value of output minus all production and
regulatory costs (if applicable) and harm — is positive, that is, if


(1) 



N

  pq



R



R

N

  pq






( )  c(q N ( ))  h N q N ( ) g ( )d

R

 

( )  q N ( )   c(q R ( ))  c(q N ( ))





 

 K  kq R ( )  h N q N ( )  h R q R ( ) g ( )d  0.
Expression (1) is just the cost-benefit assessment of a very simple regulation in a basic setting,
yet it is more complex than is ordinarily appreciated due to output effects. Indeed, both exit and
quantity reductions, which naively may be viewed as costly side-effects of regulation, contribute
to its desirability. It turns out that few generalizations about expression (1) are possible. Most
obviously, the desirability of regulation rises with the magnitude of hN and falls with hR.
Interestingly, however, a requirement that Δh > k (that regulation reduces harm per unit of output
by more than the marginal cost of regulatory compliance, even ignoring the positive fixed cost
K) is not a necessary condition for regulation to raise social welfare. It is not even necessary that
Δh > 0: A regulation that imposes both marginal and fixed costs and also fails in reducing harm
one iota can boost welfare. Suppose, for example, that Δh = 0 but hN is sufficiently large that
even the most efficient firm type, γE, causes more harm than good, and, moreover, K is
sufficiently high that γR = γE. Regulation is desirable because it shuts down the industry, even
though, conditional on operation, regulation imposes more cost on any firm than would be
gained by the reduction in harm caused by the output that would be produced by that firm. Of
course, products or production methods are sometimes banned. More broadly, because the
marginal cost of regulatory compliance, k, acts in some respects as an output tax, causing qR(γ) to
be below qN(γ), regulation contributes something to social welfare precisely because of its
marginal costs (since we are assuming that hR > 0) — a benefit that supplements any reduction in
harm for a given level of output (having a magnitude of Δh, which we ordinarily suppose to be
positive when regulation is efficient). This point is in addition to induced exit, i.e., the fact that
both marginal and fixed costs (k and K) lead to the exit of less productive firms (γR < γN), which
produce less social surplus per unit of output and thus per unit of external harm. In sum:

-5-

Proposition 1, comparing Regulation and No Regulation:
a.
Regulation (versus no regulation) raises social welfare if and only if inequality
(1) holds.
b.
A higher hN and a lower hR favor regulation.
c.
Regulation can raise social welfare even if Δh # 0 — and thus, a fortiori, even if
Δh # k, implying that, conditional on a given level of output, regulation is strictly
inefficient.
Next, suppose that the government instead employs (only) a linear output tax t.16
Obviously, it is optimal to t = hN, so that firms of each type (that choose to operate) equate
marginal cost to price minus marginal harm, which is equivalent to their equating the social
marginal cost (the marginal production cost plus the externality cost) to price, which indicates
consumers’ marginal benefit. Note that this problem nests that with no regulation (which
corresponds to t = 0), so optimal taxation dominates a regime without any regulation. The
comparison of this regime with simple regulation, however, is somewhat involved because either
γR or γT (the marginal type below which firms operate under the tax regime) could be larger, and
the expressions for the social welfare differ qualitatively in these two cases. The results (derived
in the appendix) can be summarized as follows:
Proposition 2, comparing Regulation and Output Taxation:
a.
Regulation (versus output taxation) raises social welfare if and only if the
applicable inequality (A10 or A11) holds.
b.
A higher hN and a lower hR favor regulation.
c.
Higher fixed or marginal costs of regulatory compliance do not necessarily
disfavor regulation.
d.
Regulation is dominated by output taxation when Δh # k.
e.
In addition, output taxation dominates no regulation, and the optimal output tax
is such that t = hN.
Regarding Proposition 2(a), keep in mind that, although output taxation induces optimal output
for each type of firm given the technology it employs, it does not reduce harm per unit of output,
which regulation does. If regulation has high costs and harm is negligible even without
regulation, output taxation produces greater social welfare, but if regulation has low costs and Δh
is large, regulation is superior. The explanation for Proposition 2(c) is now familiar: higher
compliance costs have output effects that may raise social welfare by more than the costs
themselves;17 therefore, because social welfare under regulation can rise whereas that under
16

Taxes directly on external harm are taken to be infeasible, which may be motivated by the unobservability
of such harm. The case with multiple inputs, some more closely related to external harm than output is, would be
intermediate, with differential input taxes better controlling external harm but creating input distortions (unless the
input is a perfect proxy for external harm). See Plott (1966) and Spulber (1985).
17
For example, raising k from an initial value of zero might raise social welfare under regulation on account
of the output effect, and this gain would be large if hR was large. It might appear that raising K unambiguously
reduces social welfare under the regulation regime, favoring output taxation. However, in addition to K appearing in
the second integrand of (A10) and (A11), it also influences γR. Specifically, increasing K induces exit. Under
regulation, the firm just indifferent to operating earns zero profits and thus its exit raises welfare by hRqR(γR). When
hR and g(γR) are sufficiently large, this effect will exceed the welfare loss due to inframarginal regulated firms

-6-

output taxation is unaffected, higher costs can favor regulation. Proposition 2(d), however,
stands in contrast to Proposition 1(c): Technically inefficient regulation cannot dominate output
taxation because in that case any net benefit of regulation is due entirely to its negative output
effects, which output taxation produces without incurring compliance costs.18
3. Regulation with an Exemption
3.1. Model and Firms’ Behavior
In an exemption regime, firms are subject to regulation if and only if q > qE. This regime
nests simple regulation, when qE = 0, and no regulation, when qE $ qN(γE).
To understand the effects of such an exemption regime on firms’ behavior, begin with
qE = qN(γE) — i.e., where the most efficient firm, with the highest output, is exempt when its
output is at its unregulated profit-maximizing level. Next, contemplate gradually reducing qE to
zero. At first, when we reduce qE to just below qN(γE), firms in a neighborhood of γE will reduce
their output to qE: specifically, all firms of types γ such that qN(γ) > qE. To maintain their former
output, qN(γ), or indeed any output above qE, means that they are subject to regulation and thus
incur the fixed compliance cost K and also the marginal compliance cost k on each unit of such
output. Because qN(γ) was their profit-maximizing quantity without regulation, a slight reduction
in q from that level (remaining free from regulation) reduces profits negligibly. Therefore, they
indeed choose qE. Define γNE such that qN(γNE) = qE, indicating the type of firm whose profitmaximizing output under no regulation just equals the exemption level. All firms with
γ 0 [γE, γNE] produce qE, and those with γ 0 (γNE, γN) produce a positive qN(γ) that is below qE.
Regulation with an exemption that barely binds causes output suppression by the most efficient
firms, who cluster at the exemption threshold, and has no effect on the less efficient firms, who
produce below the threshold. Regulation still affects behavior although no firm is actually
subject to the regulation.
As qE is reduced further, there will come a point at which the most efficient firms, those
with sufficiently low γ’s, no longer wish to produce qE and instead choose qR(γ) > qE, subjecting
themselves to regulation.19 This happens as qE falls below the level at which
πR(qR(γE), γE) = πN(qE, γE), that is, where the most efficient type is just indifferent between
choosing the higher output, qR(γE), which maximizes profit under regulation, and the lower
output, qE, which generates the highest possible profit while remaining exempt from regulation.
When qE is below this level, there will be a range of firms, γ 0 [γE, γRE), that produce qR(γ) > qE,
where γRE is defined such that πR(qR(γRE), γRE) = πN(qE, γRE). Firms with γ 0 [γRE, γNE] produce qE,
and firms with γ 0 (γNE, γN) produce a positive qN(γ) that is below qE, as before. See Figure 1.

bearing a higher fixed cost.
18
To confirm this conclusion, note first that, when Δh # k, any unit of output produced by a regulated firm
of any type would contribute more to social welfare if the firm were instead subject to an output tax because the
greater harm is less than the cost savings. (As noted above, this is strictly so even if Δh = k because the positive
fixed cost K is also avoided.) Second, any unit of output that contributes positively to social welfare in the output
tax regime will be produced.
19
In principle, this point may never come, which would be true if regulatory costs were sufficiently high that
even the most efficient firm, type γE, cannot profitably produce any output under regulation; as note 12 states, this
possibility is assumed not to prevail.

-7-

Figure 1: Regulation with Exemption (Three Regions)

Firm types (γ) are depicted on the horizontal axis, with the most efficient type (γE) toward the
left and the least efficient of relevance (γN) toward the right. Quantity is on the vertical axis.
The outer (northeast) dashed curve depicts quantity choices (qN) of firms under no regulation,
and the inner (southwest) dashed curve shows quantities (qR) under regulation (with no
exemption). In the latter case, at γR quantity drops discontinuously to zero due to the fixed cost
K.
The bold curve shows quantity choices under regulation with an exemption at qE, as
described just above: The most efficient firms, those with γ 0 [γE, γRE), choose the quantities they
would have under pure regulation; they are unaffected by the exemption. Firms of intermediate
efficiency, γ 0 [γRE, γNE], cluster at qE. Less efficient firms, γ 0 (γNE, γN), choose the
(unconstrained) quantities that they would have under no regulation. The discontinuity at γRE
reflects the fixed cost (K) and the marginal costs of regulation (k, applied to qR(γRE)). In addition,
as can be seen, there is an interval of firms to the left of the intersection of the qR curve and qE —
those with γ toward the left of [γRE, γNE] — that are induced by the exemption to drop their output
discretely down to the exempt level, qE (i.e., qR(γ) > qE). In contrast, all firms to the right of that
intersection that are in operation produce more due to the introduction of the exemption: As the
figure is drawn, for those with γ toward the middle and right of [γRE, γNE], respectively, some
produce more (qE) than their positive quantities qR(γ) under pure regulation, and some produce qE

-8-

whereas they would not have operated under pure regulation.20 Finally, firms with γ 0 (γNE, γN)
produce the unconstrained qN(γ) instead of nothing.
As we further reduce qE, this depiction continues to hold — and the magnitudes of γRE
and γNE rise (move to the right) — until qE = 0. At that point, γNE = γN. In other words, since it is
impossible to produce positive output and remain exempt, the rightmost region vanishes.
Similarly, γRE = γR. (When qE = 0, all the firms clustered at the exempt level of output are firms
that do not produce.) As mentioned above, this case corresponds to pure regulation.
3.2. Optimal Exemption Level
First, it is straightforward to demonstrate that the optimal exemption level qE is strictly
below qN(γE), which is to say that regulation with an optimal exemption produces greater social
welfare than a regime with no regulation. Recall that the only effect of reducing qE slightly from
a starting point of qN(γE) is to induce firms with γ in the (positive) neighborhood of γE to reduce
their output slightly, from qN(γ), which is barely above this qE, to qE. Because qN(γ) maximized
profits, the slight reduction in output has no first-order effect on profits and thus on social
welfare, except through the reduction in external harm, a first-order welfare gain. This analysis
provides an initial insight into exemptions (and reinforces a lesson from the earlier analysis of
pure regulation): output effects matter and, in this instance with regard to firms exempt from
regulation, some reduction in output necessarily increases social welfare due to the presence of
(uninternalized) externalities. Here, this result holds even though the imposition of this
regulatory scheme does not actually subject any firm to regulation.
Next, suppose that we continue to reduce qE but that we stay in the scenario in which
there are only two regions: more efficient firms clustering at qE, and less efficient firms
producing lower levels of output, as they would if there were no regulation. The marginal loss
of profits (due to the quantity reduction) by the ever increasing group of firms in the first region
— γNE is rising, so [γE, γNE) is widening — is now first-order and eventually may (but need not)
exceed the welfare gain from the marginal reduction of external harm. Accordingly, there might
exist an interior optimum in this scenario. When this is also a global optimum, which is
possible,21 we would have a situation in which the optimal regulatory scheme (relative to a
regime of no regulation) raises social welfare entirely due to firms that reduce output and thereby
cluster at the exemption threshold. Firms’ jumping down to avoid regulation is the source of the
regulation’s benefit, not an inefficient side-effect of exemption as commonly supposed.
We now turn to the more interesting scenario with three (nonempty) regions, as depicted
in Figure 1. Social welfare for this case (denoted by the superscript R/E) is given by

20

To confirm that it is possible that some firms in the middle group would be ones that would not operate in
the absence of an exemption, suppose that qE is near zero and consider firms with γ just below γNE.
21
Note that, by considering a K that is sufficiently large, we will continue to have only two regions as we
keep reducing qE until we reach a level as low as we like, including qE = 0. Moreover, by considering an appropriate
level of hN, the optimum could be at any qE that binds, including qE = 0: if hN is sufficiently small, reducing qE will
soon switch to lowering social welfare, whereas if hN is sufficiently large, reducing qE will continue to raise welfare.

-9-



( 2) W R / E ( q E ) 

RE

  pq

R



( )  c(q R ( ))  K  kq R ( )  h R q R ( ) g ( )d








NE

  pq



 c(q E )  h N q E g ( )d

N

( )  c(q N ( ))  h N q N ( ) g ( )d .

RE







E

N

  pq



NE

The first integral in expression (2) indicates the net contribution to social welfare from the most
efficient firms; as explained, they choose quantities qR(γ) > qE and thus are subject to regulation.
The integrand is the benefit from this output minus production costs, regulatory costs, and
external harm. The second integral is the contribution from firms of intermediate efficiency that,
as explained, choose to produce at the exemption threshold, qE. The third term is for firms that
are less efficient, but not so much so that unregulated operation is unprofitable. Because
qN(γ) < qE, their situation is precisely as in the unregulated world.
Supposing that we remain in a range consistent with this scenario — that is, qE > 0, but qE
is not so high as to eliminate the region in which at least some firms, the most efficient, choose
qR(γ) > qE — a necessary condition for an optimal qE is that dW R/E(qE)/dqE = 0.22 Examining
expression (2) for W R/E(qE), we can see that there are two types of effects from a marginal
increase in qE. Most obviously, the value of the integrand in the second term changes, reflecting
that firms clustered at qE will now raise their output accordingly.
Furthermore, the limits of integration (boundaries between the regions), γRE and γNE, each
fall. Regarding γRE, because the exempt quantity is now higher, some firms that had barely
preferred to be subject to regulation (the least efficient in that range) will now drop their output
to qE and become exempt. In other words, some of the mass in the first integral will now appear
in the second. Note, however, that even though these two integrands are entirely different, the
effect on social welfare from this shift is rather simple. Firms of type γRE, who are the ones that
jump down, are those that were just indifferent between producing qR(γ) under a regime of
regulation and producing qE under a regime of no regulation. Their envelope condition is that
the sum of all the terms except the last (external harm) in the first integrand equals the sum of
the first two terms (all but external harm) in the second integrand. (Compare expressions (A5)
and (A1), respectively, in the appendix.) Therefore, the change in social welfare from this
change in γRE will simply equal the difference between these two external effects, weighted by
the mass of firms that jump down.
Regarding γNE, the higher exempt quantity now means that the marginal firm that was at

22

Most terms in the second-order condition associated with expression (3), below, are of indeterminate sign,
and inspection makes it apparent that this is not a sufficient condition.

- 10 -

this boundary (a firm whose unconstrained output in an unregulated world, qN(γ), just equalled qE
in any event), will now be producing the same level of output (rather than raising its output as qE
is increased), but that lack of change will put it in the bottom integral rather than the middle one.
The movement in this boundary obviously has no effect on behavior or on social welfare. (Note
that the value of the integrand in the third integral, at this boundary, where qN(γ) = qE, is the same
as the value of the integrand in the second integral.)
In light of the foregoing (which implies that, when one mechanically takes the stated
derivative, a substantial majority of the terms cancel), we can write

(3)

d W R / E (q E )
 h R q R (
E
dq








RE



)  h N q E g (

NE

  p  c (q

E

RE

RE

 d RE 
) 

 dq E 



)  h N g ( )d ,

where

d RE
p   RE c (q E )
( 4) 

.
dq E
c(q R ( RE ))  c(q E )
The right side of expression (4) is positive because, with reference to the numerator, the most
efficient type of firm in (at the left boundary of) the middle region, type γRE, has a marginal cost
below price (it does not expand output above qE because then it would no longer be exempt from
regulation). In the denominator, since qR(γRE) > qE, the cost difference is positive. Therefore, as
stated above, raising qE reduces γRE.
The first term in expression (3) indicates, as previewed above, the change in social
welfare due to regulated firms jumping down to qE as that exemption threshold is increased.
There is a welfare gain due to the external harm from regulated output no longer arising, and a
welfare loss because we now have external harm from unregulated output. The first component
in brackets involves less harm per unit of output, because hR < hN, but more harm due to the
greater quantity, because qR(γRE) > qE. Accordingly, the net effect on external harm from firms
jumping down could be of either sign: the benefit of regulation (lower harm per unit of output) is
forgone, but the quantity of output that gives rise to external harm falls.23 Finally, this term in
brackets is weighted by the mass of firms that jump down, indicated by the product of the
density of the marginal firm type and the rate of change in the marginal type.
The second term in expression (3) indicates the greater production by firms that cluster at

23

At a given qE, qR(γRE) is endogenous, but we know in any event that qR(γRE) > qE. In contrast, the hi are
exogenous and have no effect on any endogenous variables. Accordingly, we can imagine cases in which Δh is
arbitrarily small, in which event the quantity effect dominates, and cases in which Δh is arbitrarily large (and,
moreover, in which hR is arbitrarily small), in which event the harm effect dominates.

- 11 -

qE. For firms at the upper limit of this integral, of type γNE, qE is their profit-maximizing choice,
so price equals marginal cost. Hence, for them, the first two terms in brackets in the integrand
together equal zero. Their marginal output reduces social welfare by hN, the harm per unit of
output associated with an unregulated firm’s production. For more efficient firms in this region,
price exceeds their marginal cost (but they do not raise output because they wish to remain
exempt), so raising qE raises profits and thus social welfare on this account, but there remains the
externality, hN. It is a priori indeterminate whether, even for the most efficient firms in this
range, the output increase from raising qE raises or lowers social welfare, accounting for both
profits and external harm. Moreover, even if it raises welfare with regard to them, it remains
indeterminate whether the term as a whole, integrating over all firm types in this region (the least
efficient of which reduce welfare when they raise output), is positive or negative.
All together, both terms in our first-order condition for the optimal qE (within this
scenario) are of ambiguous sign. It is apparent, however, that a high level of hR favors a higher
exemption level: the only effect of regulation entailing a higher level of residual harm per unit of
output is to raise the social benefit (or reduce the social cost, as the case may be) of firms
jumping down to the exempt level of output as qE is increased. A high level of hN favors a lower
exemption level on two accounts: it makes the jumping-down phenomenon more detrimental,
and it also renders more harmful (or less beneficial, perhaps, for the most efficient exempt firms)
the increase in output for firms clustered at the exempt level of output.
Next, consider the effect of regulatory compliance costs on the optimal exemption level.
Interestingly, these do not appear directly in expression (3), our first-order condition for the
optimal qE. The reason is that raising the exemption level saves all compliance costs for firms
that, as a consequence, jump down to the exempt level of output, but in so reducing their output,
these firms also forgo profits, an excess of price over marginal production cost, which also
contributes to social welfare. Moreover, as noted previously, for the marginal firm (type γRE),
the envelope condition is that these effects are precisely equal. Hence, perhaps surprisingly,
regulatory costs have no direct (mechanical) effect on the marginal welfare impact of raising qE.
Regulatory compliance costs are nevertheless relevant to the optimal value of qE because
they influence γRE, the efficiency of the marginal type of firm (and k influences qR(γRE) for a
given γRE). Specifically, it is straightforward to demonstrate that, as we would expect, a higher
fixed cost K and a higher marginal cost k each reduce γRE; that is, when regulatory compliance
costs are greater, the firm just indifferent to operating at a high output in the regulated regime,
versus producing qE while being exempt from regulation, is one with greater efficiency.
Moreover, it can be demonstrated that this more efficient firm is one with a greater quantity
under regulation.24 Therefore, for a given qE, more costly regulation is associated with a greater
value for the bracketed portion of the first term in expression (3), making a higher exemption
more desirable on that account: because the quantity drop when the marginal firm jumps down is
from a higher initial level, the savings in harm from regulated output is greater. Whether the
optimal qE rises, however, is a more complicated question because γRE appears elsewhere in both
24

For a higher K, this is obvious, on account of γRE falling. For a higher k, there is a countervailing effect on
q (γ ) due to the higher marginal cost. However, the indifference condition that defines γRE requires higher profits
when regulated (because the fall in γRE implies higher unregulated profits at qE), which necessarily implies lower
overall marginal costs under regulation and hence a higher qR. (Actually, a lower overall marginal cost is required
even to achieve the same level of profit under regulation because raising k shifts up marginal cost by a constant
amount at all levels of output.)
R

RE

- 12 -

terms of expression (3). Each of these additional effects is of indeterminate sign, and it can be
shown that it is a priori indeterminate whether higher regulatory costs favor a higher exemption
level.25
Finally, having previously demonstrated that the optimal qE is strictly below qN(γE),
consider now whether the optimal qE is strictly greater than zero. Given the fixed cost K of
regulatory compliance, it may seem that this would be so, but the foregoing analysis suggests
that the matter is more complicated. To begin, review expression (2) for W R/E(qE). At qE = 0,
there is no production in the middle and right regions: firms clustering at qE produce nothing, and
less efficient firms (which had output below qE when there were three operative regions) do not
produce either. Therefore, if we raise qE slightly, starting from zero, there are two effects: firms
just at (below) γRE (which, in this instance, equals γR since, after all, an exemption regime with an
exemption of zero is identical to regulation without any exemption) jump down to the nowpositive qE, and the more efficient firms among those that were not producing will now enter.
(These are firms in the interval γ 0 [γR, γN). The left endpoint was just explained; for the right
endpoint, recall that all firms with γ < γN produce a positive quantity when not subject to
regulation, and since the marginal contribution of quantity to profit is at its maximum when
qN = 0, marginally increasing quantity from that level as the exemption is increased will indeed
be profitable, there being no fixed costs for unregulated firms.) Accordingly, we wish to
evaluate expression (3), for dW R/E(qE)/dqE, at qE = 0 when the limits of integration are as just
described.

d W R / E (q E )
(5)
dq E

E

q 0

 d RE 
 h q ( ) g ( ) 

 dq E 



R

R





R



R

N

  p  c (0)  h g( )d .
N



R

In contrast to expression (3), the first term in expression (5) is unambiguously positive.
(The component of the bracketed term in which we had subtracted the exempt quantity level
times the unregulated per unit harm now equals zero because we are evaluating the expression at
qE = 0.) Therefore, at least initially, the effect of a higher exemption of inducing firms to jump
down to the exemption threshold unquestionably raises social welfare: the negative externality
associated with regulated output is avoided (and nothing is substituted in its place) when firms at
the margin drop their output to become exempt. (And, as before, all the other effects on social
welfare cancel in light of the marginal firm’s indifference condition, so regulatory compliance
costs K and k again do not appear directly.) At least in a neighborhood of qE = 0, a net positive
effect will continue to prevail. Interestingly, introducing some exemption from regulation is

25

To elaborate briefly, because the first bracketed term in expression (3) is of indeterminate sign, effects of
changing γRE (which is lowered by raising K or k) due to the latter two components of the first term will be
indeterminate. Moreover, the effect of changing γRE on each of those factors is of indeterminate sign. Finally,
changing γRE changes the lower limit of integration of the second term, but, as explained previously, the sign of the
integrand at that value is also indeterminate.

- 13 -

desirable in this regard precisely because it induces some firms subject to regulation to become
exempt (by dropping their output).
The second term, however, continues to be ambiguous: At the upper limit of integration,
the first two terms in the integrand, taken together, equal zero, so the integrand as a whole is
negative, whereas at the lower limit of integration the value may be positive or negative.
Clearly, if hN is sufficiently large, we know the second term will be negative, and if it is true that
hN is large and hR is sufficiently small, then a barely positive exemption is undesirable.26 (And
this is so regardless of the magnitude of the fixed regulatory compliance cost K or the marginal
cost k, although larger costs imply a lower γR, which adds at the lower end of the interval of
integration more efficient firms that, on this account, have higher levels of marginal profit.27) By
contrast, there clearly exist combinations of hN, hR, and the density function g(·) such that a
positive exemption is optimal. For example, if hN is sufficiently small that the integrand in the
second term is positive for some range of γ, consider g(·) arbitrarily close to zero for any γ such
that the integrand is negative. In that event, the second term is positive and the first term is
always positive, so a positive exemption is optimal.
The foregoing analysis can be summarized as follows:28
Proposition 3, on Optimal Exemption from Regulation:
a.
Regulation that exempts at least some firms (whose unregulated quantities would
exceed the exemption level) dominates no regulation, and the exemption level can
be optimal even if no firms are subject to regulation — that is, if any firm whose
unregulated quantity would exceed the exemption level chooses to reduce its
quantity to the exemption level.
b.
The optimal exemption from regulation can be positive or zero, and it can be zero
regardless of how high are the fixed and marginal costs of regulatory
compliance.
c.
If it is optimal to set the exemption at an intermediate level — that is, a positive qE
such that, for some γ > γE, πR(qR(γ), γ) > πN(qE, γ), meaning that a mass of firms
finds it profitable to produce quantities above the exemption level — then a
necessary condition for the optimal exemption level is that expression (3) equals
zero.
d.
A higher hN and a lower hR favor a lower level of the exemption.
26

The analysis in the text only shows that, in the neighborhood of zero, the optimal qE is zero. However, it
is also clear from the earlier analysis of expression (3) that if hN is sufficiently large, welfare will be falling as the
exemption level rises for any qE, until qE = qR(γE). And welfare rather obviously falls beyond that point when hN is
sufficiently large.
27
On the other hand, a lower γR implies a larger qR(γR) for the reasons given in note 24, which, ceteris
paribus, raises the magnitude of the first term. And the other factors in the first term change as well.
28
Note that the latter point in Proposition 3(b) can hold regardless of how small is Δh, including where
Δh = 0. In expression (5), observe that, even in this limiting case, hN can be arbitrarily large and g(γR) can be
arbitrarily small. Regarding the latter clause in result (c), it is true that, when regulatory compliance costs become
sufficiently large, it will no longer be true that γR is high enough that any firms choose to produce subject to
regulation, but it remains true that qE = 0 can be optimal: we are left with only the latter term in expression (5) but, as
explained (see note 26), that term will be negative if hN is sufficiently large. Also, with regard to Proposition 3(d), a
lower hR only weakly favors a lower level of the exemption because, if the optimal qE is such that there are only two
regions (the earlier case where even the most efficient firms produce at qE), then changing hR at the margin has no
effect on the optimal qE.

- 14 -

e.

Higher fixed or marginal costs of regulatory compliance do not necessarily favor
a higher exemption level.

4. Regulation with an Exemption and Output Taxation
This section first considers how the analysis changes when one allows for taxation of
exempt output, then taxation of regulated output, and finally taxation of both types of output at
different rates.
4.1. Taxation of Exempt Output
Suppose that, in addition to regulation with an exemption, it is also possible to impose a
tax on output that is exempt from regulation. One motivation is that, because such output is
unregulated, it is more harmful, so a tax on it seems particularly appealing, all the more so due to
the worry that firms may have an excessive incentive to jump down to the exempt quantity.
Moreover, the feasibility of an output-based exemption, qE, does suppose that the output level of
exempt firms is observable, suggesting that such a tax may be feasible.
Accordingly, let us modify section 3’s model by allowing a (nonnegative) tax at the rate
tN on all output that is not subject to regulation. As in subsection 2.2, it will be assumed
throughout this section that there are no government administrative or firm compliance costs
associated with the tax and that, regarding social welfare, tax payments per se are pure transfers.
The analysis appears in the appendix. The main results are:29
Proposition 4, on Optimal Taxation of Exempt Output (for a given exemption level, qE):
a.
It is possible to have an optimum with γRE < γE, that is, with no firms producing
output in excess of qE and thus subjecting themselves to regulation. In that case,
the optimum has tN = hN.
b.
It is possible to have an optimum with γRE > γE, that is, with a mass of efficient
firms producing output in excess of qE. In that case, the optimum has tN 0 [0, hN),
and a necessary condition for the optimal tax (if it is interior) is that expression
(A12) equals zero. That is, the optimal tax on exempt output does not fully
internalize the externality, and this optimal tax might equal zero.
c.
If there is a missing middle region (a necessary condition for which is tN > k), no
firms produce qE, and, for K sufficiently small, some types of firms wish to be
subject to regulation despite producing output below qE (and, if voluntary
regulation were not permitted, some would jump up, producing output just above
qE, in order to be subject to regulation).
For Proposition 4(a), if indeed all output is unregulated, it is hardly surprising that the
optimum sets tN = hN. Proposition 4(b) indicates that this is not true when we also have regulated
29

Regarding Proposition 4(a), it is also possible to have an optimum with γRE = γE, which likewise implies
that there is no mass of firms producing output in excess of qE. (The most efficient firm is indifferent to producing
qE and a higher, regulated level of output. The convention has been that it produces the former, exempt quantity, but
in any event firms of this type have no mass.) In that case, the optimum has tN 0 [0, hN] because, as explained in the
appendix, in this case raising tN switches the outcome from the two- to the three-region case.

- 15 -

firms. The intuition is that, as we fully internalize the externality regarding the output of
unregulated firms, there is no marginal social gain from output reduction by them, whereas the
induced jumping up to a higher, regulated level of output reduces social welfare because the
harm caused by regulated firms (even though it is lower per unit of output) is external, whereas
the harm caused by unregulated output is completely internalized. (To be sure, harm is harm
with regard to social welfare, but there are differences regarding revenue, production costs,
regulatory compliance costs, and tax payments that change when firms jump up. The net of all
this, in light of marginal firms’ envelope condition, is just uninternalized externalities, which in
the present scenario are only hN ! tN per unit of output by unregulated firms while for regulated
firms per-unit harm is still hR.) This conclusion runs against conventional wisdom that tends to
view the jumping down induced by exemptions as detrimental: If indeed that were always so,
then the jumping (back) up caused by raising the tax on unregulated output would always be
beneficial, but we can see that this need not be so. To complete our discussion of Proposition
4(b), note that, even when tN = 0, it is possible that jumping down can be sufficiently beneficial
that no tax on unregulated output is desirable (indeed, if allowed, a marginal subsidy could be
optimal); for details, see the appendix. The analysis underlying Proposition 4(c) is also in the
appendix. In brief, it concerns a qualitatively different two-region case characterized by a
“missing middle” in which no firms cluster at the exemption level: As one raises tN, γNE falls
because firms’ aggregate marginal cost of producing unregulated output rises, and γRE rises
because jumping down to be unregulated becomes less attractive; if these boundary types meet
and cross, which is possible, no firms produce qE.
Consider next how the introduction of a tax on unregulated output, tN, changes the
optimal exemption from regulation, qE. First, examine the two-region scenario in which there is
an exemption that is low enough to bind on some firms (forcing them to reduce output) but not
so low as to induce any firms to produce output above the exempt level and thereby subject
themselves to regulation. The result in Proposition 3(a) is that such a regime dominates no
regulation and can be optimal overall. Once we introduce a tax on exempt output, however, the
latter is no longer true. The advantage of a regulation whose only effect is to induce some firms
to reduce (unregulated) output was to diminish the uninternalized externality, hN. Proposition
4(a) now informs us that, when a tax on unregulated output is introduced into such a regime, it is
optimal to set tN = hN. Once that is done, there is no longer any uninternalized externality, which
implies that, conditional on not being subject to regulation, firms’ quantities are chosen
optimally. Hence, it is not desirable to impose regulation with an exemption, qE, whose only
effect is to suppress quantity. A pure output tax — which is what a tax on all unregulated output
in a world with a nonbinding exemption amounts to — would be superior.
Corollary 1: When it is possible to impose a tax on unregulated output, it cannot be optimal to
employ regulation with a binding exemption under which no firms produce output above the
exempt level (subjecting themselves to regulation). Such a regime is dominated by one with
tN = hN and a nonbinding exemption (qE $ qN(γE)), which is tantamount to no regulation
combined with a pure output tax.
To further assess how the availability of a tax on unregulated output affects the optimal
exemption level, let us reexamine the intermediate, three-region scenario. To begin, it is clear
that such an intermediate scheme may well be optimal despite the introduction of this tax
instrument. Consider the case in which k, K, and hR are each close to zero: that is, in which
- 16 -

regulation eliminates virtually all harm at negligible cost. Obviously, regulation (with a binding
exemption) will be optimal.30
How does introduction of a tax on unregulated output — and, in particular, one set
optimally (which, recall, involves tN < hN in this scenario) — affect qE, the optimal exemption
level? If we restate the pertinent derivative (expression 3) for this case, the only nominal change
is that the first bracketed term substitutes hN ! tN for hN, as just explained. This modification
favors a higher qE. The intuition is that, without taxation, raising qE caused firms to jump down
to the exempt level of output, and this had a cost, the magnitude of which was given by the
exempt output times the level of external harm per unit of such output; this latter component is
now reduced to the uninternalized portion of that harm. Nevertheless, the impact of the tax on
the optimal exemption is ambiguous because there are many other effects as well: Because a
positive tax implies a higher initial level of γRE, as explained above, qR(γRE) is lower (the
marginal firm is a less efficient one), so the social gain when marginal firms jump down to qE
that is attributable to the reduction in the externality on their regulated output is smaller. In
addition, the density is evaluated at a different γRE, the expression for and value of dγRE/dqE
change, and both limits of integration for the second (ambiguous) term in expression (3) change
(they move closer together, as mentioned). Accordingly, it is not possible to offer a sharp
characterization of how the introduction of a tax on unregulated output affects the optimal
exemption level in this scenario.
4.2. Taxation of Regulated Output
Suppose now that, instead of taxation of unregulated output, regulation with an
exemption can be supplemented by (only) a tax, tR, on regulated output, that is, on all output of
firms that are subject to regulation. A natural rationale is that, with regard to firms already
subject to regulation, it may be particularly inexpensive to impose such a tax. In any event, for
present purposes, it will be assumed that there are no government administrative or firm
compliance costs associated with introducing this instrument and that tax payments are pure
transfers. In other respects as well, the model is unchanged.
The analysis appears in the appendix. The main results are:
Proposition 5, on Optimal Taxation of Regulated Output (for a given exemption level, qE):
a.
It is possible to have an optimum with γRE # γE, that is, with no firms producing
output in excess of qE and thus subjecting themselves to regulation. In that case,
the optimum has tR sufficiently high to induce this result, but the particular level
of tR is inconsequential.
b.
It is possible to have an optimum with γRE > γE, that is, with a mass of efficient
firms producing output in excess of qE. In that case, when qE > 0, the optimum
has tR 0 [0, hR), and a necessary condition for the optimal tax (if it is interior) is
that expression (A15) equals zero. That is, the optimal tax on regulated output
does not fully internalize the externality, and this optimal tax might equal zero.
c.
If qE = 0, the optimum has tR = hR.

30

Furthermore, it is possible that social welfare is rising as we increase qE from zero: recall the discussion of
expression (5) and note that the fact that unregulated output is now subject to a positive tax is immaterial.

- 17 -

The intuition behind the optimal levels for tR are straightforward with regard to Propositions 5(a)
and 5(c). For Proposition 5(b), the reasoning is analogous to that for Proposition 4(b). The
difference is that, in the present case, in which we tax only regulated output (rather than only
unregulated output), the incentive for firms to jump down is more readily too large rather than
too small. Again, this pushes against full internalization, and if this force is sufficiently strong, it
may be optimal to set tR = 0.
Next, examine how the introduction of a tax on regulated output, tR, changes the optimal
exemption from regulation, qE. If, without such a tax, the optimal qE is such that there are only
two regions — that is, no firms produce regulated output — then a positive tax on regulated
output is of no consequence.31 It is possible that the availability of such a tax, by improving
welfare in the three-region scenario, would make the highest achievable welfare in that setting
surpass the maximum achievable welfare when there are only two regions, in which event the
previous global optimum would no longer be the global optimum. But that global optimum also
may remain so.32
Consider next how the optimal qE is affected supposing that we are and remain in the
three-region scenario. The most straightforward consequence of the tax on regulated output is to
reduce the element of social gain from a higher qE that arises due to the fact that firms jumping
down no longer produce regulated output. From the analysis just above and that in subsection
4.1 pertaining to unregulated output, we know that this component now reflects only the
uninternalized external harm per unit of regulated output, hR ! tR, and not the full hR. But, just as
when we were considering the analogous question in subsection 4.1, introducing tR will also
change γRE, g(γRE), qR(γRE), and dγRE/dqE, so no sharp characterization can be offered.
Finally, observe that the case mentioned in Proposition 5(c) is one that may involve an
optimal scheme. It was already recalled that qE = 0 can be optimal in the absence of taxation on
regulated output. When such a tax is positive, the welfare effect of raising the exemption from
zero (see expression 5) changes in a number of ways. Most directly, hR is replaced by hR ! tR:
there is a smaller benefit of raising qE from zero because the welfare gain from marginal firms
that jump down, due to their no longer producing harmful regulated output, is diminished. Of
course, as noted just above, the other terms change as well, so the effect could be in either
direction. Nevertheless, as explained when discussing expression (5), since hN can be arbitrarily
large, the optimal exemption can be zero even when regulatory compliance costs are high. In
sum, it remains possible that qE = 0 is optimal even when there is available a tax on regulated
output, and, as already stated, in that event this tax should fully internalize the externality. What
we have, in essence, is a regime of simple regulation (no exemption) plus a pure output tax (here,
all output is regulated output).
Corollary 2: When it is possible to impose a tax on regulated output, it can be optimal to employ

31

Note, however, that a positive tax, by rendering regulated operation less profitable, makes it feasible to
reduce q further (than with a zero tax) without inducing any firms to jump up and become regulated (transforming
the two-region case to the three-region case).
32
Consider the case in which hR is near zero, in which case a tax on regulated output can do little to raise
welfare; regulation is extremely expensive and output is very valuable, making a substantial exemption optimal; but,
as shown in Proposition 3(a), we nevertheless want the exemption to have some binding force (but parameters are
such that not much force is optimal because hN is also low).
E

- 18 -

regulation with no exemption (qE = 0), and in such a case the optimal tax fully internalizes the
externality (tR = hR). This regime is equivalent to simple regulation (no exemption) combined
with a pure output tax.
4.3. Taxation of Exempt and Regulated Output, at Different Rates
Finally, suppose that we have a regulation, an exemption, qE, and also two tax
instruments: a tax on unregulated output, tN, and a tax on regulated output, tR.33 As one would
expect, it is now possible to implement the first-best allocation.34 The appendix derives the
following results:
Proposition 6, on Optimal Regulation with Differential Taxation of Regulated and Unregulated
Output:
a.
The optimal taxes on regulated and unregulated output fully internalize the
externality produced by such output: tR = hR and tN = hN.
b.
When the taxes on regulated and unregulated output are both (optimally) set as in
(a), optimal regulation is voluntary: that is, firms may freely choose whether to be
subject to regulation.
c.
The optimal scheme implements the first best: that is, the choice of technology
(production with or without regulation) and the level of output (given that choice)
are the same as what would be selected by a social-welfare-maximizing planner
who could observe each firm’s type and command all aspects of its behavior.
d.
Under the optimal scheme, it is possible that both regulated and unregulated
firms will operate, that all operating firms will be regulated, that all operating
firms will be unregulated, and that no firms will operate.
e.
Under the optimal scheme, if both regulated and unregulated firms are in
operation, there is a range of output, (qN(γ*), qR(γ*)], that no firm chooses to
produce, where γ* is the firm type that is just indifferent as to whether to be
regulated. All firms producing more output — firms with γ 0 [γE, γ*) — are
regulated; all firms producing less — firms with γ 0 [γ*, γN) — are unregulated.
f.
When the optimal scheme involves both regulated and unregulated firms in
operation, if a mandatory regime with an exemption, qE, is employed — meaning
that a firm of type γ that wishes to produce qR(γ) # qE may not voluntarily subject
itself to regulation and one that wishes to produce qN(γ) > qE cannot opt out of

33

An omitted case combines regulation, an exemption, and the pure output tax from subsection 2.2: a
common tax t on all output. Not surprisingly, when one solves this case, behavior and welfare effects are essentially
a combination of those with only tN and only tR. The presence of the tax has an ambiguous effect on the optimal qE,
and the optimal t can only be shown to lie in the interval [0, hN) for the case with three regions. A uniform output
tax may have appeal on administrative grounds if goods are already taxed for purposes of raising revenue, such as
under a VAT, and different rates can be applied at only modest additional administrative cost. Note further that, if
this is so and it is also true that there would be little cost to imposing an output tax or subsidy on firms that are
regulated in any event, then the combination of these two tax instruments allows for unrestricted differential taxation
of the sort examined in this section.
34
Under the interpretation of the model in which k and K include government administrative costs that arise
due to efforts to observe firms and enforce compliance, one would not characterize the result as first best in the
traditional sense, but the analysis that follows is otherwise unaffected by such matters of interpretation.

- 19 -

regulation — then the optimal exemption qE must be (anywhere) in (or at the
lower boundary of) the interval (qN(γ*), qR(γ*)] in which no firms would
voluntarily choose to produce.
5. Conclusion
This article analyzes a commonplace but neglected feature of regulation — the use of
exemptions — taking into account that both regulated and unregulated output involve external
harm, which makes the effects of regulation and exemptions on all firms’ output a first-order
concern. The core examines the optimal level of regulatory exemptions when there is no output
taxation, which is typical in practice. Regulation with an exemption can dominate no regulation
and may be optimal (compared to other exemption levels) even if no firm produces regulated
output, because of the scheme’s effect on output. The optimal exemption can equal zero
regardless of the magnitude of the fixed and marginal costs of regulatory compliance.
Characterization of an optimal exemption that is intermediate involves two complications. First,
firms jumping down to become exempt, as the exemption is increased, may raise or lower social
welfare: they produce output that is more harmful per unit but lower in quantity, and, recall,
regulated output is also harmful. Second, quantity increases by less efficient types of firms
clustered at the now-higher exemption reduce welfare, but quantity increases by more efficient
types clustered at the now-higher exemption may raise welfare. In this setting, higher fixed or
marginal costs of regulatory compliance have an ambiguous effect on the optimal exemption
level. Due to an envelope condition, compliance costs do not even appear directly in the
pertinent first-order condition; that is, they have no mechanical effect on the optimal exemption.
Although this article focuses on regulation as typically practiced — command-andcontrol regulation, with exemptions — the analysis is extended to include output taxation as
well. Allowing a tax on (only) exempt output need not raise welfare, and, in a range of settings,
the optimal tax on exempt output is below the level of external harm caused by such output.
Results are similar for a tax on (only) regulated output. In some settings, adjusting one of these
taxes induces inefficient jumping down (to exemption), but in others it induces inefficient
jumping up (to regulation). By contrast, when both exempt and regulated output can be taxed,
and at different rates, setting each tax equal to the corresponding external harm implements the
first best, as one would expect.
Much conventional thinking about regulation as actually practiced, including about the
use of exemptions, is incomplete. The present investigation raises serious questions about
standard cost-benefit analysis that implicitly takes firms’ outputs, including decisions whether to
operate at all, as given. There exists a large gulf between the optimal character of the sort of
regulation generally in use and the dictates a pure mechanism design approach.

- 20 -

References
David P. Baron, Regulation of Prices and Pollution under Incomplete Abatement, Journal of
Public Economics 28: 211–31 (1985).
__________, Design of Regulatory Mechanisms and Institutions, in Richard Schmalensee and
Robert D. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 2 (1989): North-Holland,
Amsterdam.
__________ and Roger B. Myerson, Regulating a Monopolist with Unknown Costs,
Econometrica 50: 911–30 (1982).
Randy Becker and Vernon Henderson, Effects of Air Quality Regulations on Polluting
Industries, Journal of Political Economy 108: 379–421 (2000).
__________, Carl Pasurka Jr., and Ronald J. Shadbegian, Do Environmental Regulations
Disproportionately Affect Small Businesses? Evidence from the Pollution Abatement Costs
and Expenditures Survey, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66: 523–38
(2013).
C. Stephen Bradford, Does Size Matter? An Economic Analysis of Small Business Exemptions
from Regulation, Journal of Small & Emerging Business Law 8: 1–37 (2004).
Serguey Braguinsky, Lee G. Branstetter, and Andre Regateiro, The Incredible Shrinking
Portuguese Firm, NBER Working Paper No. 17265 (2011).
William A. Brock and David S. Evans, The Economics of Regulatory Tiering, Rand Journal of
Economics 16: 398–409 (1985).
__________ and __________, The Economics of Small Businesses: Their Role and Regulation in
the U.S. Economy (1986): Holmes & Meier, New York.
Charles Brown, James Hamilton, and James Medoff, Employers Large and Small (1990):
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Vidar Christiansen and Stephen Smith, Externality-Correcting Taxes and Regulation,
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 114: 358–83 (2012).
W. Mark Crain, The Impact of Regulatory Costs on Small Firms (2005): SBA Office of
Advocacy.
Partha Dasgupta, Peter Hammond, and Eric Maskin, On Imperfect Information and Optimal
Pollution Control, Review of Economic Studies 47: 857–60 (1980).
R. Mithu Dey and Mary W. Sullivan, Was Dodd-Frank Justified in Granting Internal Control
Audit Exemption to Small Firms?, Managerial Accounting Journal 27: 666–92 (2012).
Dhammika Dharmapala, Joel Slemrod, and John Douglas Wilson, Tax Policy and the Missing
Middle: Optimal Tax Remittance with Firm-level Administrative Costs, Journal of Public
Economics 95: 1036–47 (2011).
Gunnar S. Eskeland, A Presumptive Pigouvian Tax: Complementing Regulation to Mimic an
Emissions Fee, World Bank Economic Review 8: 373–94 (1994).
Feng Gao, Joanna Shuang Wu, and Jerold Zimmerman, Unintended Consequences of Granting
Small Firms Exemptions from Securities Regulations: Evidence from the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act, Journal of Accounting Research 47: 459–506 (2009).
Luis Garicano, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen, Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity
Distribution: Evidence from France, American Economic Review 106: 3439–3479 (2016).
Edward L. Glaeser and Andrei Shleifer, A Reason for Quantity Regulation, AEA Papers and
Proceedings 91(2): 431–35 (2001).
__________ and __________, The Rise of the Regulatory State, Journal of Economic Literature

- 21 -

41: 401–25 (2003).
François Gourio and Nicholas A. Roys, Size-Dependent Regulations, Firm Size Distribution, and
Reallocation, Quantitative Economics 5: 377–416 (2014).
Jonathan Gruber and Botond Köszegi, Is Addiction “Rational?” Theory and Evidence, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116: 1261–1303 (2001).
Nezih Guner, Gustavo Ventura, and Yi Xu, Macroeconomic Implications of Size-Dependent
Policies, Review of Economic Dynamics 11: 721–44 (2008).
Anthony D. Holder, Khondkar E. Karim, and Ashok Robin, Was Dodd-Frank Justified in
Exempting Small Firms from Section 404b Compliance?, Accounting Horizons 27: 1–22
(2013).
Hugo A. Hopenhayn, Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium, Econometrica
60: 1127–50 (1992).
Erik Hurst and Benjamin Wild Pugsley, What Do Small Businesses Do?, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 73–118 (Fall 2011).
IMF Staff, Taxation of Small and Medium Enterprises, Background Paper for the International
Tax Dialogue Conference (October 2007).
Liangliang Jiang, Chen Lin, and Ping Lin, The Determinants of Pollution Levels: Firm-Level
Evidence from Chinese Manufacturing, Journal of Comparative Economics 42: 118–42
(2014).
Michael Keen and Jack Mintz, The Optimal Threshold for a Value-added Tax, Journal of Public
Economics 88: 559–76 (2004).
Jean-Jacques Laffont, Regulation of Pollution with Asymmetric Information, in Cesare Dosi and
Theodore Tomasi, eds., Nonpoint Source Pollution Regulation: Issues and Analysis (1994):
Kluwer, Dordrecht.
__________ and Jean Tirole, A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation (1993):
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Robert E. Lucas, Jr., On the Size Distribution of Firms, Bell Journal of Economics 9: 508–23
(1978).
Marc J. Melitz, The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity, Econometrica 71: 1695–1725 (2003).
Juan-Pablo Montero, Pollution Markets with Imperfectly Observed Emissions, Rand Journal of
Economics 36: 645–60 (2005).
Richard J. Pierce, Jr., Small Is Not Beautiful: The Case Against Special Regulatory Treatment of
Small Firms, Administrative Law Review 50: 537–78 (1998).
Charles R. Plott, Externalities and Corrective Taxes, Economica 33: 84–87 (1966).
A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, Pigouvian Taxation with Administrative Costs,
Journal of Public Economics 19: 385–94 (1982).
__________ and __________, Enforcement Costs and the Optimal Magnitude and Probability of
Fines, Journal of Law and Economics 35: 133-48 (1992).
Al J. Ringleb and Steven N. Wiggins, Liability and Large-Scale, Long-Term Hazards, Journal of
Political Economy 98: 574–95 (1990).
Steven Shavell, The Optimal Structure of Law Enforcement, Journal of Law and Economics 36:
255–87 (1993).
Andrei Shleifer, The Failure of Judges and the Rise of Regulators (2012): MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Lori D. Snyder, Nolan H. Miller, and Robert N. Stavins, The Effects of Environmental
- 22 -

Regulation on Technology Diffusion: The Case of Chlorine Manufacturing, AEA Papers and
Proceedings 93(2): 431–35 (2003).
Daniel F. Spulber, Effluent Regulation and Long-Run Optimality, Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 12: 103–16 (1985).
Kate S. Whitefoot and Steven J. Skerlos, Design Incentives to Increase Vehicle Size Created
from the U.S. Footprint-based Fuel Economy Standards, Energy Policy 21: 402–11 (2012).
Appendix
No Regulation: With no regulation, a firm of type γ chooses qN(γ) to maximize profits:

( A1)  N (q N ( ),  )  pq N ( )  c(q N ( )).
The first-order condition for an interior solution, if one exists, is simply

( A2) c (q N ( ))  p,
which, if we differentiate with respect to γ and rearrange terms, indicates that

dq N ( )
c (q N ( ))
( A3)

 0.
d
c (q N ( ))
As we would expect, the unregulated profit-maximizing quantity is falling in γ. Moreover, it is
apparent that there will exist some γ, denoted γN, such that qN(γN) = 0. (From expression (A2),
γN = p/cN(0).) Firms with γ $γN will not produce in the regime with no regulation.
Social welfare in this regime is given by


( A4) W N 

N

  pq

N



( )  c(q N ( ))  h N q N ( ) g ( )d .



That is, firms that produce, those with γ 0 [γE, γN), generate benefits from their output (here, just
the price times quantity), production costs (the net of these first two terms constituting firms’
profits), and external harm.
Regulation: In the regime with regulation, a firm of type γ chooses qR(γ) to maximize profits:

( A5)  R (q R ( ),  )  pq R ( )  c(q R ( ))  K  kq R ( ).
The first-order condition is

( A6) c (q R ( ))  p  k .
This first-order condition indicates a firm’s optimal choice of qR(γ) taking as given that it
chooses to operate. Because we now have the fixed cost K, expression (A6) is a necessary but
not sufficient condition for qR(γ) > 0 to maximize profits. To explore this, we can again
differentiate the first-order condition with respect to γ and rearrange terms to learn (essentially as
before) that

dq R ( )
c  (q R ( ))
( A7)

 0.
d
c (q R ( ))
The regulated quantity — again, conditional on a firm’s producing positive output — is falling in
γ (and, for a given quantity, at the same rate as without regulation). Furthermore, for
- 23 -

γ = (p!k)/cN(0), we know that the optimal quantity, given operation, is zero. For γ that is only
slightly lower (for a type of firm only infinitesimally more efficient), the optimal quantity
conditional on operation barely exceeds zero, so revenue minus variable costs (production costs
and marginal regulatory compliance costs) will be barely positive and therefore insufficient to
exceed the fixed compliance cost K. Hence, the γR below which firms earn positive profits with
regulation is strictly less than (p!k)/cN(0) (which in turn is strictly below γN). Assume that γE is
sufficiently low and that K is not too large such that γE < γR, i.e., that some firms produce in the
presence of regulation (see note 12).
Social welfare in the regime with regulation is given by


( A8) W R 

R

  pq

R



( )  c(q R ( ))  K  kq R ( )  h R q R ( ) g ( )d .



This expression differs from expression (A4) in a number of respects: Firms that produce are
now those with γ 0 [γE, γR), which is a narrower interval. For firms that do produce, costs are
higher due to the additional costs (fixed and marginal) imposed by regulatory compliance.
Finally, for output that is produced, harm per unit, now hR, is lower.
Regulation versus No Regulation: Regulation is optimal if and only if the value of WR given by
expression (A8) exceeds the value of WN given by expression (A4). Subtracting expression (A4)
from expression (A8) yields expression (1) in the text. The first integral in (1) indicates the
social welfare loss (which can be negative, i.e., a gain) from firms that no longer operate on
account of regulation. The first two terms in the integrand, revenue minus production costs, are
what their profits would have been (see expression A1) and hence are positive, indicating a
welfare loss to that extent. However, these firms also no longer generate the external harm, hNqN.
Clearly, if hN is sufficiently large, the first integral is negative, so the aggregate effect on social
welfare on account of induced exit is positive. (Indeed, hN could be large enough that even the
most efficient firms in this range, those of type γR, generate more harm than good.) The second
integral indicates the effects of regulation on firms that operate under both regimes. The first
line of the integrand shows the revenue difference and the production cost difference on account
of output reduction (recall that qR(γ) < qN(γ) due to the marginal regulatory compliance cost k).
For each type of firm in this range, revenue and costs fall, but we know that the net effect on
social welfare must be negative because the additional production by the unregulated firms is
profitable in that regime. The next line of the integrand shows, to begin, the additional welfare
loss on account of the cost of regulatory compliance. Not surprisingly, looking just at the effects
of regulation on output and costs, regulation reduces welfare. Finally, we have the difference in
external harm. Regulation reduces this cost, for each firm type, for two reasons: hR < hN, i.e.,
harm per unit of output is lower; and qR(γ) < qN(γ), i.e., output is also lower.
Pure Output Taxation: Suppose now that the government has available an alternative instrument,
a linear output tax t. At present, we will only compare an output tax to a regime with no
regulation and to a regime with regulation; regimes that mix taxes and regulation (a central focus
of this article) are analyzed in section 4. Because output is taken to be observable, such an
instrument is natural to consider. To facilitate a brief analysis, assume that there are no
government administrative or firm compliance costs associated with the tax and that the shadow
value of government revenue is one (so that the transfer of revenue in itself is socially neutral).

- 24 -

Because the analysis of such a regime is simple and familiar, a sketch will suffice. First,
let us compare a regime with no regulation. Firms’ profits differ from expression (A1) because
we now must also subtract tqT(γ) (each appearance of q now bears the superscript T). The firm’s
first-order condition, corresponding to expression (A2), has p ! t on the right side instead of just
p. (Comparing this condition to (A6) reinforces the prior statement that the marginal cost of
regulatory compliance, k, acts like an output tax with regard to regulated firms’ output choices.)
Firms’ optimal choices of qT(γ) vary with γ as before (expression A3). Finally, the expression
for social welfare (A4) is unchanged except that the upper limit of integration is γT (the type
whose first-order condition implies a quantity of zero) and the quantities are qT(γ):
T

( A9) W T 

  pq

T



( )  c(q T ( ))  h N q T ( ) g ( )d .



Note that the external harm per unit of output remains hN, as in the case with no regulation, a
point that will be significant when we compare this output tax to regulation. As mentioned,
maximizing WT obviously involves setting t = hN. Firms induced to exit are unable to produce
any quantity that has a social marginal cost less than price.
Comparison of the optimal output tax regime to the regime with regulation (and, as
mentioned, no taxation) is, as mentioned in the text, more involved because either γR or γT could
be larger: that is, the efficiency of the firm just indifferent to operation could be higher under
either regime. The reason is that regulation, on one hand, imposes the marginal cost k and the
fixed cost K, both of which reduce γR below γN, whereas the output tax imposes what is
effectively a marginal cost of t. Now, if t # k, the output tax is less costly to firms, so we will
have γT > γR. (This inequality is strict, even when t = k, due to the fixed cost K.) But if t exceeds
k by a sufficient amount, then γT < γR. The expressions for the social welfare comparison differ
qualitatively in these two cases and thus must be stated separately (even though in both instances
we are subtracting expression A9 from expression A8).
Begin with γT > γR, that is, when there are low-productivity firms that operate under the
(here taken to be optimal) output tax but not under regulation. Welfare is higher under
regulation if and only if
T

( A10) 



  pq



R



R

T

  pq






( )  c(q T ( ))  h N q T ( ) g ( )d

R

 

( )  q T ( )   c(q R ( ))  c(q T ( ))





 

 K  kq R ( )  h N q T ( )  h R q R ( ) g ( )d  0.
The interpretation is similar to that offered for expression (1), comparing social welfare under
regulation with that under no regulation. Nevertheless, the differences are substantial even
though the expressions seem nearly identical.
The integrand in the first integral indicates, for each type of firm that operates under
taxation but not regulation, its net contribution to social welfare. Because we have an output tax
t and, moreover, it is set optimally, equal to hN, this integrand is necessarily positive (except at

- 25 -

the upper limit of integration, where it equals zero). This integral is preceded by a negative sign,
so we know that, in this scenario (in which γT > γR), regulation (rather than output taxation)
reduces welfare on account of inducing the exit of firms that contributed more to welfare from
their production than they reduced it on account of external harm (which is fully internalized).
For the second integral, consider initially all the terms in the integrand except those
relating to external harm. At the upper limit of integration, we compare a regulated firm that
earns zero profits (accounting for all costs, including those of regulatory compliance) to a taxed
firm that has positive profits. However, as we consider more efficient firms (lower γ’s), the
comparison is trickier. If t # k (recall, a sufficient condition to be in this scenario), then a taxed
firm with any γ in the range of integration has greater profits than a regulated firm of that type.
But if t > k, this could reverse: i.e., sufficiently efficient (low γ) firms may be more profitable
under regulation than under taxation.
Similar considerations influence our interpretation of the difference in external harm (the
final terms). As when comparing regulation to no regulation, harm per unit of output is lower
under regulation than under output taxation. Keep in mind that, although output taxation induces
optimal output for each type of firm given the technology it employs, it does not reduce harm per
unit of output, which regulation does. These final terms do not, however, unambiguously favor
regulation because (in contrast to the comparison between regulation and no regulation) output
could be higher under regulation or under output taxation: the former will prevail if and only if
k < t, but, since t is set optimally, this arises when k < hN. (All things considered, there is a
tradeoff here: when output is indeed higher under regulation, external harm is higher in this
respect, but it is also true that harm per unit of output is lower and profits tend to be higher,
which raises welfare on account of the other terms in this second integral.)
Let us now more briefly consider the other scenario: γT < γR. Welfare is higher under
regulation if and only if


( A11)

R

  pq

R



( )  c(q R ( ))  K  kq R ( )  h R q R ( ) g ( )d

T

T



  pq




R

 

( )  q T ( )   c(q R ( ))  c(q T ( ))





 

 K  kq R ( )  h N q T ( )  h R q R ( ) g ( )d  0.
The formal differences between expressions (A11) and (A10) are that, regarding the first term,
we now have a social welfare difference on account of firms that operate under regulation but
not under output taxation (rather than vice versa). Other differences relate to the limits of
integration, also reflecting the reversed inequality.
The first integral has ambiguous sign. As with no regulation, at the upper limit (here, γR),
the integrand is negative, reflecting that the external harm that is nevertheless produced by
regulated firms, hR, is not internalized. (Indeed, not at all, despite the output-tax-like effect of
the marginal compliance cost, k: the positive k does indeed reduce output, but k is a real resource
cost, so the fact of firms bearing it directly does not indicate that any of hR is internalized.) For
more efficient firms (lower γ, approaching γT), the integrand could become positive, but it need
not.
- 26 -

The integrand of the second term in expression (A11) is identical to that in the
corresponding term in expression (A10), but the interpretation differs because we are now in the
scenario in which γT < γR. As explained previously, this condition requires that t exceed k by a
nontrivial amount (in light of the fixed cost K). As a consequence, we know that, for all firm
types γ in the range for this integral, profits (even accounting for regulatory compliance costs)
are higher under regulation than under output taxation. (At the upper limit of integration, profits
are zero under taxation and positive under regulation, and k < t implies that profits rise faster
under regulation than under taxation as γ falls.35) Hence, the combination of all terms but those
pertaining to external harm is positive. Regarding external harm, however, even though (as
always) harm per unit of output is lower under regulation, we now have unambiguously higher
output under regulation, making the overall external harm effect ambiguous.
For reasons similar to those adduced under the first scenario, it is again possible that
either regulation or output taxation could be superior. Note that, on one hand, the necessary
condition for this second scenario — that t (taken to be set optimally) exceeds k by a sufficient
amount — guarantees that hN is not negligible relative to the cost of regulation. Considering
cases in which regulation is extremely cheap and highly effective, whereas output taxation
merely moderates output (to an optimal extent, given the technology used in the absence of
regulation), regulation will be superior when hN is large. Note also, however, that the condition
that k be small relative to t and thus to hN is of only moderate consolation when Δh is small
relative to k, because the regulation is both inefficient with regard to output that is produced and
also output is reduced less under regulation than under output taxation (where, moreover, the
reduction under the latter is optimal in light of the magnitude of harm).
Taxation of Exempt Output: For firms whose output levels render them exempt, their first-order
condition will be as in expression (A2) for unregulated firms, except that they now equate their
marginal cost, γcN(qN(γ)), to p ! tN, so their ideal output if unregulated, qN(γ), is lower when
tN > 0. In addition, the boundaries between the regions, γNE and γRE, change. (For now, we are
confining attention to the scenario with three nontrivial regions. Moreover, we are taking qE as
given.) The value of γNE falls as tN rises: because qN(γ) falls, the type of firm that maximizes
profits if not subject to regulation (but subject to tN) at an output of qE will be one that is more
efficient. In contrast, the value of γRE increases as tN rises: a higher tax makes jumping down to
qE less attractive because profits at qE fall by tNqE and profits at qR(γ) (which exceeds qE at γRE)
are unaffected. As a consequence, raising tN causes firms that were at the left end of the middle
region (those clustered at qE) to jump up and become regulated, implying that γRE is higher,
which is to say that the firm just indifferent to becoming regulated will be one with lower
regulated profits and thus one that is less efficient.
When there are three nontrivial regions, expression (2) continues to state social welfare,
the only differences being, as just stated, that qN(γ), which appears in the third integrand, is
lower, and the limits of integration, γNE and γRE, change. Accordingly, we can write

35

Quantity rises at the same rate for a given decrease in γ under both regimes (the modified expression (A3)
for the output tax regime is the same as the original expression (A3), which in turn is the same as expression (A7)
under regulation).

- 27 -

N



d W R / E ,t ( q E , t N )
( A12)
  h R q R (
N
dt





RE



) h t
N

N

( ))  h

N

N

  p  c (q

N

NE

q g(
E



RE

d RE
) N
dt

dq N ( )
g ( )d ,
dt N

where

d RE
qE
( A13)

,
dt N
c(q R ( RE ))  c(q E )
and

dq N ( )
1
( A14)

.
N
c (q N ( ))
dt
As when deriving expression (3), mechanically taking the appropriate derivative of expression
(2) generates mostly terms that cancel, reflecting firms’ profit-maximization decisions.
These expressions can readily be understood in terms of the aforementioned effects of
raising tN. The only integrand in expression (2) that changes is the third, and it falls due to the
output reduction for unconstrained, unregulated firms; this is reflected in the second line of
expression (A12), with the output reduction given by expression (A14).
The reduction in γNE has no effect on social welfare for the essentially same reason given
previously. Because the pertinent marginal type produces qE initially, and the second and third
integrands in expression (2) have the same value when the third integrand is evaluated at qE,
there is no welfare consequence of changing the boundary between these regions.
Finally, we have the increase in γRE, reflected in the first line of expression (A12), with
the magnitude of this increase indicated by expression (A13). These marginal firms raise their
quantity to qR(γRE) as they jump up, into the regulated regime, now causing harm per unit of
output of hR. There is also a social gain because they no longer cause harm per unit of output of
hN on their former output of qE. Note, however, that in contrast to the analysis in section 3 of the
pure exemption regime, we now have a social welfare effect per unit of unregulated output of
only hN ! tN instead of hN. The reason for this reduction is that, as explained earlier, only
externalized consequences enter this expression; any social welfare effects borne by the firm are
included in the indifference condition that defines the marginal type γRE. Put more directly, this
type of firm’s profits when operating at the higher, regulated level of output (revenue minus
production costs minus all regulatory costs) just equal its profits when operating at qE, and the
latter are no longer just revenue minus production costs because now one must also subtract the
output tax it pays. By comparison to the calculus for social welfare, the former omits hRqR(γRE)
entirely, whereas the latter omits only (hN ! tN)qE.
Having explained expression (A12) for the change in social welfare with respect to the
tax on unregulated output, tN, let us now consider what it tells us about the optimal level of this
tax. Begin by examining the second line. The bracketed term in the integrand is negative as
long as tN < hN. This result reflects profit-maximization: as mentioned, firms equate marginal
cost, γcN(qN(γ)), to p ! tN, so the integrand is below marginal profits (which equal zero) by
hN ! tN. Because dqN(γ)/dtN < 0, the second term as a whole is positive when tN < hN, reflecting
that raising tN serves to further internalize an externality. Turning to the first term, we have in
brackets, just as in section 3, opposing effects, although when we reach the point at which

- 28 -

tN = hN, this first term is unambiguously negative. (In this regard, note from expression (A13)
that, as explained previously, dγRE/dtN > 0.) Hence, if this scenario continues to be applicable (on
which more in a moment), the optimum necessarily has tN < hN.
Consider next whether social welfare rises with tN if we start at tN = 0 (and we continue to
assume that there are three regions, so that expression (2) correctly states social welfare).
Although the second term in expression (A12) is positive in this case, the first term is
ambiguous. Furthermore, it need not be true that at least some internalization raises social
welfare for essentially the reason just given: raising tN causes some firms to jump up, and this
effect could dominate (detrimentally) if hR is sufficiently large (even supposing that it does not
exceed hN), qR(γRE) is large relative to qE, and the density of firm types is such that many firms
would jump up relative to the mass in the rightmost region, (γNE, γN), with relatively inefficient
firms.36
Let us now relax the assumption that there are three operative regions. Specifically,
consider the case, explored in section 3, where qE binds on the most efficient firms, but it is not
low enough that any of them choose to produce higher, regulated output. In that case, the first
term in expression (2) for social welfare vanishes, and the lower limit of integration in the
second term becomes γE rather than γRE. In this scenario, it is apparent that the optimal level of
the tax on unregulated output is tN = hN. For firms choosing quantities below qE, whose quantity
choices are affected by the tax, we wish to fully internalize the externality. Those producing qE
are unaffected in any event. And, finally, because there is no region of firms producing output
above qE and thus subjecting themselves to regulation, we no longer have the jumping-up effect
that, as explained, pushes against this result.
All of the foregoing analysis implicitly assumes that changing tN does not affect which of
these two scenarios applies. As explained in section 3, the applicable scenario depends on the
relationship between γRE and γE: if the former is smaller, we have only two regions, but if it is
larger, we have three. Therefore, if we begin with three regions when tN = 0, we will continue to
have three regions because raising tN increases γRE. See expression (A13) and recall the prior
explanation. However, it is possible that we would have only two regions when tN = 0 but would
switch to three regions as tN is increased. (Consider the case in which, initially, γRE is barely
below γE.) When there are (and will continue to be) two regions, we wish to raise tN all the way
to hN, but when there are three regions, we wish to stop short of hN. Thus, if two regions become
three before tN reaches hN, the optimal tN might be characterized by expression (A12) equaling
zero (and there being three regions), but it is also possible that welfare would be falling with tN
once the third region emerges, so the optimal tN would be such that we are at the boundary
between these two scenarios, in which case γRE = γE.
Finally, consider the possibility that the middle region vanishes. Before we introduced
output taxation on unregulated output, suppose that we had an intermediate region [γRE, γNE] in
which firms produce qE. However, as explained, as we increase tN, γRE rises and γNE falls,
presenting the question whether they ever meet. The answer is that they can.
It is helpful to begin exploring this set of cases by examining what turns out to be a
somewhat broader set of possibilities, those that arise when tN > k. Such cases are of interest
because technically efficient regulation requires at a minimum that k < Δh, and this in turn
implies (as a necessary condition) that k < hN. Now, since we are explicitly interested in raising

36

That this case is possible follows from the facts that all values are finite and no restrictions were placed on
g(γ), so that we can consider a case in which g(γRE) is arbitrarily large and g(γ) in the range (γNE, γN) is arbitrarily
small. Note further that the possibility that raising the tax rate from zero is welfare reducing implies that, had we not
constrained the tax to be nonnegative, a negative tax (an output subsidy) could be optimal.

- 29 -

tN until the point at which it equals hN, it follows that we need to understand settings in which
tN > k.
Backing up slightly, consider tN = k. It follows from firms’ profit-maximization decisions
that any type of firm γ would choose the same quantities, i.e., qR(γ) = qN(γ), if it decides to
operate under regulation and no regulation, respectively — ignoring for the moment the effect of
the exemption, qE. Because K > 0, however, all firms strictly prefer no regulation. Therefore,
once we reintroduce our exemption, we have γRE < γNE, resulting in our familiar three regions
(unless γRE < γE, in which case we have only the aforementioned two regions).
When tN > k, however, (unconstrained) profit-maximizing output is higher under
regulation, i.e., qR(γ) > qN(γ), for all γ, conditional on operating in the corresponding regimes. In
this case, for K sufficiently large, we still have γRE < γNE, and the analysis is as before. But if K is
in an intermediate range, that inequality fails and, at some critical γ, we have firms jumping
down from qR(γ) > qE to qN(γ) < qE.37 (More efficient firms, with lower γ, produce strictly more
than qE, and less efficient firms, with higher γ, produce strictly less than qE.) Finally, for K in a
lower range (including values arbitrarily close to zero), there will be some regulated firms with
γ’s such that qR(γ) < qE, yet they would earn more profits producing subject to regulation than
they would if they produce qN(γ) and are not regulated. In other words, they would prefer to
subject themselves to regulation. (And if they are not permitted to do so, and their γ is in the
relevant range but sufficiently low, they would produce slightly more than qE in order to be
subject to regulation.) Finally, note that the pertinent critical values for K that divide these
subcases will all be higher the greater the degree to which tN exceeds k, ceteris paribus. (Recall
that, when tN = k, any positive K is sufficient to maintain our original configuration.)
Taxation of Regulated Output: For firms whose output levels exceed qE, their first-order
condition will be as in expression (A6) for regulated firms, except that they now equate their
marginal cost, γcN(qR(γ)), to p ! k ! tR, so their ideal output if regulated, qR(γ), is lower when
tR > 0. In addition, the boundary between the upper and middle region, γRE, changes. (In contrast
to the previous case, γNE is unaffected because tR applies neither to firms producing qE nor to
those producing less.) We primarily confine attention to the scenario with three nontrivial
regions: when the upper region vanishes (which here will happen when tR is sufficiently high,
even if that region exists when tR = 0), changes in tR become moot; also, unlike when we were
analyzing tN, we need not be concerned with a vanishing middle region (tR combines with k to
raise the aggregate marginal cost of regulated output above that of unregulated output).
Moreover, we initially take qE as given.
The value of γRE falls as tR rises: the tax makes jumping down to qE more attractive
because profits at qR(γRE) (which exceeds qE) fall by tRqR(γRE) whereas profits at qE are unaffected.
As a consequence, raising tR causes firms that were at the right end of the left region to jump
down and become exempt, implying that γRE is lower, which is to say that the firm just
indifferent to becoming regulated will be one that is more efficient.
When there are three nontrivial regions, expression (2) continues to state social welfare,
the only differences being, as just stated, that qR(γ), which appears in the first integrand, is lower,
and the limits of integration that equal γRE change. Accordingly, we can write

37

In this case and the next, it is possible that the optimal unregulated output will be zero, which is to say that
the γ under consideration might not be less than γN.

- 30 -

R

d W R / E ,t ( q E , t R )
( A15)

dt R



RE

  p  c (q

R

( ))  k  h

R





 h t
R

R

q

R

(

RE



)h q
N

dq R ( )
g ( )d
dt R

E

g(

RE

 d RE 
) 
,
 dt R 

where

dq R ( )
1
( A16)


,
c (q R ( ))
dt R
and

 d RE 
q R ( RE )
( A17)  
.

 dt R  c(q R ( RE ))  c(q E )
The first term in expression (A15) indicates the welfare consequence of the quantity
reduction by regulated firms due to the increase in tR. The bracketed term in the integrand — the
welfare impact per unit change in quantity — is negative when tR < hR (and it equals zero when
they are equal). The now-familiar explanation is that regulated firms’ marginal gain from raising
quantity differs from this integrand only in substituting tR for hR, and profit-maximizing firms set
their marginal profit equal to zero. Because qR(γ) falls as tR rises (see expression A16), the first
term is positive when tR < hR and zero at tR = hR.
The second term is the effect of firms jumping down to the exempt level of output as tR is
increased. The bracketed term indicates that they no longer cause the harm associated with
regulated output but instead cause the (larger) harm per unit of unregulated output at the output
qE. However, just as with a tax on only unregulated output, with the former we now have only
hR ! tR instead of hR as the per-unit social harm because the indifference condition for firms of
type γRE differs from the social calculus only in that the former ignores the uninternalized portion
of external harm. Note further that this now-reduced first component is positive when tR < hR
and zero at tR = hR. Finally, the bracketed portion of the second term is weighted by the density
of firms at γRE and the rate at which γRE changes with tR (see expression A17). (As with
expressions 3 and 4, it is convenient to employ a minus sign here: raising tR causes γRE to fall,
which is to say that the marginal firm is a more efficient firm, with those at the margin jumping
down as tR is increased.)
The lessons for the optimal tax on regulated output, tR, are apparent. First, if this threeregion scenario governs, we know that the optimum has tR < hR: at tR = hR, the first term in
expression (A15) is zero and the second term is negative.38 Second, if it is optimal to raise tR to
the point that the left region vanishes (no firms produce regulated output), then any further
increase in tR is immaterial. (Note that, at γRE = γE, the first term in expression (A15) becomes
zero, but if at the level of tR that just reaches that point, we still have tR < hR, the second term is
still of indeterminate sign, indicating that a social optimum could have this character.)

38

If we do set tR = hR, we restore the unambiguous result that jumping down is detrimental, in accord with
conventional wisdom that, as explained in the introduction, implicitly ignores that regulated output often causes
external harm. This restoration arises because, when tR = hR, although there is harm from regulated output, there is
no uninternalized harm.

- 31 -

Third, it need not be true that the optimal tR is positive because, even at tR = 0, the second
term is ambiguous: raising tR from zero does unambiguously raise social welfare as a
consequence of the output reduction from regulated firms, but the induced jumping down to
become exempt could produce a net welfare reduction, and one that exceeds the foregoing
welfare gain. To illustrate, consider a case in which hR is very small (so the first term of
expression (A15) and the first component of the second term are likewise small), hN is very large
(it can be arbitrarily high, after all), and g(γRE) is large. In that instance, the gains from
introducing a positive tax on regulated output are insignificant whereas the harm caused by firms
jumping down and producing harmful unregulated output is large.
Fourth, suppose that qE = 0 (which, recall from Proposition 3(a), may be optimal in the
absence of taxation on regulated output). We no longer have three regions, and the appropriate
revision to expression (A15) is that, in the bracketed portion of the second term, the latter
component equals zero. In this case, it is obvious that the optimum involves tR = hR: the only
force pushing against this equality was the fact that firms jumping down to the exempt level of
output cause (uninternalized) external harm of hN for each unit of exempt output, qE; but now we
have that qE = 0, so this effect vanishes. The only effect of tR in this scenario is on the output
choices of regulated firms (including the choice whether to operate). Their profit-maximization
calculus differs from the social calculus only because of the external harm, hR, so that externality
should be internalized fully.
Taxation of Exempt and Regulated Output, at Different Rates: Consider a planner who wishes to
maximize social welfare and, moreover, is able to observe each firm’s type and command its
behavior: whether it is subject to regulation (using the more expensive but less harmful
production technology) and its level of output. Starting with the latter, the socially optimal
output, conditional on whether a firm is regulated, maximizes revenue net of production costs,
regulatory compliance costs (if applicable), and harm. As is familiar, the pertinent first-order
condition is precisely the same as what the firm’s would be if it were to bear the full social cost
of the external harm. This internalization can be accomplished by setting tN = hN and tR = hR.
Moreover, because the maximand is strictly concave, the solution is unique, which implies that
output decisions can be decentralized with these output tax instruments. As is familiar, although
the optimal output for unregulated and regulated firms (continuing to take that choice as given)
does depend on firms’ types (their productive efficiency), the planner does not need this
knowledge in order to set output taxes that fully internalize the externality. Finally, note that a
firm’s optimal output may be zero (a corner solution) with or without regulation, but firms also
make this choice — whether or not to produce a positive quantity — in a socially optimal
manner when they are subject to these taxes.
The remaining question is which firms should be subject to regulation — that is, which
types should produce using the more expensive technology that reduces external harm per unit of
output. Our planner wants a firm of type γ to be regulated if and only if

( A18) pq R ( )  c(q R ( ))  K  kq R ( )  h R q R ( )
 pq N ( )  c(q N ( ))  h N q N ( ),
where the qi(γ) refer to the quantities that firms would choose when subject to the (optimal)
output taxes ti as well as regulation in the case of qR(γ). Once again, for any γ, the planner’s
calculus is the same as the firm’s: a profit-maximizing firm would wish to be subject to
regulation if and only if inequality (A18) holds because, once we set tN = hN and tR = hR, its

- 32 -

profits under each regime are the same as its net contribution to social welfare. Hence, the
decision of which technology to employ can be left to the firms themselves. The principle is the
same as with the quantity decision: once there is full internalization of externalities, firms’
decisions — here, whether to be regulated rather than how much to produce — are socially
optimal. An implication is that, like with the quantity decision, the planner’s knowledge of
firms’ types, γ, is not needed to implement a decentralized scheme.
Let us now characterize firms’ behavior under this optimal regime, with fully
internalizing output taxes and what amounts to voluntary regulation. Recall from section 2 that a
necessary condition for regulation to be technically efficient is that k < Δh. (If k $ Δh, each unit
of output under regulation has an aggregate cost — including the external harm — at least as
high as under no regulation, and we also have the positive fixed cost K. Hence, regulation is
dominated for any γ, and no firm would choose regulation.) Focusing, then, on technically
efficient regulation, and taking as given our (optimal) output taxes, it follows that, for any γ and
any quantity choice, a firm’s all-inclusive marginal cost under regulation (its marginal
production cost plus its marginal compliance cost plus its marginal tax payment) is below its
inclusive marginal cost with no regulation. (The condition k < Δh means that k < hN ! hR, which
here implies that k < tN ! tR; hence, k + tR < tN.) Therefore, for any γ, we have qR(γ) > qN(γ) —
unless qR(γ) = 0, as elaborated in the note just below.
Consider next which firms will wish to be (and socially should be) subject to regulation.
Because of our fixed cost, K, regulation will be relatively preferred by more efficient (lower γ)
firms. In particular, there exists a γ* such that a firm prefers to be regulated if and only if
γ 0 [γE, γ*). Firms with γ 0 [γ*, γN) choose no regulation. Suppose initially that neither of these
regions is empty. Note that, as γ falls from γ* to a value slightly lower, quantity jumps up,
because qR(γ) > qN(γ) for all γ (assuming qR(γ) > 039), including γ*. Therefore, we have a
quantity interval, (qN(γ*), qR(γ*)], in which no firms produce. Likewise, it is clear that there is
no quantity (other than zero) at which firms bunch: any positive quantity is produced by at most
one type of firm. See Figure 2.

39

The text corresponds to the case depicted in Figure 2. If the fixed cost K were greater, γR would be further
to the left, and possibly to the left of γN. This poses no complication, however, for it is obvious that γ* will
nevertheless be strictly to the left of γR.

- 33 -

Figure 2: Differential Output Taxation of Regulated and Unregulated Output

Furthermore, it is possible that one or both of these two quantity regions is empty. If K is
sufficiently small, γ* may exceed γN, which is to say that any firm that chooses to operate will
subject itself to regulation — which, of course, is optimal in this case, because the regulation is
sufficiently cost-effective that any firm that operates should employ the regulation’s technology.
(One might think of this as a case in which the optimal exemption, qE, is zero, but, as explained,
no exemption policy is required since firms’ voluntary choices whether to be regulated are
optimal. This case is tantamount to simple regulation plus pure output taxation.) Furthermore,
because the fixed cost is positive, the lowest positive quantity produced is bounded away from
zero (qR(γ*) > 0): our quantity gap, therefore, has a lower bound of zero (i.e., qN(γ*) = 0).
If K is sufficiently large, such that the most efficient regulated firm, producing qR(γE),
would earn profits that do not exceed those at qN(γE) when the firm is unregulated, then under the
optimal scheme no firms will be subject to regulation. (That is, we would have γ* # γE. This
case is tantamount to no regulation plus pure output taxation.) This situation, of course, is
optimal because regulation, in light of the fixed cost of compliance, is inefficient for all firm
types. When this case arises, there is no gap in the range of produced quantities. In addition,
note that this case includes a degenerate subcase in which no firms operate. (That is, we may
also have γN # γE, which is to say that even the most efficient firm has a marginal production
cost that, when combined with the tax on unregulated output that is set equal to the external harm
of such output, is not below the price p even at zero output.) This subcase arises when
unregulated output is sufficiently harmful that even the most efficient unregulated production is
not cost-justified (and, moreover, regulation is too costly to make regulated production costeffective).
Finally, reflect briefly on employing an exemption, qE, in this setting. We already know

- 34 -

that firms’ voluntary choices whether to subject themselves to regulation are optimal. If an
exemption is mandatory — which is to say, firms producing above qE must be regulated and
firms producing at or below qE may not be regulated (use the harm-reducing technology and
thereby be permitted to pay the lower output tax) — then the exemption might reduce social
welfare. If the exemption is set within the quantity range in which no firms produce, between
qN(γ*) and qR(γ*) in Figure 2, it will have no effect because firms would have behaved
consistently with that exemption regime in any event. But if the exemption is binding — if it is
set above or below that range — it strictly reduces welfare. In the former case (when it is set too
high, above qR(γ*) in the Figure), there are firms that would wish to be regulated but, at their
ideal level of regulated output, they will not be. (They would be forced to choose an
inefficiently high output while being subject to regulation or a lower output while being
unregulated.) In the latter case (when it is set too low, below qN(γ*) in the Figure), there are
firms that wish to be exempt but, at their ideal level of output, they are regulated. Granting them
a waiver from regulation would raise social welfare.

- 35 -

