                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SIZING UP MARKET FAILURES IN EXPORT PIONEERING ACTIVITIES

                                        Shang-Jin Wei
                                           Ziru Wei
                                         Jianhuan Xu

                                      Working Paper 23893
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23893


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




We thank Wouter Dessein, Amit Khandelwal, Nikhil Patel, Andrea Prat, Dan Trefler, Daniel Xu,
and seminar participants at the National Bureau of Economic Research China workshop, UC
Berkeley, Columbia University, Cambridge University, University of Toronto, UC San Diego,
University of Southern California, Tsinghua University, Harvard Kennedy School, and Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics for helpful discussions, and especially Daniel Xu for
generously sharing his codes with us, and Nikhil Patel, Yang Jiao, and Lea Sumulong for
editorial comments. All errors are our responsibilities. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Shang-Jin Wei, Ziru Wei, and Jianhuan Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sizing up Market Failures in Export Pioneering Activities
Shang-Jin Wei, Ziru Wei, and Jianhuan Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 23893
October 2017
JEL No. F1

                                          ABSTRACT

We argue that existence of public good does not necessarily imply market failure, and illustrate
this point in the context of international trade. An influential hypothesis states that export
pioneers are too few relative to social optimum because the first exporter's action creates an
informational public good for all subsequent exporters. The hypothesis has been invoked to
justify certain types of government interventions. We note, however, that such market failure
requires two inequalities to hold simultaneously: the discovery cost is neither too low nor too
high. Neither has to hold in the data. We propose a structural estimation framework to evaluate
the hypothesis, and estimate the parameters based on the customs data of Chinese electronics
exports. Our key finding is that "missing pioneers" are a low-probability event for large countries,
but can be a serious problem for small economies.

Shang-Jin Wei                                    Jianhuan Xu
Graduate School of Business                      School of Economics
Columbia University                              Singapore Management University
Uris Hall 619                                    90 Stamford Road, Singapore
3022 Broadway                                    xujh03@gmail.com
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

Ziru Wei
Tsinghua University
Beijng, China
weizr.04@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
1     Introduction
We argue in this paper that existence of public goods or externality does not
automatically imply market failure, as long as the cost of providing the public
good or the investment needed for the activities that generate positive exter-
nality has a …xed or lumpy component. We illustrate this point in the context
of evaluating empirically an in‡uential hypothesis in international trade. Ac-
cording to this hypothesis, the action of the …rst exporter - an export pioneer-
to a new market is (partly) a public good as it may reduce the …xed cost of
entry to the same market for all subsequent exporters. This public good feature
is then taken to imply that there would be too few export pioneers in market
equilibrium relative to social optimum. We will show that this reasoning is
incomplete.
    Arrow (1962) may be the …rst to formally model the notion that if investment
by one …rm creates knowledge that is a public good that can bene…t other …rms,
then market failure may occur when all …rms choose to under-invest in these
activities. Market failure can be avoided if the newly discovered knowledge
can be patented so that the pioneering …rm can capture the full value of its
e¤ort. When a …rm exports a product to a new market, it has to incur a cost
to …nd out about local taste, local regulation, and the appropriate amount of
"tinkering" that may be needed to make the sale possible. At least a major
part of such information cannot be patented or hidden by the pioneer …rm,
subsequent …rms can use it to save entry cost to the market. This implies a
gap between the social value of the …rst discovery and the private value to the
pioneering exporter. The existence of such market failure has been emphasized
in the theoretical models by Ho¤ (1997) and Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) as
a possible explanation for why many developing countries fail to convert their
potential comparative advantage into actual exports. Since new exports can
bring bene…ts to accelerate growth (Lucas, 1993; Kehoe and Ruhl, 2013; and
Amsden, 1992), missing export pioneers and under-exporting may contribute
to economic under-development. Many have cited this possibility as a basis for
supporting government interventions, in the form of subsidizing export discovery
activities (Hausmann and Rodrik, 2003; Rodrik, 2004; and Lin, 2012). This
hypothesis is very in‡uential. For example, the Hausmann and Rodrik (2003)
paper has 1866 citations by Google Scholar count as of September 2017.
    Several recent empirical papers provide support for parts of this hypothesis.
Freund and Pierola (2010) examine the case of Peruvian exports of nontradi-


                                        1
tional agricultural products (e.g., asparagus) which did not grow locally and
were not part of the traditional local diet. Ex post, Peru proves to be good
at producing and exporting these products. But the country did not do so
and probably would not do so except for some serendipitous government in-
tervention via a US foreign aid program. The case study supports the notion
that a country’s latent comparative advantage needs to be discovered and the
discovery is costly. Artopoulos, Friel, and Hallak (2013) study the beginning
of Argentinian exports of wine, boats, TV programs, and furniture to the US
market, and suggest that, at least in these four cases, the start of exports was
somewhat random, and the observable action of the …rst exporter seems to be a
public good that bene…ts follower …rms. Of course, for each of these four cases,
because the export pioneering activities did take place, the problem of missing
pioneers was avoided. Nonetheless, one may be tempted to think that such
market failure can happen in many other cases. To our knowledge, no paper so
far has formally estimated the probability of missing pioneers and determined
when they may be a low-probability event.
   We contend that even if the observable action of the …rst exporter is a
public good, it does not automatically imply missing pioneers and a need for
government intervention. Such market failure would require two inequalities to
be satis…ed simultaneously. First, the discovery cost cannot be too small, or has
to be greater than the expected pro…t of any individual …rm. Otherwise, some
…rm will …nd it pro…table to unilaterally pay the discovery cost in spite of its
inability to capture the full value of the discovery, and then the public good is
produced anyway. Second, the discovery cost for entering a new market cannot
be too large, or has to be smaller than the sum of the expected pro…ts of all
potential exporters in that market. Otherwise, even a social planner would not
want to pay the cost to discover that new market.
   Since no presumption exists in the economic theory that either of the two
inequalities has to hold, one has to look at the empirical evidence on these
inequalities. In other words, even if we know that the action of the …rst exporter
is a public good, we have to empirically …nd out the values of relevant parameters
before we can conclude that the existing market equilibrium is sub-optimal. As
far as we know, no existing empirical work has taken this approach. Hence, we
are not yet able to judge if "missing pioneers" are a high probability event.
   We develop a structural estimation framework to study this question. We
apply the framework to micro-data on 21 Chinese electronics products (e.g.,
cameras, radios, radars, and television sets). Speci…cally, we …rst use annual


                                        2
export data during 1996-1999 from the Comtrade database to identify product-
destination pairs that China did not export prior to 2000, then we use monthly
customs data to capture all new market explorations during 2000-2002, and
track the export activities of both pioneers and follower …rms at the product-
destination level by month throughout 2000-2006. A structural model and a
maximum likelihood estimation procedure (modi…ed from an approach devel-
oped by Roberts et al., 2012) allow us to estimate structural parameters includ-
ing the discovery costs and other demand and cost parameters. Our data allows
us to observe if and when a new market is explored, who the pioneers are, who
the follower …rms are, and how their respective export volumes and unit export
values evolve over the sample period.
   How do we identify market failure? In particular, since there are many
product-destination pairs for which there are zero exports from China, how do
we estimate the size of the discovery costs in such markets? How do we know, in
cases of zero trade, whether they represent market failure -when the discovery
cost is high enough to deter any individual …rm to want to be a pioneer but not
too high so that the social planner still wants a pioneer? These are some of the
important identi…cation questions we have to tackle. Our identi…cation relies on
a combination of assumed economic structure and data features. In terms of the
economic structure, the discovery costs are allowed to vary by (HS 4-digit) sector
and region, but assumed to be the same within a given sector and region. If some
countries in a region receive exports of some products within a given sector, the
discovery cost for that region and sector can be estimated. In the actual data,
while many products are not exported to many countries, there are always some
exports of some products to some countries in every region-sector. This helps
us to estimate the discovery costs for all region-sectors. Similar assumptions on
the structures of demand and cost together with the same data features allow
us to uncover all the parameters in the demand and cost functions. Like any
research with structural estimation, the assumed economic structure o¤ers us a
way to interpret the data patterns. Armed with these structural parameters, we
can simulate the expected pro…ts of the …rms in any given product destination
pair, and then make assessments on the likelihood of market failures.
    Interestingly, once we lay out our framework, a di¤erent type of market
failure could arise that goes in the opposite direction of "missing pioneers."
Sometimes, the social planner may prefer that no …rm enters a particular export
market in that period and all …rms wait for at least one more period before
entering a new market but some …rms want to do it right away anyway. This


                                        3
could produce "premature" or "too many pioneers." While such a possbility is
not entertained in the Ho¤ (1997) and Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) models,
both types of market failure can be investigated in a uni…ed framework.
   To preview the main results, we …nd evidence in support of the notion that
the observable action of the export pioneer is a public good. Nonetheless, we
…nd that the probability of "missing pioneers" is only high for small economies
but not for large or medium ones. One reason for this result is that the presence
of …rst mover advantage adds an incentive for …rms to be an export pioneer.
Separately, productivity (and demand) shocks in the data are su¢ ciently dis-
persed across …rms, which also reduces the probability that no …rm wants to be a
pioneer. It is important to note that our framework does not pre-determine the
answer. Indeed, we show that with a di¤erent set of parameter values, "missing
pioneers" could become a high-probability event.
   While our paper shares some common features with the existing literature
by allowing for the public good feature in the …rst exporter’s actions, it di¤ers
in four important ways. First, we allow for (but do not impose) …rst mover
advantage. Second, we use structural estimation to uncover parameter values
rather than reduced form regressions or case studies. Third, we provide the
…rst-ever assessment of the likelihood of "missing pioneers" (the percentage of
product-destination pairs for which both inequalities hold). Fourth, we examine
both types of market failures, not just "missing pioneers." Our conclusion is also
di¤erent from the existing literature - our results suggest that "missing pioneers"
are a low probability event for most country-sectors except for the very small
ones.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review a
larger body of the literature and comment on the contributions of our paper. In
Section 3, we set up a structural model of a …rm’s demand and cost equations
and optimization problem. We pay special attention to when a …rm decides to
be an export pioneer in an unexplored market, and when a …rm decides to be
a follower exporter when the market has already been explored. We also con-
trast the social planner’s solution with the decentralized market equilibrium.
In Section 4, we explain the procedure and techniques used to estimate this
non-linear problem with a large number of parameters. We also introduce and
summarize the Chinese export data at the …rm-product-destination level over
our sample period, highlighting a few salient features that are particularly rele-
vant for our research questions. In Section 5, we present our baseline estimation
results, including estimates for discovery costs. In Section 6, using the structural


                                         4
parameter estimates, we provide an assessment of the probability of "missing
pioneers" and that of "premature pioneers". In Section 7, we discuss a number
of extensions and robustness checks. Finally, in Section 8, we provide concluding
remarks.


2     Placing the Paper in the Broader Literature
This paper is related to a larger literature on barriers to trade in new markets.
Besides Ho¤ (1997) and Hausmann and Rodrik (2003), Wagner and Zahler
(2011) propose a model that features a substantial role for random shocks in
deciding which …rm will become a pioneer. In other words, in their model, it is
not necessarily the most productive …rm that will become a pioneer. They argue
that this assumption is supported by the …rm-product level data on Chilean
exports. It is interesting to compare this with the Melitz (2003) model (see also
evidence in Bernard et al., 2007, and Freund and Pierola, 2010) in which …rm
productivity is a key determinant of whether a …rm would export or not and
how much it would export. If exporters are more productive than non-exporters
in the Melitz model, one may think that the pioneers are more productive than
followers. In the model we will present, we allow both forces to play a role and
rely on the data to decide on their relative strength. In particular, a permanent
component of …rm-level productivity will give the more productive …rms an edge
in the export decision, other things equal. However, other things are not held
equal as all …rms are assumed to face a random …xed entry cost to an export
market and a transitory component in both productivity and demand. The
latter assumption is motivated by the work of Wagner and Zahler (2011). Thus,
while on average, pioneer …rms tend to have a high productivity level, a less
productive …rm with a lucky draw of a low …xed entry cost could sometimes
enter a new destination ahead of an otherwise more productive …rm but with
an unlucky draw of a high …xed entry cost.
    Note that none of the theoretical papers formally states that the existence of
discovery cost and externality are only the necessary but not su¢ cient conditions
for "missing pioneers." None of the theoretical papers prove that either of the
two inequalities has to hold. This suggests that whether the two inequalities
hold or not needs to be resolved empirically.
    We have already noted that several empirical papers have cited the theoret-
ical models and provided empirical support for parts of the story. Prominent



                                        5
empirical papers include Freund and Pierola (2010) and Artopoulos, Friel, and
Hallak (2013). The key takeaway from these analytical case studies is that the
…rst exporter does appear to pay an extra cost to enter a market than the sub-
sequent exporters. In addition to showing that a pioneer …rm becomes a pioneer
often for random reasons (e.g., a chance visit in the US), Artopoulos, Friel, and
Hallak (2013) and Wagner and Zahler (2011) also show data patterns that are
consistent with the notion that the …rst exporter’s action is a public good. In
particular, once a pioneer becomes successful, they show that imitators tend
to emerge relatively quickly. Fernandes and Tang (2014) provide both a model
and evidence from China that exporting …rms bene…t from observing the suc-
cesses and failures of other …rms. When they test if a …rm bene…ts more from
a nearby …rm or a far-away one, they …nd no statistically signi…cant evidence
that distance matters. Why is this the case? If trade associations, trade shows,
and industry conferences at the national level are the primary channels for un-
derstanding foreign markets, then distance within a country may matter much
less.
    We can connect the current discussion on whether an exporter pioneer pro-
duces a public good (knowledge about a new foreign market) to another litera-
ture on informational barriers to trade. Rauch (1996, 1999, and 2001), Rauch
and Trindade (2002), and Casella and Rauch (2003) show that …rms often tap
into social networks or organize themselves in ways to overcome the informa-
tional barriers. In other words, new explorations can successfully take place in
markets where information appears costly even in the absence of government
interventions. This makes "missing pioneers" less likely than it …rst appears.
    If knowledge about a foreign market is a public good, diplomatic services,
government-sponsored trade missions, and export promotion agencies could play
a useful role. Rose (2007) formally studies this possibility in an extended grav-
ity model and …nds support for this, although the trade promotion e¤ect of the
activities of foreign embassies and consulates appears to be quantitatively small.
Nitsch (2007) shows that state visits by foreign leaders are often associated with
a big boost to bilateral trade (with an increase of about 10%), but the e¤ect is
short-lived. Ferguson and Forslid (2013) develop a Melitz-type model of gov-
ernment trade facilitations, which could be applied to opening of embassies and
state visits, and suggest that such facilitations are most useful for medium-sized
…rms. Lederman, Olarreaga, and Payton (2009) document that o¢ cial trade
promotion agencies do appear to be associated with an increase in trade. Note
that in these studies, a government’s role may not necessarily be about produc-


                                        6
ing a public good. It could include reducing …nancing di¢ culties of exporting
…rms or applying political pressures on a foreign government to re-direct trade
‡ows away from other trading partners. In other words, they are not a direct
support for the "missing pioneers" hypothesis.
    While the relevant empirical papers are numerous, none in our reading uses a
structural estimation approach, and none formally assesses the probability that
both inequalities discussed in the introduction hold simultaneously in the data.
In addition, none of the papers on this topic has simultaneously examined the
two types of market failures. In this sense, our paper …lls an important void in
the literature.


3     Model
We now develop a dynamic structural model for a …rm’s decision on whether it
wants to be a pioneer, a follower, or a non-exporter. In the baseline model, a
…rm is assumed to produce a single product, and has to make an entry, stay,
or exit decision in every market in every period. (In our empirical estimation,
we call each HS 6-digit line a product, each HS 4-digit line a sector, and each
individual country a destination. A market is a product-destination pair.)
    Our model ultimately produces a system of four equations: (a) a demand
function, (b) a cost function, (c) for a …rm in a mature market, a decision rule on
whether to export to the market, and (d) for a …rm in a previously unexplored
market, a decision rule on whether to become a pioneer. Because the last two
equations are non-linear, a general model may have too high a dimension to be
estimated. We will impose restrictions on the parameters so that the number
of parameters is more manageable.
    As a notational convention, we use t = 0 to denote a period in which no
pioneer has appeared as of then and …rms have to decide if they wish to be a
pioneer in that period.
    It is important to note that, while we follow Hausmann and Rodrik (2003)
and use the term "discovery cost," the action of the export pioneer is modeled
as a public good. The …xed entry cost for a …rm to export a good to a market
has two pieces: one is a standard entry cost that any …rm needs to pay, but
the other is something only the very …rst exporter needs to pay (which is the
discovery cost). In other words, the …rst exporter’s action reduces the total
…xed cost of entry that subsequent …rms need to pay. The …rst exporter cannot



                                        7
patent the knowledge about the foreign market, and the use of the knowledge
by one follower does not preclude the usage by other followers. Note that we do
not need to assume that everything that the …rst exporter has learned becomes
a public good. Rather, the observable action of the …rst exporter is a public
good. The part that is not a public good belongs to the remaining part of the
entry cost that every …rm still needs to pay.
   Note that our speci…cation does not mechanically assume that the public
good feature has to exist; the estimate of the discovery cost can be zero or
even negative in principle. Finding a positive discovery cost empirically will be
interpreted as …nding evidence of public good. It is also important to note that
we do not model the problem as a learning problem. Due to the complexity of
introducing learning in a dynamic structural model with an unrestricted number
of potential entrants, we leave it to future research.
   The assumption that the discovery cost is paid for only by the …rst exporter
but not by subsequent ones is also signi…cant. If the discovery cost needs to
be paid by all …rms, say on a declining scale based on the timing of entry to
the market, then, the payo¤ to a …rm depends on the actions of other …rms.
This would make the problem substantially more complex. In comparison, if
the discovery cost is paid only by the …rst exporter, then only the payo¤ in t=0
depends on the actions of other …rms. In other words, the problem after the
…rst period becomes a static game.


3.1    Demand
We begin with the demand curve for an individual …rm that produces product
k. With slight abuse of notation, we use i to denote both an individual …rm
and the variety that the …rm produces. The demand for …rm i’s variety in
destination d at time t is denoted as

                                            d
                             ln sdi (t) =   i   (t) + ln Ykd (t)                   (1)

where ln Ykd (t) is an aggregate demand shifter for product k in destination d
                  d
and time t and    i   (t) is a shifter that is speci…c to the …rm’s variety. We will
specify the demand in such a way as to capture the possibility of …rst mover
advantage (FMA). FMA here refers to the possibility that the demand for the
…rst exporter’s variety is higher than those for other …rms, but this advantage
                                                                               d
could be eroded over time. More precisely, we model the …rm-speci…c term       i   (t)



                                                8
as:

            d           d        d                              d
            i   (t) =   i        k   ln pdi (t) + Iid (0) (     k   k   (t)) + Hi (t) + udi (t)   (2)
                            d
      The …rst term,        i,   is a …rm-speci…c demand component. The second term,
pdi   (t), is the price paid by consumers in destination d for variety i in period t.
                                     d
The third term, Iid (0) (            k      k   (t)), is meant to capture the notion of FMA for
an export pioneer. Iid (0) is equal to one for an export pioneer …rm and zero for
all …rms that follow the pioneer. The initial strength of the FMA is represented
                                                           d
by a product-destination speci…c term                      k,   and it decays over time at a rate of
                   d
 k    (t) (until   k        k   (t) reaches zero). Because we do not restrict the values
or the signs of these parameters in the estimation, the speci…cation allows for
the possibility of FMA but does not impose it. We will let the data tell us
its presence and strength. Note that FMA does not appear in the theoretical
models by Ho¤ (1997) and Hausmann and Rodrik (2003). One might conjecture
that its presence should make missing export pioneers less likely since a …rm
would have more reasons to want to be the …rst exporter in a market.
      An important assumption we make here is that the number of …rms does not
enter the demand equation directly. The number of …rms can a¤ect the demand
indirectly via its e¤ect on the price index for that market, and the price index
is absorbed into the destination, sector, and time …xed e¤ects. The setting we
have in mind is that, while the number of entrants from a particular exporting
country may be small, the total number of sellers in the destination country
from all countries is big. In that setting, the assumption can be justi…ed by
a Dixit-Stiglitz-like utility function for variety or monopolistic competition. In
any case, this assumption will vastly simplify the subsequent …rm optimization
problem and help us to avoid discussing strategic interactions among …rms.1
      One interpretation of the FMA as we have speci…ed is that it is a favorable
shock to the taste - the demand for the variety of the …rst exporter from a given
country - that lasts for a few periods but not forever. (In the context of Dixit-
Stigliz utility function, the FMA speci…cation can be thought of as capturing
the evolution of the preference parameter for the pioneer …rm). Note that we
do not assume that the two parameters in FMA have to be non-zero. We will
   1 In the existing literature, there are papers (e.g., Aguirregabiria, 2010) that solve for

strategic interactions when the number of …rms is relatively small but not when it is large or
unrestricted. As we will show later, the potential number of exporters in our sample will be
in the hundreds; it will be nearly impossible to allow for strategic interactions and we choose
to avoid it.




                                                       9
let the data tell us what they are.
     Hi (t) is a set of …rm characteristics that may be correlated with product
quality (such as …rm ownership) and                                 is an associated vector of coe¢ cients.
The last term, udi (t), is a random noise, whose distribution will be speci…ed
later.
    Combining the previous two equations, the sale for variety i in destination
d, in logarithm, takes the following form:


                 d                                         d
 ln sdi (t) =    i
                         d
                         k   ln pdi (t) + Iid (0) (        k         k   (t)) + Hi (t) + ln Ykd (t) + udi (t) (3)

     Equation (3) will be identi…ed by using data on actual sales by …rms in
di¤erent export destinations. The independent variables include price (unit
                                                                         d
export value), pdi (t), initial FMA, Iid (0)                             k;   decay rate   Iid (0)   k   (t), and a
                                                       d
…rm-speci…c demand shock term                          i.      However, since we simultaneously esti-
mate the system of equations for multiple products (21 in the sample), and the
system is non-linear, we need to impose some additional structures on the para-
meters to make the computational burden manageable. We make the following
                             d       d                 d            d
assumptions: (1)             k   =       +       k;    k    =           . This says that the price elasticity
parameter            varies by destination and product while the FMA parameter
varies by destination but not by product. (2)                                  k   (t) = t. This assumes that
the FMA decays at a linear rate that is common across destinations or sectors.
(3) ln Ykd (t) = ln Y d + ln Yk + ln Y (t) : These assumptions are made to reduce
the number of parameters that need to be estimated.


3.2      Variable Cost
The log marginal cost for …rm i to produce and export to market d in period t
is given below:


                      ln cdi (t) =       d
                                             +   k    + (t) + Wi (t) + ! i + vid (t)                            (4)
 d
     is a …xed e¤ect component that is common to all …rms in a given destination,
whereas    k    is a …xed e¤ect component that varies only by product and                                   (t) is a
…xed e¤ect that varies only by time period. Collectively, the marginal cost can
vary by destination, product, and time period. However, such an assumption
still rules out those components of costs that vary by location, product, and
tari¤, simultaneously, and in this sense, is restrictive. Allowing generic e¤ects


                                                               10
at the product-destination-time level would substantially increase the number
of parameters, exacerbating computational burdens.
     Wi (t) represents a set of observable components that a¤ect a …rm’s mar-
ginal cost. An example of observable components would be the local wage (i.e.,
wage at the province-year level where a …rm is located). Another example is
whether a …rm is a processing exporter or not; a processing exporter can enjoy
tari¤ exemption on imported inputs and may therefore enjoy a cost advantage
over normal exporters. We also include a set of ownership dummies for wholly
foreign owned …rms, joint ventures, and state-owned …rms; the omitted group
is domestic private …rms. The ownership dummies are meant to capture two
things. First, they can be proxies for quality. In particular, relative to the va-
rieties produced by domestic private …rms, if those produced by foreign-owned
…rms or state-owned …rms are of higher quality, they may require better and
more costly inputs. Second, if state-owned …rms have privileged access to cheap
credit, they may have a lower cost of production than otherwise.                                   is the coef-
…cient of Wi (t).
     The last two terms are meant to capture two di¤erent aspects of a …rm’s
productivity. While ! i is a permanent or time invariant component, vid (t) is a
transitory or noise term.
     Between the demand and the cost functions, there are four random variables.
                                 d
We assume ! i and                i   are observed by the …rm but not by the researcher. vid (t)
and udi (t) are noise shocks realized after the …rm has made the decisions about
production and exports. We assume that udi (t) and vid (t) follow an i.i.d. joint
normal distribution with mean 0 and variance-covariance matrix                                 :
     Assuming all …rms operate in a monopolistically competitive industry, a
pro…t-maximizing …rm facing the demand in equation (2) will charge a price of

                                               d
                     ln pdi (t) = ln       d
                                               k
                                                       +   d
                                                           k    (t) + Wi (t) + ! i + vid (t)               (5)
                                           k       1
             d
where    d
             k
                 1
                     is a constant markup.
         k
     We will use unit export values as a proxy for prices charged by each …rm.
The pricing equation contains a set of destination, product, and period e¤ects,
 d               d
 k   (t) =           +   k   +       (t), a …rm-speci…c cost term Wi (t), and an unobserved
                                                                                                             d
productivity shock term ! i . The markup term depends on price elasticity                                    k
which varies by destination and product. The noise term, vid (t), can capture,
among other things, measurement errors in the price term. Again, to make the


                                                           11
computational burden manageable, we impose some additional structures on
the parameters; in particular         is assumed to be the same across all products
and destinations.


3.3     The Firm’s Problem
We …rst consider a mature market, i.e., one that has already been explored by
some exporting …rms (i.e., a pioneer …rm has already existed). A …rm obtains
a random draw on the …xed market entry cost (which can vary by destination,
product, and time period), and decides if it wishes to export to that market. We
then consider a virgin market that has not yet been explored by any exporter
from the same country. In that case, a …rm has to decide if it wants to be the
…rst exporter (i.e., a pioneer) in that market.
    Note if either the demand or the cost function of a …rm were to depend the
number of …rms in the market, then the payo¤ and entry/exit decisions of a
…rm would depend on the entry/exit decisions of all other …rms in each period.
Because the potential number of …rms is large in our sample, and the …rms
are heterogeneous, this problem is impossible for solve, and no papers in the
existing literature has solved such a problem in the case of a large number of
…rms. Under our assumption that neither the demand nor the cost function of a
…rm depends on the number of …rms, we can simplify the problem su¢ ciently to
make it solvable. In this case, only the pioneer …rm’s payo¤ (and entry and exit
decisions) may depend on other …rms’actions. For all follower …rms, the payo¤
(arnd the entry and exit decisions) are independent of other …rms’ entry/exit
actions. Note that a pioneer …rm’s problem after the …rst period is identical to
that of a follower …rm.

3.3.1       To Be an Exporter or Not ?

Consider a mature market in which a pioneer already exists. The timing of
…rm i is as follows: at the beginning of period t, it observes …rm-speci…c cost
                                                                                d
shifters w
         ~ i (t), the destination, product, and period cost shifters            k   (t), and
the aggregate demand shifters        Ykd   (t). The …rm i also knows the permanent
                                                                                 d
productivity component ! i and the permanent demand component                    i . For a
                                                                                d
given destination and a given time period, a …rm draws an entry cost            i (t) from
a normal distribution with parameter           .2 Based on this information, the …rm
   2 Although   we call   an entry cost, it can take a negative value (e.g., from an export
subsidy).



                                             12
                                            Figure 1: Timing Assumption


chooses to export or not. Transitory shocks udi (t) and vid (t) will be realized after
i makes the export decision. Figure 1 shows the timing of the …rm problem.
       For a representative …rm i, the expected pro…t before paying the entry cost
is3
                                        d
                                        i   (t) = Eu;v sdi (t) pdi (t)                       cdi (t)                           (6)

       The …rm will choose to export to that particular market if and only if

                                                             d               d
                                                             i   (t) >       i   (t)                                           (7)
                                    d
                      d
       Denoting       k   =     d
                                    k
                                        1
                                            and combining with the pricing and demand equations
                                k
before, we obtain the …rm’s log expected pro…t as

                                    ln          i   (t) = ln ai + ln ri (t) + ln bi (t)                                        (8)

where

               1
ln ai = ln        d
                          + 1               d
                                            k       ln    d
                                                          k +ln Eu;v     exp u + 1                     d
                                                                                                       k   v + di +Hi (t) + 1        d
                                                                                                                                     k   !i
                  k
                                                                                                                               (9)
                  ln ri (t) =           ln Ykd           (t) + 1         d
                                                                         k       ln     d
                                                                                        k   (t) + ln Wi (t)                   (10)

                                                    ln bi (t) = Ii (0) (                    t)                                (11)

       In equation (8), the …rst term is a term that captures all time invariant
components. The second term, ln ri (t), captures all factors that are random
in di¤erent periods. It includes both the aggregate demand and marginal cost
terms. The last term, ln bi (t), captures the …rst mover advantage. Hence we
can summarize the …rm’s state variables as                                        t    = fai ; ri (t) ; bi (t)g.4
      3 The  expectation is taken over two random noise terms udi (t) and vid (t) :
      4 More     formally,         the set of …rm state variables should be                                         d   (t)     =
                                                                                                                    i
  d                     d (t) ; bd (t) ; d (t)
  i ; ! i ; w
            ~ i (t) ; Y k        i       i




                                                                   13
         Assumption: ri (t) is a Markovian process.
         Given that ri (t) is a Markovian process, bi (t) has a deterministic evolution-
                                     d
ary rule, and                        i   (t) is an iid shock, we can de…ne the …rm value by a recursive
formula
                                             h                        i   h                                           i
                    d                                      d                                    d
V             t;    i   (t) = max                i (t)     i   (t) ; 0 + E V            t+1 ;   i    (t + 1) j    t       , t     1
                                                                                                                                (12)
         The right hand side of equation (12) has two parts. The …rst part says that
by choosing to export to this market today, the …rm can obtain a current pro…t
          d                  d
of        i   (t)            i   (t). The second part is the discounted future value where the
discount factor is                           2 (0; 1). The solution to the problem is a cuto¤ rule: if
    d                                                                d
    i   (t) is smaller than a cuto¤ value                            i   (t), then the …rm will export.
         Note that the …rm value depends on whether the …rm is a pioneer or not,
as that would a¤ect whether the …rm obtains the FMA, bi (t). We use V P and
V F to denote the …rm values for a pioneer and a follower, respectively.

3.3.2              To Be a Pioneer or Not ?

Let us now consider a …rm’s optimization problem in a virgin market not yet
explored by a pioneer. We use V P and V F to denote the …rm values of being a
pioneer and a follower, respectively. We use V to denote the …rm value before
making the pioneer/follower decision. We denote the time period by t = 0. The
…rm problem di¤ers from (12) in two aspects. First, if …rm i chooses to export
in period 0, it needs to pay a discovery cost Dkd that varies by sector and region
(on top of a random generic entry cost that needs to be paid by any exporter
in any market and period). Second, it will obtain a …rst-mover-advantage if it
decides to be a pioneer. Hence, the expected value for a …rm that decides to be
a pioneer is:5
                                                                                 h                                    i
                                 d                         d                                          d
         VP             0;       i   (0) =       d
                                                 i   (0)   i   (0)        Dkd + E V P           1;    i   (1) j   0             (13)

         However, if the …rm chooses not to be a pioneer in t = 0, the problem is
more complex. The …rm’s payo¤ depends on the actions of other …rms. We
denote the distribution of individual …rm states                                    0   as f0 . We use            to denote
the probability that at least one …rm will become a pioneer in the next period.
As long as some …rms are known to want to export in the next period,                                                        = 1;
        5 The      payo¤ of choosing to become a pioneer does not depend on other …rms’actions.




                                                                         14
otherwise        = 0. Notice that                     depends on f0 . Given the policy functions of
the …rms,        is a determinstic function of f0 .
     For a …rm that chooses not to be a pioneer in t = 0, its payo¤ is a con-
vex combination of two possibilities: (1) if another …rm becomes a pioneer
next period ( = 1), it obtains the value of a follower …rm                                          E VF (         1) j    0   ;
and (2) if no other …rm becomes a pioneer (                                       = 0), its expected payo¤ is
 E V(       1 ; f1 ) j   0 ; f0   , since it will face the exact same choice next period of
whether or not to become a pioneer.6 Then the expected …rm value if it does
not export is

     VF (     0 ; f0 )   =        E VF (         1) j      0   +        (1       )E V (      1 ; f1 ) j   0 ; f0          (14)

     Hence the …rm’s optimization problem at t = 0 is

                                     V(         0 ; f0 )   = max V P ; V F                                                (15)

     To simplify the matter, we focus on a pure strategy in a symmetric equilib-
rium. That is, every …rm has a similar cuto¤ rule. For a given …rm, if and only
                                                  d
if its entry cost is lower than its cuto¤ value, ~ , will it choose to export.7 We
                                                                             i
                                                                                     d
determine that            = 1 if at least one …rm’s export cost draw is lower than ~ i ,
and 0 otherwise. Decisions by other …rms a¤ect a …rm’s decision only in period
t = 0. Note that from t = 1 onwards, the model is in a monopolistic competitive
environment and other …rms’actions can not a¤ect the …rm’s pro…t any more.8
     We use G to denote the cdf of an normal distribution.
                                        h                             i    h             i
                                            d                  d                  d
                                   Pr       i   (t)            i   (t) = G        i   (t)                                 (16)

                                             h                        i  h i
                                        Pr        d
                                                      (0)          ~d = G ~d                                              (17)
                                                  i                 i      i

     Equation (16) says that the probability of exporting (to a particular des-
tination) at time t is equivalent to the …rm drawing an entry cost lower than
 d
 i (t), which is a function of state variable (t). Similarly, as shown in (17),
                   d
the cuto¤ value ~ i for the decision to be a pioneer is a function of (0), and
   6 Since the demand and cost shifters are assumed to be a Markovian process,       is a Markov-
ian process. As a result, the distribution of is also a Markovian process.
   7 There might be multiple equilibria if we do not restrict attention to symmetric equilibrium.
   8 We allow multiple …rms to be pioneers. But the number of pioneers does not change the

pro…ts of any …rm since the pro…t functions do not depend on the number of …rms on the
market.




                                                                   15
                                        h di
the probability of becoming a pioneer, G ~ i .


3.4        From the Social Planner’s Problem to Market Failures
In this section, we formally consider a social planner’s optimization problem.
The planner could require all entrants to share the discovery cost (regardless of
the sequence of entry). A market is now worth entering as long as the social
value (or the sum of the value of all entrants) is higher than the discovery cost.
Let us assume that the social planner always asks the most pro…table …rm to be
the pioneer. We show that this determines a lower cut-o¤ point of productivity
for export pioneering to take place than in a decentralized economy.
    We assume the social planner’s objective is to maximize the total value of all
…rms in this economy. She does so by choosing whether to ask a …rm to enter
the market IiP d (t) 2 f0; 1g. The total value of the …rms can be thought of as
the sum of …rm values across products and destinations. For a given product
and destination, her optimization problem is:
                              (1                                            )
                             X X           h                         i
                                       t       d              d        Pd
            max         E0                     i   (t)        i   (t) Ii (t)    IiP d (0) Dkd    (18)
      IiP d (t)2f0;1g
                             i   t=0


s.t: (8)
   Inside the big bracket is the discounted export pro…t for …rm i, which has
two parts. The …rst part, di (t), is the same …rm pro…t before paying the entry
cost as in Equation (8). If …rm i is chosen by the planner to export at time t
                                                                                d
(IiP d (t) = 1), then it also needs to pay a …xed export cost                   i   (t). The last term
(outside the big bracket) says that …rm i must also pay the discovery cost Dkd
if it is chosen to be a pioneer.
    Once a pioneer has been chosen (which is de…ned to be an event in period
0), the discovery cost is paid and the FMA is assigned. As a result, there are
no other potential sources of market failure. For this reason, the rest of the
planner’s decision rule (about whether any given …rm should export or not in
each subsequent period) would be exactly the same as what the …rms would
have chosen on their own in a decentralized market.
    Under the assumption in section 3.3 that all shifters in the demand and cost
functions follow a Markovian process, the planner’s problem is recursive: the
distribution of individual states in one period f1 only depends on the distribution




                                                         16
in the immediate past period f0 . We can rewrite the planner’s problem as:
                            X h                                   i
                                  d             d
J (f0 )   =     max          f    i   (0)       i   (0)        Dkd IiP d (t) +                            (19)
                IiP d (t)
                            i
                                      !                                                      !
                      X                                                       X
                            IiP d (t) E V P (             i;1 )    g+     1          IiP d (t) E [J (f1 ) jf0 ]
                        i                                                        i


   s.t. (15).
   The …rst part of this problem is the sum of the …rm values when a …rm has
been designated to be a pioneer by the planner. The second part is the sum of
the …rm values in which no …rm is chosen to be a pioneer. Let x be the value
of the …rst term.
   In the planner problem, at least one …rm will be designated as a pioneer i¤

                                       x      Dkd > E [J (f1 ) jf0 ]                                      (20)

   We de…ne the set of all potential exporters as E0 . The probability of "missing
pioneers" could be formally de…ned as
                                          "                                          #
                                d             maxi2E0          d
                                                                   (0)   ~ d < 0;
                                                               i           i
                                k = Pr                                                                    (21)
                                              x > Dkd + E [J (f1 ) jf0 ]

   To see when market failure would emerge, it is instructive to compare when
a central planner would want to designate a …rm to be a pioneer based on (19)
and when the …rm would want to be a pioneer on its own in a decentralized
equilibrium (15). That is, the planner would want a pioneer as long as the total
gain of all …rms x is greater than Dkd + E [J (f1 ) jf0 ]. Because the planner and
the …rms are not solving the same optimization problem, there is a potential
for market failure. In the decentralized market, only if there is at least one …rm
whose draw of entry cost is lower than the cuto¤ value, will the …rm enter. We
de…ne "missing pioneers" as an event when condition (21) is satis…ed.
   In principle, a di¤erent kind of market failure can emerge. In particular,
there may be times when the social planner does not wish to have any …rm
to be a pioneer (by asking all …rms to wait for one period), yet at least one
…rm wants to be a pioneer in a decentralized economy. This problem of "too
many pioneers" or "premature pioneers" is the opposite type of market failure
that Hausman and Rodrik (2003) stresses. The problem of "too many pioneers"




                                                          17
occurs when                      "                                    #
                                     maxi2E0     d
                                                     (0)   ~ d > 0;
                      'dk = Pr                   i           i
                                                                                              (22)
                                     x < Dkd + E [J (f1 ) jf0 ]
 As an example of the second type of market failure, sometimes the highest-
productivity draw and the lowest-entry-cost draw are such that some …rms …nd
their individual expected pro…ts good enough and would want to be a pioneer
now. Yet, the central planner knows the the productivity and entry cost draws
are likely to be more favorable in the next period given their distributions and
therefore would want all …rms to wait for a period. When this occurs, a pioneer
…rm could emerge prematurely relative to the social optimum.
    We now explore some qualitative relationships between the probabilities of
these two types of market failures and the number of potential exporters in E0 .
                           d
We can reason that both    k   and 'dk depend on the number of potential exporters
in E0 , and the relationships are non-monotonic. To see the intuition for the non-
monotonicity, let us …rst consider the case of a single exporter in E0 . Since the
…rm and the planner have to solve the same problem, there is no market failure
of either type by construction. Now consider the case in which the size of E0
increases. As more …rms take draws from the productivity, demand, and entry
cost distributions, the chance that at least one …rm will get favorable draws
                                                                      d
increases. This means a declining probability that maxi2E d (0) ~ < 0 ,    0    i         i
while at the same time, an increasing probability that x >                Dkd   + E [J (f1 ) jf0 ].
Therefore, when the number of potential entrants is very large, there should be
very low probability for either type of market failure. Market failures are more
likely to occur for intermediate values of E0 : We will verify this intuition later.


4     Estimation Procedure and Data
4.1    Estimation Procedure
In the data, for each …rm i, we observe a sequence of cost shifters w
                                                                    ~ i (t), and
a sequence of participation choices Iid (t). When a …rm exports, we observe its
unit export value, pdi (t), and export sales sdi (t). Of all the …rms that export to
a particular market, we can easily tell which one is the pioneer and which ones
are the followers. Let us denote the entire data set as Df . Our empirical model
consists of four structural equations: a demand equation (3), a pricing equation
(5), an export decision rule (16) and a pioneer decision rule (17). The two
decision rules are non-linear, adding substantial complexity to the estimation.


                                            18
Each equation contains an unobserved permanent component of productivity
                                                                d
shock for a …rm, ! i , and unobserved demand shifter,           i.
   Our estimation strategy can be devided into two steps. Intuitively, we …rst
                      d
estimate ! i and      i   using data on an individual …rm’s prices and quantities.
Second, conditional on a set of demand and cost parameters, we estimate the
…xed entry cost from the MLE. Details of the estimation procedure are explained
in Appendix A.


4.2      Data and Identi…cation of Pioneers and Followers
We have monthly …rm-product-destination level export data from the Chinese
customs covering the 84 months from January 2000 to December 2006. We have
annual product-destination level export data for China from the UN Comtrade
database for a much longer time period, but the Comtrade data do not have
…rm-level information, which is crucial for our research question. Because our
system of four non-linear equations is complex, it is wise for us to focus on a
subset of sectors. (Even after making a number of simplifying assumptions, we
will still have 131 parameters to estimate in our baseline model.)
   In this paper, we work with the Chinese exporters of 21 electronics products
spanning four 4-digit sectors (HS8525-8528) or 21 6-digit products in HS Chap-
ter 85 (electrical machinery and equipment). They are (1) four products from
HS8525, transmission apparatus for radiotelephony, TV cameras, and cordless
telephones, (2) three products from HS8526, radar apparatus, radio navigation
aid, and remote control apparatus, (3) nine products from HS8527, reception
apparatus for radiotelephony etc, and (4) …ve products from HS8528, television
receivers etc. Key features of these four sectors are reported in Appendix C.
   We call a product-destination pair a market. Based on UN Comtrade data
(available at the bilateral product level), we …rst identify a set of markets to
which China did not export during 1996-1999 but did during 2000-2002.9 We
then use the Chinese customs data from 2000-2006 to identify, for each of the
newly explored market, who the …rst exporter is, who the followers are, and
how their sales and prices (unit values) evolve. In other words, we identify all
the export pioneering activities (593 in total) during 2000-2002 and trace the
dynamics of both the pioneers and the followers during 2000-2006.
   A …rm is called a pioneer if it is the very …rst Chinese exporter of a particular
product to a particular destination. We call all subsequent entrants (for the
  9 By   our procedure, we have bypassed a reclassi…cation of HS codes from 1995 to 1996.



                                             19
same product-destination pair) as followers. While it is possible to have more
than one pioneer …rm for a given product-destination pair, it is extremely rare
in practice. We …nd that in 97% of all the newly explored markets during 2000-
2002, there is a single pioneer …rm; in the remaining 3% of the cases, there are
two pioneers. There is never a case with more than two pioneers. Therefore, for
practical purposes, it is realistic to assume a single pioneer.
    Importantly, when a product is not exported to a particular destination,
some other products (out of 21 in our sample) are often still exported to this
destination. It is relatively uncommon to have a destination in which none of
the 21 products is exported. This feature of the data is important in our ability
to identify discovery cost parameters (the sum of a product component and a
destination component) and other parameters.
    In Appendix Table 2, we report the number of Chinese exporters for each of
the 6-digit products in our sample. In over 75% of the cases (16/21), the number
of exporters exceeds 100. The median and average numbers of exporters are
295 and 394, respectively. This means that these sectors are fairly competitive
and the number of potential exporters is large. For any given destination and
product, the number of exporters tends to be substantially lower (often between
3 and 10). This presumably is a result of …rms’ choices (e.g., in response to
destination-speci…c entry costs).


5     Empirical Results
In this section, we apply the structural model to our sample. Recall that our
model estimates price elasticity and FMA by destination and product, and the
discovery costs are assumed to vary by sector and region. The more products
and countries we include, the more parameters we are going to estimate (with
the number of parameters growing multiplicatively). To further reduce com-
putational time, we make two more assumptions. First, we assume all 6-digit
products within a given 4-digit sector share the same parameters. Second, we
cluster all countries into 6 destination regions according to their geographical
and socioeconomic features: (i) the Western Hemisphere, (ii) Former Soviet Re-
publics (FSR), (iii) Europe (excluding FSR countries), (iv) Japan, Korea, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, (v) Rest of Asia, and (vi) Africa. We assume all countries
within the same region share the same coe¢ cients. For similar computational
considerations, Roberts et al. (2012) had to make comparable simplifying as-



                                       20
sumptions. (As noted earlier, even with these simpli…cations, we still have 131
parameters to estimate.)
     These parameters are summarized as follows. In the demand equation, we
                                                                                   d
have: (1) 6 destination-speci…c demand price elasticity parameters (                   ); (2) 3
sector-speci…c demand price elasticity parameters (            k)   (We will set sector 8525
as the benchmark sector, such that the estimates for all other sectors are relative
to Sector 8525); (3) 6 destination-speci…c parameters for FMA, d ; (4) 1 linear
decay rate ( ); (5) 3 …rm speci…c demand shifters, including …rm ownerships
(state owned, joint venture, and foreign owned); (6) 13 aggregate demand dum-
mies (sector/destination/year, 3+5+5=13). In the pricing equation, we have:
                                                 d
(7) 6 destination-speci…c cost shifters (            ); (8) 3 product-speci…c cost shifters
(   k ); (9) 4 time-speci…c cost shifters     (t); (10) 6 other cost shifters, Wi (t),
including …rm ownerships (state owned, joint venture, and foreign owned, with
"domestic private" as the left-out group), status of processing trade, status of
intermediate trader, and average wage in the city where a …rm is located (the
average is computed excluding the …rm’s own wage). We also have: (11) 8 pa-
rameters associated with the four random variables in the model (permanent
and transitory demand and productivity shocks in equation (3) and (5)). Fi-
nally, in the export and pioneer decision rules, (12) there are 24 discovery cost
parameters (for 4 sectors x 6 regions) and 48 export cost parameters (mean and
variance for each of the 24 sector-region).
     Before we present the estimation results, it may be helpful to discss intu-
itively the sources of identi…cation for some key parameters. The parameter for
                               d
the …rst mover advantage,          ; is identi…ed via the di¤erences in sales between
a pioneer and followers over time. The …xed discovery cost, Fkd , is identi…ed by
the expected pro…t of the pioneer …rms. What happens if there are zero exports
from China in certain product-destination pairs? How do we estimate the size
of the discovery costs in such markets? Our identi…cation relies on a combina-
tion of assumed economic structure and data features. In terms of the economic
structure, the discovery costs are allowed to vary by (HS 4-digit) sector and
region, but assumed to be the same within a given sector and region. If some
countries in a region receive exports of some products within a given sector, the
discovery cost for that region and sector can be estimated. In the actual data,
while many products are not exported to many countries, there are always some
exports of some products to some countries in every region-sector. This helps
us to estimate the discovery costs for all region-sectors. Similar assumptions on
the structures of demand and cost together with the same data features allow us


                                            21
to uncover all the parameters in the demand and cost functions in all markets.


5.1    Demand and FMA Estimates
Table 1 reports the estimates of the demand equation parameters (equation (3)).
In our estimation, to mitigate concerns with endogeneity, we will replace pi (t) by
the average of the export prices of the same product by di¤erent …rms in di¤erent
destinations. This is in the spirit of the instrumental variable idea proposed
by Hausman et al. (1997) and commonly applied in the empirical industrial
                                                                                 d
organization literature. The …rst panel of Table 1 reports price elasticities    k.
For example, the price elasticity for sector 1 in Western Hemisphere is -4.70,
indicating that an increase in price by one percent is associated with a decline
in export sales by 4.70%; the result is statistically signi…cant.
   In the second part of the table, the paramters for initial FMA are positive for
all regions and statistically signi…cant for two regions (Former Soviet Republics
and Rest of Europe). The point estimates for the initial FMAs range from
0.43 for the Rest of Asia to 1.21 for the Rest of Europe. A linear per-period
decay rate    is estimated to be -0.06; while it has the expected sign, it is not
statistically signi…cant.
   The demand for the varieties produced by foreign invested …rms, joint ven-
tures, and state-owned …rms are higher than that by domestic private …rms.
This may re‡ect the higher quality associated the products from the …rst three
types of …rms.


5.2    Pricing Equation Estimates
Table 2 reports parameter estimates of the pricing equation (equation (5)).
The coe¢ cient on processing exporters is negative and statistically signi…cant.
Their lower marginal cost probaby re‡ects their advantage in tari¤ exemption
for imported inputs. Intermediary exporters also have a lower marginal cost.
Wholly foreign owned …rms (FIE), joint ventures (JV) and state-owned …rms
(SOEs) exhibit a higher marginal cost than domestic private …rms (the left-out
group), probably because they use more expensive inputs to produce output
of higher quality. SOEs’ higher marginal cost could come from an altogether
di¤erent reason - their relative lack of e¢ ciency.
   Note that processing exporters are overwhelmingly foreign owned or joint
ventures. The unconditional association between foreign ownership and mar-
ginal cost is some convex combination of the coe¢ cients on processing trader


                                        22
          Parameter                                         Mean           Std
          Price elasticity-Western hemisphere               -4.697**       0.991
          Price elasticity-Former Soviet Republics          -4.396**       0.922
          Price elasticity-Rest of Europe                   -4.440**       0.991
          Price elasticity-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  -4.261**       0.980
          Price elasticity-Rest of Asia                     -4.326**       0.946
          Price elasticity-Africa                           -4.718**       0.945
          Price elasticity-product 1                        benchmark
          Price elasticity-product 2                        0.203          0.427
          Price elasticity-product 3                        1.025**        0.375
          Price elasticity-product 4                        0.627*         0.303
          FMA-Western hemisphere                            0.583          0.399
          FMA-Former Soviet Republics                       1.173*         0.462
          FMA-Rest of Europe                                1.209**        0.393
          FMA-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                               0.495          0.625
          FMA-Rest of Asia                                  0.433          0.394
          FMA-Africa                                        1.024          0.409
          Linear decay rate                                 -0.055         0.094
          SOE                                               3.327**        0.822
          JV                                                5.348**        1.120
          FIE                                               2.081**        0.239


                     Table 1: Parameters in Demand Equation
Notes: Aggregate demand coe¢ cients for sector, destination, and period are not reported. **
and * denote statistically signi…cant at the 5% and 10% levels, respectively.



and foreign ownership. Somewhat disappointingly, the coe¢ cient on local wage
is not statistically signi…cant.


5.3     Parameters for the Permanent and Transitory Shocks
There are four random variables in the demand and pricing equations. First,
                                                   d
a permanent …rm-speci…c demand shock,              i,   in the demand equation, and a
permanent …rm-speci…c productivity draw, ! i , in the marginal cost function
are jointly log normally distributed. Second, a transitory demand shock, udi (t),
in the demand equation, and a transitory productivity shock, vid (t), in the
marginal cost function are also jointly log normally distributed. While we allow
for non-zero correlations between the permanent components of the demand and
productivity shocks, and between the transitory components of the demand and
productivity shocks, we assume independence between the permanent and the
transitory shocks.


                                            23
                  Parameter                       Mean              Std
                  SOE                             0.904**           0.119
                  JV                              1.159**           0.200
                  FIE                             0.236             0.169
                  processing status               -0.354**          0.083
                  trader                          -0.412**          0.115
                  local wage                      -0.067            0.195
                  Destination …xed e¤ects         not reported
                  Sector …xed e¤ects              not reported
                  Period …xed e¤ects              not reported


                      Table 2: Parameters in Pricing Equation
Notes: 14 coe¢ cients for destination, period, and sector …xed e¤ects are not reported to save
space; ** denotes statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.


    There are in total 8 parameters. We report the estimation results in Table
3. We note that the standard deviation for the permanent demand shock (1.19)
is somewhat greater than that for the permanent productivity shock (0.94).
This pattern is consistent with the …ndings reported in Roberts et al. (2012)
for Taiwanese footwear exporters. A relatively big dispersion in the persistent
demand shock across …rms may re‡ect dispersion in product quality across …rms
or dispersion in consumer taste over varieties.


5.4     Parameters for the Export Cost
Fixed entry costs are assumed to be a random variable that follows a normal
distribution with sector and region speci…c parameters. In order to put a dollar
value to the estimates, we have to make an assumption about the discount
factor (because the entry costs will be inferred from expected life-time pro…ts
of the …rms. Assuming that the discount factor               = 0:96, the second column
of Table 4 reports the estimates of the mean by sector and region, together
with associated standard errors. The third column reports the estimates of the
standard deviation by sector and region, together with the standard errors. As
we can see, across all products and regions, the mean export costs range from
$0.32 million to $0.64 million.


5.5     Discovery Cost Parameters
The discovery cost is assumed to be a constant that may di¤er by sector and
region. Assuming that the discount factor               = 0:96, the discovery costs are


                                             24
                     Permanent Shocks
                                                 Mean        Std
                     Productivity                2.541       0.944**
                                                 (0.028)     (0.018)
                     Demand                      2.223**     1.187**
                                                 (0.017)     (0.023)
                     corr                        -3.579**
                                                 (0.014)
                     Transitory Shocks
                     u                                       0.266**
                     v                                       1.717**
                     corr                                    -0.220
                                                             (0.134)


                  Table 3: Parameters for the Random Variables
Notes: ** denotes statistically signi…cant at the 5% level. Standard errors are reported in
brackets.


reported in Table 5. As we can see, the discovery cost ranges from 0.54 million
to 1.21 million US dollars.
   It is important to note that while we have to make a speci…c assumption
about the discount factor in order to place a dollar value on the estimates
of the …xed entry costs and discovery costs, our subsequent discussion on the
probability of missing pioneers is independent of the speci…c value of the discount
factor. A change in the value of the discount factor would change all …rms’
expected life-time pro…ts, entry costs, and discovery costs proportionately. As
a result, …rms’decisions on whether to become an export pioneer or whether to
export in a mature market are independent of the speci…c value of the discount
factor.
   Because the discovery costs are assumed to be paid by a pioneer …rm in a
given market but not by follower …rms, our …nding of positive discovery costs
also implies the action of the …rst exporter is a public good existence of a public
good - it reduces the total entry cost by all follower …rms. In this sense, we
con…rm the …ndings in Freund and Pierola (2010) and Artopoulos, Friel, and
Hallak (2013) that positive spillover exists. As we show below, however, the
existence of public good does not automatically lead to market failure.




                                            25
                                         M ean (in thousands dollars)   Standard deviations
 Sector 1
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        619.7**                        289.2**
                                         (5.8)                          (143.9)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   555.3**                        211.3*
                                         (8.1)                          (128.2)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            637.8**                        328.5*
                                         (5.7)                          (179.1)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            553.3**                        222.6
                                         (7.9)                          (75.5)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               626.0**                        295.6
                                         (4.7)                          (135.6)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     614.3**                        239.4
                                         (6.4)                          (58.1)
 Sector 2
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        473.1**                        202.3*
                                         (10.4)                         (116.9)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   459.9**                        92.3**
                                         (18.2)                         (15.8)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            450.8**                        241.9**
                                         (8.8)                          (45.0)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            377.6**                        156.5**
                                         (10.6)                         (37.3)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               506.0**                        211.6**
                                         (9.2)                          (40.0)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     470.9**                        183.7
                                         (10.7)                         (126.3)
 Sector 3
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        411.2**                        168.1**
                                         (7.6)                          (78.2)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   318.9**                        148.6**
                                         (7.1)                          (37.0)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            412.2**                        164.4
                                         (7.9)                          (110.8)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            358.5**                        78.2**
                                         (20.5)                         (4.5)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               416.6**                        158.7**
                                         (7.2)                          (60.3)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     416.2**                        155.1**
                                         (8.1)                          (54.5)
 Sector 4
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        541.1**                        236.8**
                                         (7.1)                          (109.8)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   451.6**                        192.2**
                                         (7.9)                          (88.9)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            609.8**                        320.0**
                                         (7.2)                          (72.7)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            491.7**                        201.9**
                                         (9.1)                          (79.5)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               590.4**                        259.3**
                                         (6.3)                          (95.2)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     486.4**                        216.9*
                                         (6.3)                          (114.0)



                       Table 4: Parameters for the Export Cost
Notes: Standard errors of the point estimates are reported in brackets. ** and * denote
statistically signi…cant at the 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                              26
                                                    Estimates (in thousands dollars)   Standard deviations
 Sector 1
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               893.5**                            9.7
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          876.4**                            13.9
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   1,212.1**                          8.1
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  892.9**                            22.1
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     827.6**                            7.6
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           833.1**                            7.9
 Sector 2
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               926.5**                            18.7
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          1,020.7**                          117.7
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   1,153.7**                          13.2
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  813.0**                            28.9
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     796.5**                            14.0
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           917.9**                            14.9
 Sector 3
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               1,082.1**                          10.7
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          1,060.1**                          15.0
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   1,134.8**                          14.5
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  987.3**                            52.8
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     1,064.8**                          10.3
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           1,037.0**                          8.7
 Sector 4
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               588.2**                            11.0
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          555.7**                            16.6
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   999.7**                            9.5
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  639.4**                            25.3
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     667.1**                            9.9
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           543.9**                            9.6


                                Table 5: Discovery Costs
Notes: ** denotes statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.




                                              27
6     Market Failures in a Decentralized Economy
As we have stated earlier, the missing pioneer problem occurs if and only if two
inequalities are satis…ed simultaneously. First, the discovery cost for entering a
new market has to be smaller than the sum of the expected pro…ts of all potential
exporters in that market. Otherwise, even a social planner would not want to
pay the discovery cost to discover that new market. Second, the discovery cost
has to be greater than the expected pro…t of any individual …rm. Otherwise,
some …rm will …nd it pro…table to unilaterally pay the discovery cost in spite of
its inability to capture all the value of the discovery, and the knowledge spillover
will take place anyway.
    We have also discussed a second type of market failure - the problem of pre-
mature pioneering activities - which is markedly di¤erent from the Hausmann-
Rodrik hypothesis.


6.1       Probability of Market Failures
To start with, we note an important role played by the number of potential
exporters (which is a measure of the size of a country-sector). Even without
doing any estimation, we may conjecture that the relationship between the
probability of "missing pioneers" and the number of potential exporters should
resemble an inverse V. At one extreme, if there is only one …rm, it is clear that
there is no market failure because the social planner’s and the individual …rm’s
                                                  d
optimization problems coincide (hence             k   = 0). At the other extreme, if the
number of …rms is in…nite and the distributions for the permanent productivity
and the demand shock are not bounded on the right, which are satis…ed if
productivity distribution or demand shock distribution is normal, log normal,
or Pareto, then some …rm is bound to get a productivity draw so high (or a
demand draw so favorable) that it wants to be a pioneer anyway even if its
action bene…ts other …rms. Therefore, the probability of "missing pioneers" is
likely to be higher only for some intermediate values of the number of potential
exporters. This is the limit of our intuition. How fast does the probability of
"missing pioneers" increase when the number of …rms increases? Where does
the probability peak? How fast would the probability decline after it peaks? We
will now use estimated structural parameters and simulations to answer these
questions.10
 1 0 We   explain how we solve the planner problem in the appendix B.



                                             28
   For any particular value for the number of potential exporters in E0 , we
randomly draw permanent productivity and demand shocks and the …xed entry
costs from the estimated distributions of these variables. Based on the real-
ization of the shock, we can determine if the missing pioneer problem arises or
not. (Recall that the …rms make export decisions before the transitory shocks
to productivity and demand are realized.) For 1000 randowm draws, we can
                                             d
compute the probability of market failure    k   for that particular number of po-
tential exporters E0 . We trace out the probability of missing pioneers in Figure
2 by varying E0 from 1 to 200.
   In the top graph of Figure 2, we plot three lines. A broken red line traces out
the probability that no …rm wants to be a pioneer as a function of the number
of potential exporters. This is a declining function because, as the number of
…rms increases, it becomes increasingly likely that some …rm will get a very lucky
draw from either the productivity distribution or the demand shock distribution
or both so that it would want to be a pioneer. A broken blue line denotes the
probability that the social planner prefers to have a pioneer. This probability
rises with the number of …rms because the sum of the expected pro…ts across
…rms from successfully exporting to a new destination - something that the
social planner cares about - tends to rise with the number of exporters. Finally,
a solid blue line represents the probability of missing pioneers (i.e., when the
social planner wishes to have an export pioneer yet no individual …rm wants to
be one). Logically, the probability of "missing pioneers" should be lower than the
smaller of the …rst two probabilities. Because "no …rm wants to be a pioneer"
and "the planner wants a pioneer" are not independent events, the probability
of "missing pioneers" can be lower than the lower envelope of either the broken
red line or the broken blue line.
   Interestingly, we …nd that one cannot make a blanket statement about this
type of market failure. The probability of missing pioneers depends on the
size of a country-sector (or the number of potential exporters to be precise).
This type of market failure can be a serious problem for a small country-sector,
with a peak probability of missing pioneers around 70% when the number of
potential exporters is about 10. On the other hand, since the mean and median
numbers of actual exporters are 394 and 295 for a 6-digit product in our Chinese
example, and the potential number of exporters is likely to be greater than the
actual number, the probability of missing pioneers is close to zero for a large
country. In Table 6, Column 2 reports the probability of missing pioneers as
a function of the number of potential exporters that corresponds to Figure 2.


                                       29
 Number of entrants     Prob of missing pioneers    Prob of premature pioneers
        5                        0.31                          0.01
        10                       0.71                          0.02
        15                       0.63                          0.00
        20                       0.56                          0.00
        25                       0.48                          0.00
        30                       0.41                          0.00
        35                       0.37                          0.00
        40                       0.34                          0.00
        45                       0.31                          0.00
        50                       0.27                          0.00
        55                       0.24                          0.00
        60                       0.20                          0.00
        65                       0.17                          0.00
        70                       0.14                          0.00
        75                       0.12                          0.00
       100                       0.05                          0.00
       150                       0.01                          0.00
       200                       0.00                          0.00
       250                       0.00                          0.00
       300                       0.00                          0.00


                     Table 6: Probability of Market Failure


As we can see, when the number of potential exporters is greater than 45, the
probability of missing pioneers is 31% or smaller. When the potential number
of exporters in a country-sector is 100 or more, the probability of this type of
market failure is 5% or less.
   Conceptually, we can have a second type of market failure - the problem of
"premature pioneers" - when a …rm decides to be a pioneer but the social planner
prefers that all …rms wait for at least one more period. We report the probability
of "premature pioneers" as a function of the number of potential exporters in
Column 3 of Table 6, and plot the relationship in a solid blue line in the lower
graph of Figure 2 (together with the probability that some …rm wants to be a
pioneer in a broken red line, and the probability that the social planner wants
no pioneers in a broken blue line). The probability of "premature pioneers" as a
function of the number of exporters also has an inverse-V shape. However, the
most striking conclusion is that in our baseline estimation, this second type of
market failure is a low-probability event for any number of potential exporters.




                                       30
 1

0.9        ← Prob that the planner wants a pioneer
0.8
          ← Prob that no f irm wants to be a pioneer
0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3
                     ← Prob of missing pioneers
0.2

0.1

 0
      0            50           100           150       200
                         Number of Entrants


 1

0.9

0.8

0.7
                  ← Prob that a f irm wants to be a pioneer
0.6

0.5
          ← Prob that the planner wants no pioneer
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0            ← Prob of premature pioneers
      0            50           100           150       200
                         Number of Entrants


             Figure 2: Probability of market failures




                                 31
7       Extensions and Robustness Checks

We now explore a number of extensions, starting with an exploration of the
roles of …rst mover advantage and the dispersions of productivity and demand
shocks.


7.1     Shutting Down FMA
To develop some idea about the importance of …rst mover advantage in our
inference, we attempt to arti…cially shut down the FMA in this section. In the
baseline case, we assume that a pioneer …rm receives a boost in its export sales
at the beginning which then gradually decays to 0. We use the point estimates
of all parameters in simulating the proability of market failure.
    As an alternative simulation, we impose in the demand equation (2) that
    =   = 0 (but otherwise use the same set of estimated parameters as in the
baseline simulation). Hence the pioneer …rm no longer enjoys any …rst mover
advantage. Our conjecture is that, without FMA, …rms should be less inclined
to want to be a pioneer, and correspondingly, the probability of missing pioneers
should rise.
    We plot the probability of missing pioneers under the new simulation in the
upper left graph of Figure 3. Indeed, the probability of missing pioneers now
rises dramatically, with a peak in excess of 95% when the number of potential
exporters is around 15. More importantly, it has become a substantially more
serious problem even for a large country-sector. We plot the probability of pre-
mature pioneers in the upper right graph of Figure 3. Perhaps not surprisingly,
this probability stays low when we shut down FMA.
    If the true data generating process is known to have no FMA, we can also
directly impose this restriction ( =        = 0 ) and re-estimate the model. In
this case, other parameters could also di¤er from those in the baseline estima-
tion. Based on the re-estimated model, we re-do the simulations and present the
corresponding probabilities of missing pioneers and premature pioneers, respec-
tively, in the bottom two graphs of Figure 3. We can see that the probability of
missing pioneers is much higher than the baseline case but slightly lower than if
we pretend that other parameters are not a¤ected by shutting down FMA. The
probability of premature pioneers still stays low.
    To summarize, taking into account the possibility of a …rst mover advantage
turns out to matter a lot in assessing the probability of missing pioneers.


                                       32
                          Probabilities of market failure by arti…cially shutting down FMA
 1                                                                        1
                             ↑ Prob that the planner wants a pioneer
0.9                                                                      0.9
            Prob that no firm wants to be a pioneer
0.8                                                                      0.8
                                                                                   ← Prob that the planner wants no pioneer
0.7                                                                      0.7

0.6                                                                      0.6
          ← Prob of missing pioneers                                                                ← Prob that a firm wants to be a pioneer
0.5                                                                      0.5

0.4                                                                      0.4

0.3                                                                      0.3

0.2                                                                      0.2

0.1                                                                      0.1
                                                                                         ← Prob of premature pioneers
 0                                                                        0
      0              50             100               150          200         0              50              100             150              200
                             N umber of Entrants                                                       N umber of Entrants


                           Probabilities of market failures based on a re-estimated model
 1                                                                        1

0.9                                                                      0.9

0.8                        Prob that the planner wants a pioneer         0.8

0.7                                                                      0.7
               Prob that no firm wants to be a pioneer
0.6                                                                      0.6

0.5                                                                      0.5

0.4       ← Prob of missing pioneers                                     0.4

0.3                                                                      0.3

0.2                                                                      0.2         ← Prob that the planner wants no pioneer

0.1                                                                      0.1       ← Prob of premature pioneers
                                                                                                      ← Prob that a firm wants to be a pioneer
 0                                                                        0
      0              50             100               150          200         0              50              100             150              200
                             N umber of Entrants                                                       N umber of Entrants




                                  Figure 3: Shutting down FMA




                                                            33
7.2        Dispersions in productivity and demand
We now explore how the dispersions of productivity and demand shocks (relative
to the magnitude of the discovery costs) a¤ect the likelihood of market failure.
Our intuition is that when the dispersions are small, the probability of missing
pioneers can become very large. For instance, we can think of an extreme case
when there is no dispersion and all …rms are identical. (This extreme case
happens to be the assumption used in the model of Hausmann and Rodrik,
2003). Imagine there are 100 identical potential exporters in a market. The
expected pro…t from exporting for each …rm is $200 but the cost of discovery is
$300. In this case, no individual …rm wants to be a pioneer because its expected
pro…t is lower than the discovery cost. Yet, clearly, the social planner wants
to designate a …rm to be a pioneer because the total expected pro…t across all
…rms is $20,000 (=100x200), far exceeding the discovery cost. Hence, we have a
market failure. However, if the …rms are heterogenous, and the expected pro…ts
vary from $0 to $600 even though the mean expected pro…t is still $200, then the
most productive …rm would prefer to be a pioneer and there will be no market
failure.
   We can examine the relevance of this point in our context. Speci…cally,
we will vary the size of the dispersions of the permanent demand and produc-
tivity shocks while keeping all other parameters …xed at the estimated values.
Of course, we can also vary the size of the discovery cost while keeping the
dispersions constant.
    In the left …gure 4, we plot the probability of missing pioneers corresponding
to three di¤erent values of dispersions in permanent productivity and demand
shocks across …rms ( = the baseline estimate, 100 times the baseline estimates,
and 0.01 times the baseline estimates, respectively), while keeping all other pa-
rameters at the values of their baseline estimates. Clearly, as the productivity
dispersion becomes smaller, "missing pioneers" become more likely. In partic-
ular, when both the productivity and demand shocks are assumed to have a
much smaller standard deviation (by 99%) than what are observed in the data,
the probability of missing pioneers can peak at around 80%. However, even in
that case, when the number of potential exporters exceeds 45, the probability
of missing pioneers again becomes small.
   In the right graph of …gure 4, we increase and reduce the size of discovery
cost of all sectors and destinations (100 times the baseline estimates, and 0.01
times the baseline estimates, respectively), while keeping all other parameters


                                       34
      0.8                                                           1


      0.7
                                                                  0.9       ← discovery cost = 100 x benchmark
                                                                  0.8
      0.6
                                                                  0.7
                   ← dispersion = 0.01 x benchmark
      0.5
                                                                  0.6

      0.4                                                         0.5


      0.3
                                                                  0.4          ← Benchmark
                                                                  0.3
      0.2
                         ← Benchmark                              0.2
                                                                            ← discovery cost = 0.01 x benchmark
      0.1
                                                                  0.1
                 ← dispersion = 100 x benchmark
         0                                                          0
             0          50             100           150    200         0           50             100            150   200
                               Number of Entrants                                          Number of Entrants




                        Figure 4: Varying dispersions and discovery cost


at the values of their baseline estimates. When the discovery cost increases, the
probability of missing pioneers increases since …rms are more reluctant to pay
the cost. Similarly, when the discovery cost decreases, the probability of missing
pioneers decreases.
   We conclude from this exercise that the probability of missing pioneers de-
pends on the dispersion of the productivity and demand shocks, especially when
the size of a country-sector is in an intermediate range. To put it di¤erently, the
homogenous …rm assumption in the models of Ho¤ (1997) and Hausmann and
Rodrik (2003) may not be an innocuous assumption. Similarly, the size of dis-
covery costs also matters. Our conclusion on the probability of missing pioneers
is not pre-determined by our empirical speci…cation. Rather, estimated sizes of
the dispersions in productivity and demand shocks and of the discovery costs
collectively determine whether missing pioneers are a high or low probability
event.



7.3          Possible Biases from Using Chinese Data
We re‡ect on possible biases introduced by the use of Chinese data. Since
exchange rate undervaluation could promote entries into new export markets
(Freund and Pierola, 2012), the …rst concern is that an undervalued Chinese
currency could arti…cially boost export pioneering activities, resulting in a lower
estimated probability of market failure. While there are frequent suggestions of
an undervalued Chinese yuan during 2003-2011, both narrative reporting before
2003 and data suggest that the exchange rate was not undervalued during 2000-


                                                           35
              Figure 5: RMB/US dollar Forward Rate (1998-2013)


2002, the period in which export pioneering activities take place in our sample.
In Figure 5, we plot the forward Chinese exchange rate (units of Chinese yuan
per US dollar) minus the spot exchange rate for both 12 months forward and 3
months forward. A positive number means that the forward market is predict-
ing that the Chinese nominal exchange rate would depreciate in the subsequent
3 or 12 months. From late 2003 to 2011, the forward spot di¤erence was always
negative, indicating that the market was expecting a Chinese exchange rate ap-
preciation. This was consistent with the expectation that the Chinese exchange
rate was somewhat undervalued during that period. In contrast, until Novem-
ber 2002, the forward spot di¤erential was largely positive, which suggests that
the market believed that the Chinese exchange rate was overvalued and a de-
preciation rather than an appreciation would have to come soon. Frankel and
Wei (2007) also suggest that the RMB was not undervalued before 2003, and
postulate that the switch in market assessment of the Chinese exchange rate
was started by US Secretary of Treasury John Snow’s actions at a G-7 meet-
ing in late September 2003, and Undersecretary John Taylor’s testimony before
Congress on October 1, 2003.
   Note that from January 1994 to July 2005, the Chinese nominal exchange
rate was always …xed at 8.2 RMBs per US dollar. This means that there were
no active government actions adjusting the nominal exchange rate during these
11.5 years. If there were exchange rate manipulation, it was done by neglect-
ing to adjust the nominal exchange rate. Since prices and wages can adjust
upward (though maybe more di¢ cult to adjust downwards), it is hard to keep



                                      36
the real exchange rate undervalued anyway. Indeed, China did not succumb to
a temptation to devalue during the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997-1999 as most
other countries in Asia did, and was praised by the United States and others
for not changing its nominal exchange rate (Frankel and Wei, 2007). If one
takes the position of currency manipulation, one would have to say that the real
exchange rate was manipulated to discourage exports during 1994-2002 before
it was switched to encourage exports during 2003-2011. In any case, using the
forward market as a guide, the Chinese exchange rate was likely overvalued dur-
ing 2000-2002, which should bias against …nding a low probability of missing
pioneers.
   The standard measure of real e¤ective exchange rate su¤ers from the problem
of ignoring trade in intermediate goods and global value chains. Once one makes
the correction (Patel, Wang, and Wei, 2014), the Chinese real exchange rate
both on a multilateral basis and relative to the US dollar exhibited a steady
and strong appreciation since 2000.
   The second concern is that export subsidies by the Chinese government may
also boost export pioneering activities, resulting in a lower observed frequency of
market failure. There is no shortage of Chinese trading partners alleging Chinese
export subsidies. During 2004-2010, there were a total of 43 countervailing duty
(CVD) cases (i.e., cases alleging illegal export subsidies) at the WTO against
Chinese exporters involving 47 four-digit sectors, or 71 case-sector pairs. (Note
that each case may contain multiple sectors, and a given sector may be involved
in multiple cases.) There were no CVD cases against China before 2004. Six
sectors were most frequently targeted. They are HS7306 (tubes, pipes, and
hollow pro…les, 8 cases), HS7304 (seamless tubes, and pipes, 5 cases), HS7604
(aluminum bars, rods, and pro…les, 3 cases), HS8418 (refrigerators, freezers, and
heat pumps, 3 cases), HS4810 (paper and paperboard, 3 cases), and HS7608
(aluminum tubes and pipes, 3 cases). Importantly for this study, none of the
products in our sample has ever been subject to CVD lawsuits. That is, no
country has ever complained to the WTO of illegal export subsidies in Chinese
exports of HS8525-8528. In fact, it is relatively uncommon for any of the 48
sectors in Chapter 85 to be subject to CVD cases. Only three sectors in this
chapter, HS8505 (electromagnets and permanent magnets), HS8516 (electric
heaters for water, space, and soil), and HS8517 (electric apparatus for telephone
sets) were ever subject to a CVD case, each involving a single complaint country,
accounting for 6.4% (3/47) of the sectors or 7.3% (3/41) of the cases ever subject
to CVD cases. We therefore conclude that export activities in our sample were


                                        37
unlikely to have been boosted by government export subsidies.
   Chinese exporters face more antidumping cases than CVD cases. Most an-
tidumping cases do not involve government export subsidies; many may be
judged to be protectionist in nature for a fair-minded economist. Indeed, China’s
WTO accession agreement was written in such a way that it was relatively
easy for a trading partner to impose antidumping duties on Chinese exporters
(Bown and McCulloch, 2005). We can take a very conservative approach and
regard each antidumping case as potentially involving export subsidy. During
the period 2000-2010 there were 707 antidumping cases against Chinese exports
involving 351 four-digit sectors. Only once was one of the sectors in our sample
(HS8528 "color television receivers") subject to an antidumping law suit (which
was lodged by the United States in 2003). In that case, the US International
Trade Commission eventually imposed an antidumping duty of 78.45% to Chi-
nese TV exporters.11 As a robustness check, we exclude this sector from our
data and re-estimate the model. This does not alter our conclusions.


7.4        Dropping Smaller/Poorer Economies
In the baseline estimation, we assume that the parameters are the same for
all countries within a given region (in order to reduce computational burden).
However, the probability of market failure could be either higher or lower for
richer/larger countries than for poorer/smaller ones. On the one hand, ex-
ploratory activities may be more costly in larger or richer economies (e.g., due
to higher costs of advertisement or hiring of a consultant), implying a higher
probability of market failure. On the other hand, costs of dealing with cor-
ruption and regulatory barriers could be lower in more developed economies,
implying a lower probability of market failure. To formally link the size of the
discovery cost to a country’s size, income level, and other characteristics, and
allow them to vary by sector and region, would add many more parameters.
This would increase the computational time substantially. As a short cut, we
re-estimate the model on two smaller samples and compare the results with our
baseline case.
   Our …rst sample variation is to drop countries with less than 1 million peo-
ple in 2000. This reduces the number of newly conquered markets (product-
destination pairs) during 2000-2002 from 593 markets involving 157 countries
 1 1 Seehttp://www.usitc.gov/trade_remedy/731_ad_701_cvd/investigations/2004/
  color_television_receivers_from_china/…nal/PDF/fr_commerce_order.pdf for details.



                                         38
                The case of missing pioneers                                   The case of premature pioneers
      0.8                                                           0.04


      0.7                                                          0.035


      0.6                                                           0.03


      0.5        ← benchmark                                       0.025


      0.4                                                           0.02
                   ← population > 1 million                                       ← population > 5 million
      0.3                                                          0.015
                    ← population > 5 million
                                                                                    ← population > 1 million
      0.2                                                           0.01


      0.1                                                          0.005


        0                                                              0            ← benchmark
            0           50               100          150    200           0             50               100          150   200
                                 Number of Entrants                                               Number of Entrants




   Figure 6: Probability of Missing Pioneers, Excluding Smaller Countries


in the baseline case to 509 markets involving 134 countries. Our second sam-
ple variation is to drop all countries with either less than 5 million people or
with per capita income less than US$500 in 2000. In the reduced sample, the
number of newly conquered markets shrinks further to 299 product-destination
pairs involving 71 countries.
   We estimate the model for each of the two reduced samples, and report the
results in Figure 6. The new results turn out to be similar to the baseline case.
In particular, we …nd that missing pioneers (the left graph) is a low-probability
event for large country-sectors but can be a more serious problem for smaller
country-sectors.

   The probability of premature pioneers is plotted in the right graph of Figure
6. Note the scale of the vertical axis which peaks at 0.04. While the probability
of premature pioneers increases when we exclude smaller or poorer countries, it
stays low in absolute values.


7.5         Intermediary Firms
Intermediary …rms are …rms that specialize in exports and imports, and may
not be producers themselves. They play an important part in facilitating trade
(Ahn, Khandelwal, and Wei, 2011). It is natural to ask whether their presence
a¤ects the probability of market failure. Data show that around 20% of Chinese
export transactions or 2% of the export value in sectors HS8525-8528 during
2000-2006 were carried out by intermediaries.


                                                            39
                The case of missing pioneers                                 The case of premature pioneers
       1                                                             1

      0.9       ← Prob that the planner wants a pioneer            0.9

                                                                   0.8
                                                                             ← Prob that a firm wants to be a pioneer
      0.8
                ← Prob that no firm wants to be a pioneer
      0.7                                                          0.7

      0.6                                                          0.6
                                                                                     ← Prob that the planner wants no pioneer
      0.5                                                          0.5

      0.4                                                          0.4
                        ← Prob of missing pioneers
      0.3                                                          0.3

      0.2                                                          0.2

      0.1                                                          0.1
                                                                                  ← Prob of premature pioneers
       0                                                             0
            0           50           100             150     200         0                50               100          150     200
                                                                                                   Number of Entrants
                              Number of Entrants



                                Figure 7: Excluding intermediary …rms


    Because we do not live in a world without intermediary …rms, we cannot
formally estimate the probability of market failure in a world without them.
Instead, we elect to gauge the importance of intermediary …rms in export pi-
oneering activities in the following way: we focus on a subsample with direct
producers only. More speci…cally, we exclude those new markets where the …rst
exporter is an intermediary …rm, and pretend intermediary …rms do not exist
even if they are follower …rms.
    With these modi…cations, we re-compute the probability of market failure
and report it in Figure 7. As we can see, without giving credit to intermediary
…rms in conquering new markets, the probability of missing pioneers tends to
be slightly higher than the baseline case although the quantitative di¤erence
between the two cases seems small.


7.6         Additional Knowledge Spillover
In the benchmark case, we assume followers can only bene…t from a pioneer
…rm’s action in the same product-destination pair.                            In this subsection, we
broaden the set of channels a …rm can bene…t from the actions of other …rms or
even their own prior actions. In particular, we allow four additional channels,
to be captured by four additional parameters that are related to observable …rm
                ~ i (t) in equation (4).12 The …rst is a …rm’s own export value
characteristics w
of di¤erent products to the same destination in period t                                1, which captures
  1 2 In other words, w
                      ~ i (t) contains ownership, wage, processing status, and also four additional
variables now.



                                                            40
                    The case of missing pioneers                                                The case of premature pioneers
        1                                                                            1

       0.9       ← Prob that the planner wants a pioneer                            0.9

       0.8                                                                          0.8

       0.7                                                                          0.7            ← Prob that a firm wants to be a pioneer

       0.6                                                                          0.6

       0.5                                                                          0.5

       0.4                                                                          0.4

       0.3            ← Prob that no firm wants to be a pioneer                     0.3
                                                                                              ← Prob that the planner wants no pioneer
       0.2                                                                          0.2

       0.1                        ← Prob of missing pioneers                        0.1
                                                                                                   ← Prob of premature pioneers
        0                                                                            0
             0             50             100                150       200                0              50             100              150   200
                                    Number of Entrants                                                            Number of Entrants




                                Figure 8: Additional Learning Channels


knowledge spillover from one’s own exports to the same destination. Albornoz
et al. (2012) explore this idea. The second is a …rm’s own export value of the
same products to di¤erent destinations in period t 1, which captures knowledge
spillover from exports of the same products regardless of destination.
    Besides bene…ting from the …rm’s own export experience, we also explore
knowledge spillovers from other …rms. Fernandes and Tang (2012) study the
spillover e¤ects of other exporters on new exporters. Therefore, our third new
learning channel is through other …rms’ total exports of di¤erent products to
the same destination in period t                           1.13 The fourth learning channel is through
other …rms’export value of the same product to di¤erent destinations in period
t 1. These modi…cations also change the probability of export in equation (10).
The set of state variables                  d
                                            i   now includes these four additional variables.14
    The new speci…cation allows …rms to be multi-product producers and indeed
makes use of the observations on multi-product exports from the same …rms. Us-
ing the expanded set of structural parameters, we re-compute the probabilities
  1 3 Fernandes and Tang (2012) also examine whether knowledge spillover dissipates with

physical evidence but …nd no evidence in favor of this hypothesis. For this reason, we do not
incorporate this feature. Incorporating such a feature in our non-linear system would have
substantially complicated the estimation.
  1 4 We keep the demand equation (3) the same and change the pricing equation (5) by

augmenting w  ~ i (t). Hence w
                             ~ i (t) includes not only the …rm’s ownership and local wage but
also four new variables that captures learning from own experience and learning from other
…rms. Then the export decision and pioneer decision rules are also changed since state variables
  d are augmented too.
  i




                                                              41
of market failures and present it in Figure 8. Compared to the baseline case, we
…nd that the probability of missing pioneers has now dramatically declined for
smaller country sectors, with the peak probability now around 50% (as opposed
to 70% in the baseline case). On the other hand, the probability of premature
pioneers has increased a bit, although still low in terms of the absolute value.
These changes in the probabilities of market failures are consistent with the in-
tuition that, by reducing the marginal cost (and increasing the expected pro…t
from exporting), the additional learning channels make it more likely for …rms
to want to be a pioneer.



7.7    Separating …rst-time entry costs from generic entry
       costs
In our baseline setup, an exporting …rm faces two …xed costs of entry: a discovery
cost that is paid for only by a pioneer, and a generic …xed entry cost that needs
to be paid for by every exporting …rm. It is possible that there is a third type
of entry cost, one that is paid for by an exporter the …rst time it enters a new
market whether or not it is a pioneer. In other words, if a market is new to a
…rm even if it is not new to the exporting country, the …rm may have to pay
a cost on top of the generic entry cost. Without considering this third type of
cost, we may have over-estimated the discovery cost.
   In this section, we extend our benchmark model to allow for this possibility.
We assume this third type of entry cost, denoted by F, is a constant. Assuming
the discount factor is 0.96, the …rst-time entry cost is reported in Table 7. The
…rst-time entry cost is about 530 thousands dollars on average. Tables 8 and 9
report the export costs and the discovery costs in the new model, respectively.
The export costs do not change too much while the discovery costs become
somewhat smaller. Figure 9 plots the probaility of missing pioneers in this case.
As we can see, the peak probability of missing pioneers (about 50%) is lower than
the corresponding number in the baseline case. Otherwise, this generalization
does not materially alter our inference. In particular, the probability of missing
pioneers is low for large country-sectors though it can be higher for smaller ones.
Interestingly, the probability of premature pioneers is somewhat higher than in
the baseline case, though it is still low in an absolute sense.




                                        42
                                                     Estimates (in thousands dollars)   Standard deviations
 Sector 1
 First time   cost-Western hemisphere                231.1**                            0.6
 First time   cost-Former Soviet Republics           365.8**                            0.8
 First time   cost-Rest of Europe                    208.9**                            0.6
 First time   cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                   342.8**                            1.4
 First time   cost-Rest of Asia                      365.8**                            0.5
 First time   cost-Africa                            483.2**                            0.7
 Sector 2
 First time   cost-Western hemisphere                462.2**                            1.2
 First time   cost-Former Soviet Republics           596.9**                            1.4
 First time   cost-Rest of Europe                    440.0**                            1.2
 First time   cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                   573.9**                            2.0
 First time   cost-Rest of Asia                      596.9**                            1.1
 First time   cost-Africa                            714.3**                            1.4
 Sector 3
 First time   cost-Western hemisphere                596.9**                            1.4
 First time   cost-Former Soviet Republics           731.6**                            1.6
 First time   cost-Rest of Europe                    574.7**                            1.4
 First time   cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                   708.6**                            2.2
 First time   cost-Rest of Asia                      731.6**                            1.3
 First time   cost-Africa                            849.0**                            1.5
 Sector 4
 First time   cost-Western hemisphere                440.0**                            1.2
 First time   cost-Former Soviet Republics           574.7**                            1.4
 First time   cost-Rest of Europe                    417.8**                            1.1
 First time   cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                   551.7**                            2.0
 First time   cost-Rest of Asia                      574.7**                            1.1
 First time   cost-Africa                            692.1**                            1.3


         Table 7: First Entry Cost for First Time Exporter to a Market
Note: ** denotes statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.




                                              43
                                         M ean (in thousands dollars)   Standard deviations
 Sector 1
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        643.37**                       52.5
                                         (15.23)                        (45.2)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   525.35**                       101.2
                                         (14.01)                        (129.6)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            644.33**                       127.1
                                         (8.74)                         (148.4)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            548.58**                       34.1
                                         (28.63)                        (43.1)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               708.27**                       26.9
                                         (7.18)                         (32.6)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     668.45**                       18.2
                                         (10.81)                        (30.4)
 Sector 2
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        453.54**                       40.6
                                         (15.76)                        (61.5)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   404.74**                       80.1
                                         (15.80)                        (105.5)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            461.05**                       49.6
                                         (15.80)                        (107.4)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            383.54**                       33.0
                                         (15.72)                        (159.4)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               467.49**                       69.2
                                         (13.60)                        (71.9)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     431.24**                       195.5*
                                         (13.35)                        (67.8)
 Sector 3
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        390.34**                       229.3
                                         (9.06)                         (79.4)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   337.65**                       59.7
                                         (17.18)                        (41.2)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            402.63**                       67.9
                                         (12.78)                        (115.3)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            342.49**                       75.6
                                         (24.60)                        (33.2)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               410.22**                       111.4
                                         (8.27)                         (79.9)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     399.88**                       80.3
                                         (9.09)                         (101.3)
 Sector 4
 Exp ort cost-Western hem isphere        531.95**                       90.3
                                         (10.06)                        (135.2)
 Exp ort cost-Form er Soviet Republics   443.07**                       255.9
                                         (13.31)                        (86.5)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Europ e            587.13**                       96.5
                                         (11.35)                        (182.0)
 Exp ort cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL            482.48**                       28.5
                                         (19.91)                        (40.4)
 Exp ort cost-Rest of Asia               602.34**                       153.6
                                         (11.05)                        (161.4)
 Exp ort cost-Africa                     487.6**                        107.5
                                         (9.55)                         (122.4)



                       Table 8: Parameters for the Export Cost
Notes: Standard errors of the point estimates are reported in brackets. ** and * denote
statistically signi…cant at the 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                              44
                                                    Estimates (in thousands dollars)   Standard deviations
 Sector 1
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               182.8**                            10.0
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          346.0**                            13.2
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   187.6**                            9.0
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  331.8**                            22.7
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     317.2**                            7.6
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           425.7**                            8.0
 Sector 2
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               229.9**                            21.4
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          125.4**                            29.4
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   352.2**                            15.0
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  280.2**                            26.5
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     335.6**                            13.9
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           122.4**                            16.1
 Sector 3
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               268.5**                            10.3
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          231.4**                            15.3
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   257.6**                            14.0
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  157.9**                            45.8
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     276.4**                            10.2
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           122.5**                            8.8
 Sector 4
 Discovery    cost-Western hemisphere               384.7**                            11.0
 Discovery    cost-Former Soviet Republics          481.5**                            15.6
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Europe                   125.5**                            10.3
 Discovery    cost-JPN/KOR/AUS/NZL                  267.9**                            24.1
 Discovery    cost-Rest of Asia                     606.5**                            9.8
 Discovery    cost-Africa                           414.3**                            9.5


                                Table 9: Discovery Costs
Note: ** denotes statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.




                                              45
                  The case of missing pioneers                                               The case of premature pioneers
         1                                                                          1

       0 .9                                                                       0 .9

       0 .8                                                                       0 .8
                       ← Prob that the planner wants a pioneer
       0 .7                                                                       0 .7

       0 .6                                                                       0 .6
                                                                                                              ← Prob that a firm wants to be a pioneer
       0 .5            ← Prob that no firm wants to be a pioneer                  0 .5
                                                                                              ← Prob that the planner wants no pioneer
       0 .4                                                                       0 .4
                        ← Prob of missing pioneer
       0 .3                                                                       0 .3

       0 .2                                                                       0 .2

       0 .1                                                                       0 .1
                                                                                                               ← Prob of premature pioneers
         0                                                                          0
              0       50              100                   150         200              0               50                100                   150     200
                              N u mb e r o f En tr a n ts                                                          N u mb e r o f En tr a n ts
                                                                              +

      Figure 9: Probability of Missing Pioneers, Including First Export Cost


7.8           Market Failure in Exporting Brand New Products
The analysis so far has focused on missing pioneers in discovering new markets
when …rms export existing products to new destinations. A di¤erent type of
discovery involves …rms exporting brand new products to the world market. We
now make an attempt at gauging the likelihood of "missing pioneers" in this
type of activity in the manufacturing sector.
   First, for a given country j, we estimate the set of manufacturing goods in
which country j may have potential comparative advantage in 2002 based on
the export bundles of both country j and other similar countries. We de…ne all
countries whose per capita incomes are within (-20%, +20%) of country j in
2002 as similar countries. Second, we compute the fraction of such goods that
country j did not export in 2002.
   For example, to de…ne a set of countries similar to China in 2002, we look at
all countries whose per capita income is within (-20%, +20%) of the Chinese level
($1135 in 2002). There are 12 such countries: Vanuatu ($1354), Egypt ($1286),
Syria ($1270), Honduras ($1197), Paraguay ($1135), Swaziland ($1131), Philip-
pines ($1005), Nicaragua ($995), Turkmenistan ($970), Guyana ($962), Congo
($920), and Indonesia ($910). For each country on this list, we assume each of
its HS 6-digit manufacturing export products as a potential comparative advan-
tage product for China. Note that the 6-digit HS code is the most disaggregated
level of product classi…cation that is common across countries. By this method,
the set of “similar countries”jointly export 4011 products (out of a total of 5110
manufacturing products). This is a set of products for which countries similar


                                                                   46
to China collectively show a revealed comparative advantage. (We use the term
"revealed comparative advantage" more broadly than the traditional usage as
our goal is to catch the set of products that China could be exporting.) Let us
call this set A. They are part of the "potential comparative advantage products"
for China.
    During 2000-2002, China exported a total of 4125 manufacturing products,
which constitute a set of revealed comparative advantage products for China.
Let us call this set R. The two sets of products do not overlap perfectly. In
fact, there are 101 products that the set of "similar countries" exported but
China did not. Let us call this set M. We might de…ne R+M as the set of goods
that China has potential comparative advantage; that is, these are the goods
that China or a country with a similar level of income could conceivably export.
R+M=4226.
   In this case, the probability of failure in exporting brand new products that
China could be exporting is M/(R+M) = 101/4226 = 2.4%. Some of the prod-
ucts in M may be ones for which China has no genuine comparative advantage.
For example, some "similar countries" export processed gold products because
they happen to have an abundant gold reserve but gold is scarce in China. So
R+M may overstate the set of products in which China has comparative ad-
vantage. In other words, even after erring on the side of exaggerating what
China could be exporting, the probability of failing to export some brand new
products is fairly low.
   One may conjecture that the country size is important here. While the
probability of failure to export some brand new products is small for China, it
could be greater for smaller countries. We do the same exercise for additional
194 countries in the Comtrade database (for which we have both GDP and
population data). In Table 10, we regress the fraction of products that a country
might have a comparative advantage but fails to export - potential failure in
exporting brand new products - on log GDP, log population, and log per capita
GDP, both individually and collectively. Note that because the three variables
are perfectly collinear, we can have at most two of the variables in a given
regression. We …nd that the potential failure in exporting brand new products
tends to decline with country size, proxied by either log GDP or log population.
The potential failure appears more serious for small economies but not so for
large economies. Furthermore, log GDP seems to be a better predictor than log
population for the likelihood of potential failure. This is sensible as the number
of potential exporters in an economy is likely linked to both population and


                                       47
                          (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)
    Log (population)      -0.087**                              -0.111**     0.016
                          (0.010)                               (0.008)      (0.011)
    Log (GDP)                          -0.116**     -0.111**                 -0.127**
                                       (0.007)      (0.008)                  (0.010)
    Log (pc GDP)                                    -0.016      -0.127**
                                                    (0.011)     (0.010)
    Observations          195          195          195         195          195
    R-squared             0.286        0.596        0.6         0.601        0.6


             Table 10: Comparative Advantage and Actual Exports
Notes: ** denotes statistically signi…cant at the 5% level. An intercept is included in all
regressions but not reported.


income per capita.


8     Concluding Remarks
The paper aims to assess the empirical plausibility of a highly cited hypothesis in
the international trade literature, namely export pioneering activities are prone
to market failure. Existing empirical papers tend to focus on documenting that
the action of the …rst exporter has public good features and then often jump
to the condition that market failure exists and some government intervention
is needed. In comparison, we stress that the public goods feature of the …rst
exporter’s action is only necessary but not su¢ cient for the existence of market
failure. For market failure to occur, one has to evaluate whether two inequalities
speci…ed in this paper hold simultaneously. No existing paper in the literature
has adopted this approach.
    We propose a structural framework to estimate the relevant parameters. We
provide supportive evidence that the action of the …rst exporter has public good
features. Nonetheless, we …nd that the problem of "missing pioneers" is a low
probability event for large or medium country sectors. This conclusion appears
robust in a number of extensions and checks we have examined.
    While the notion of FMA is widely discussed in the industrial organization
literature, it surprisingly has not been featured in the theoretical or empirical
literature on possible market failures in export pioneering activities. In our
calibrations, if we arti…cially shut down …rst mover advantage, we would have
concluded (incorrectly) that the probability of missing pioneers is high even for



                                             48
large country-sectors.
   For international trade, there are two categories of contributions from the
paper: (a) a new framework to assess two types of market failure in export
pioneering activities, and (b) an application to the Chinese data. The framework
can in principle be applied to …rm-product-destination-time data from other
countries. Such applications could allow one to develop more insight about how
country characteristics may a¤ect probabilities of market failure.
   For public …nance or microeconomics, a major claim of the paper is that
public goods or externality does not necessarily lead to market failure or a
case for intervention, if there is a …xed cost component in the cost of public
goods provision or in the investment needed for the activities that generate the
externality. One should be able to …nd applications of this point outside the
…eld of international trade. We leave such exercises to future research.


References
Aguirregabiria, V., and C.-Y. Ho (2010): “A dynamic game of airline
  network competition: Hub-and-spoke networks and entry deterrence,” Inter-
  national Journal of Industrial Organization, 28(4), 377–382.

Ahn, J., A. K. Khandelwal, and S.-J. Wei (2011): “The role of inter-
  mediaries in facilitating trade,” Journal of International Economics, 84(1),
  73–85.

Albornoz, F., H. F. Calvo Pardo, G. Corcos, and E. Ornelas (2012):
  “Sequential exporting,” Journal of International Economics, 88(1), 17–31.

Amsden, A. H. (1992): Asia’s next giant: South Korea and late industrializa-
  tion. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Arellano, M., and S. Bonhomme (2009): “Robust priors in nonlinear panel
  data models,” Econometrica, 77(2), 489–536.

Arellano, M., and S. Bonhomme (2011): “Nonlinear Panel Data Analysis,”
  Annual Review of Economics, 3(1), 395–424.

Arrow, K. J. (1962): “The economic implications of learning by doing,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 29(3), 155–173.




                                       49
Artopoulos, A., D. Friel, and J. C. Hallak (2013): “Export emergence of
  di¤erentiated goods from developing countries: Export pioneers and business
  practices in argentina,” Journal of Development Economics, 105, 19–35.

Aw, B. Y., M. J. Roberts, and D. Y. Xu (2008): “RD investments, export-
  ing, and the evolution of …rm productivity,”The American Economic Review,
  98(2), 451–456.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007):
  “Firms in international trade,” NBER Working Paper No. 13054, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Bown, C. P., and R. McCulloch (2005): “US trade policy toward China:
  Discrimination and its implications,” Working Paper, Brookings Institution,
  Washington, DC.

Casella, A., and J. E. Rauch (2003): “Overcoming Informational Barriers to
  International Resource Allocation: Prices and Ties,”The Economic Journal,
  113(484), 21–42.

Ferguson, S., and R. Forslid (2013): “Sizing Up the Uneven Impact of Em-
  bassies on Exports,”Working Paper, European Trade Study Group, Fifteenth
  Annual Conference, University of Birmingham, Birmingham.

Fernandes, A., and H. Tang (2012): “Learning from Neighbors’Export Ac-
  tivities: Evidence from Exporters’Survival,” Development Studies Working
  Paper No. 337, Centro Studi Luca D’Agliano, Torino.

        (2014): “Learning to Export from Neighbors,”CESifo Working Paper
  Series No. 4699, Center for Economic Studies Ifo Institute, Munich.

Frankel, J. A., and S.-J. Wei (2007): “Assessing China’s exchange rate
  regime,” Economic Policy, 22(51), 575–627.

Freund, C., and M. Pierola (2010): “Export entrepreneurs: evidence from
  Peru,” Policy Research Working Paper 5407, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Freund, C., and M. D. Pierola (2012): “Export surges,” Journal of Devel-
  opment Economics, 97(2), 387–395.

Hausman, J. A., A. Pakes, and G. L. Rosston (1997): “Valuing the e¤ect
  of regulation on new services in telecommunications,” Brookings papers on
  economic activity. Microeconomics, pp. 1–54.


                                      50
Hausmann, R., and D. Rodrik (2003): “Economic development as self-
  discovery,” Journal of Development Economics, 72(2), 603–633.

Hoff, K. (1997): “Bayesian learning in an infant industry model,” Journal of
  International Economics, 43(3-4), 409–436.

Kehoe, T. J., and K. J. Ruhl (2013): “How Important is the New Goods
  Margin in International Trade?,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(2), 358–
  392.

Klemperer, P. (1995): “Competition when Consumers have Switching Costs:
  An Overview with Applications to Industrial Organization, Macroeconomics,
  and International Trade,” The Review of Economic Studies, 62(4), 515–539.

Lederman, D., M. Olarreaga, and L. Payton (2009): “Export Promo-
  tion Agencies Revisited,”Policy Research Working Paper 5125, World Bank,
  Washington, DC.

Lucas Jr, R. E. (1993): “Making a miracle,” Econometrica, 61(2), 251–272.

Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The impact of trade on intra industry reallocations
  and aggregate industry productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

Nitsch, V. (2007): “State visits and international trade,”The World Economy,
  30(12), 1797–1816.

Patel, N., Z. Wang, and S.-J. Wei (2014): “Global Value Chains and E¤ec-
  tive Exchange Rates at the Country-Sector Level,”NBER Working Paper No.
  20236, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Rauch, J. E. (1996): “Trade and search: Social capital, sogo shosha, and
  spillovers,” NBER Working Paper No. 5618, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

         (1999): “Networks versus markets in international trade,” Journal of
  International Economics, 48(1), 7–35.

         (2001): “Business and social networks in international trade,”Journal
  of Economic Literature, 39(4), 1177–1203.

Rauch, J. E., and V. Trindade (2002): “Ethnic Chinese networks in inter-
  national trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1), 116–130.


                                     51
Roberts, M. J., D. Y. Xu, X. Fan, and S. Zhang (2012): “A structural
    model of demand, cost, and export market selection for chinese footwear
    producers,”NBER Working Paper, No. 17725, National Bureau of Economics
    Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Rodrik, D. (2004): “Industrial policy for the twenty-…rst century,”KSG Work-
    ing Paper No. RWP04-047, JFK School of Government, Harvard University,
    Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Rose, A. K. (2007): “The foreign service and foreign trade: embassies as export
    promotion,” The World Economy, 30(1), 22–38.

Wagner, R., and A. Zahler (2011): “New exports from emerging markets:
    do followers bene…t from pioneers?,” MPRA Paper No. 30312, Munich Per-
    sonal RePEC Archive, Munich.




9     Online Appendix A: Estimation Procedure (not
      for publication)
In the data, for each …rm i, we observe a sequence of cost shifters w
                                                                    ~ i (t), and
a sequence of participation choices Iid (t). When a …rm exports, we observe its
unit export value, pdi (t), and export sales sdi (t). Let us denote the entire data
set as Df . Our empirical model consists of four structural equations: a demand
equation, a pricing equation, an export decision rule, and a pioneer decision
rule. The two decision rules are non-linear, adding substantial complexity to
the estimation. Each equation contains an unobserved permanent component
                                                                                 d
of productivity shock for a …rm, ! i , and unobserved demand shifter,            i.
                                                                               d
    Our estimation strategy have two steps. First, we estimate ! i ,           i,   the pa-
                                               d        d
rameters in the demand equation                k;   ;       and parameters in the pricing
            d
equation        ;   k;   (t) ;   w   using data on an individual …rm’s prices and quan-
tities.
    Second, conditional on the set of parameters from step 1, we estimate other
parameters via the MLE. Denote the set of all parameters as                  . Then the
likelihood of entry/exit can be written as




                                               52
                            Y          h                      iIid (t) h                               i1   Iid (t)
                                            d                                         d
      l (Df j ; ; !)    =          G        i   (t) ;                      1      G   i   (t) ;
                             d;t

                               d                    Iid (0)   h          d
                                                                                      i1     Iid (0)
                            G ~i ;                                1   G ~i ;

   where G is the cumulative distribution function of a normal distribution.


10     Online Appendix B: Solving the Planner Prob-
       lem (not for publication)
Consider …rst the problem of a follower …rm. In equations (9), (10), and (11),
we de…ne ln ai (time invariant part); ln ri (t) (time variant part), and ln bi (t)
(FMA) in the …rm pro…t function. By de…nition, the follower …rm does not
have FMA, so ln bi (t) = 0. The expected static pro…t is

                              ln       i   (t) = ln ai + ln ri (t)                                                    (23)

   Let us denote the distribution of individual …rm state variables as f (t).
Given the realization of the static pro…t in period 0, if the planner wants to
choose one …rm to become the pioneer, the expected value is
                                                       8                                 9
                                                       <                   X             =
                       J E (f (0)) = max                   ViP +                  EViF                                (24)
                                                i      :                                 ;
                                                                           j6=i


That is, the planner chooses the optimal …rm i to become the pioneer …rm and
it gets the value ViP , while other …rms will become follower …rms and they wait
one period and get the expected value of follower …rms.
   Then the planner’s problem can be described by

                          J (f ) = max J E ; E [J (f 0 ) jf ]                                                         (25)

The above equation has two parts. The …rst part is the value of choosing one
…rm to become the pioneer …rm. The seconed part is the expected value for the
planner to wait one more period. Given that all state variables of individual
…rms are Markovian processes, it is enough to infer distribution next period f 0
from the distribution of current state variables f .


                                                        53
   Generally, the space of f is very large (we need to track all …rms’individual
states). To solve the planner’s problem, we approximate the distribution of
individual state variables by several moments (mean, standard deviation, etc.).
We adopt the following procedure: for a given destination,
  (1) Fix the number of potential entrants N . We do so by randomly drawing
N …rms in a 4-digit sector. We know their ai . They are time invariant.
   (2) For those N …rms, compute the mean and standard deviation of ln ri (t)
for every period t. Then approximate the transition of moments of ln ri (t) by
Markovian processes. We then can estimate the transition matrix.
   (3) Simulate one realization of ri (0) and export cost          i   (0) and then compute
the …rm value   ViP   (0) and   E0 ViF   for each potential …rm.
   (4) Compute J E given the realization of the individual …rm state variables.
   (5) Solve the planner problem J (f ) from the Bellman equation (25).
   (6) For each simulation in step 3, compute the optimal policy of the planner
and then the probability of market failure.


11     Online Appendix C: Chinese data - Addi-
       tional Details (not for publication)
We have monthly …rm-product-destination level export data from the Chinese
customs covering the 84 months from January 2000 to December 2006. We have
annual product-destination level export data for China from the UN Comtrade
database for a much longer time period, but the Comtrade data do not have …rm-
level information, which is crucial for our research question. Because our system
of four non-linear equations is complex (we have 70 parameters to estimate in
our baseline model even after making a number of simplifying assumptions), it
is wise for us to focus on a subset of sectors in this project.
   Our core sample is the Chinese exports of 21 electronics products span-
ning four 4-digit sectors (HS8525-8528) in HS Chapter 85 (electrical machinery
and equipment). We call a product-destination pair a market. Based on UN
Comtrade data (available at the bilateral product level but no …rm-level infor-
mation), we …rst identify a set of markets to which China did not export during
1996-1999 but did during 2000-2002. We then use the Chinese customs data
from 2000-2006 to identify, for each of the newly explored market, who the …rst
exporter is, who the followers are, and how their sales and prices (unit values)
evolve. In other words, we identify all the export pioneering activities (593 in


                                             54
 Sector                                                      HS8525      HS8526    HS8527      HS8528
 average annual growth rate, 2000-2002                       46.8%        6.6%      1.8%       36.6%
 export share in HS85 in 2002                                10.6%        0.1%      4.6%        3.6%
 export share in China in 2002                                1.8%        0.0%      0.8%        0.6%
 export share in the world of the same sector in 2002         7.8%        1.7%     20.5%        7.6%

 number of 6-digit products                                     4          3          9           5
 number of markets (# products x 220 countries)                880        660        1980        1100
 % of total # markets accounted by:
   existing markets by end of 1999                             21%        11%        43%         35%
   newly explored markets during 2000-2002                     23%         9%         9%         14%
   unexplored markets as of end of 2002                        56%        80%        49%         51%

 Total   number of exporters (for all products) in 2002        641        255        2185        1024
 mean    [median] # exporters per product in 2002            160 [160]   85 [29]   243 [295]   205 [103]
 mean    [median] # exporters per existing market in 2002      6 [2]      5 [2]     10 [4]       8 [3]
 mean    [median] # destinations a …rm exported to in 2002     3 [1]      2 [1]      4 [1]       4 [1]

          Appendix Table 1: Sample Distribution of Sector HS8525-8528



total) during 2000-2002 and trace the dynamics of both the pioneers and all
followers during 2000-2006.
   Our 21 products come from four consumer electronics sectors from Chapter
HS85 (electrical machinery and equipment). They are: (1) four products from
HS8525, transmission apparatus for radiotelephony, TV cameras, and cordless
telephones, (2) three products from HS8526, radar apparatus, radio navigation
aid, and remote control apparatus, (3) nine products from HS8527, reception
apparatus for radiotelephony, etc., and (4) …ve products from HS8528, television
receivers, etc. Key features of these four sectors are reported in the …rst panel
of Table 11.
   Note that by the end of 1999, these four sectors had entered di¤erent numbers
of markets: HS8526 was relatively under-explored by the end of 1999 whereas
HS8527 was relatively more explored. The distribution of mature markets as of
the end of 1999, newly discovered markets during 2000-2002, and still unexplored
markets as of the end of 2002 are summarized in the second panel of Appendix
Table 1.
   A …rm is called a pioneer if it is the very …rst Chinese exporter of a partic-
ular product to a particular destination. All subsequent entrants (for the same
product-destination pair) are followers. While it is possible to have more than
one pioneer …rm for a given product-destination pair, it is extremely rare in
practice. We …nd that in 97% of all the newly explored markets during 2000-
2003, there is a single pioneer …rm; in the remaining 3% of the cases, there are


                                            55
                                             Total number of …rms in a region
 HS code          Number of    Western       FSR    Europe    JPN/KOR       Rest of   Africa
                  exporters   hemisphere                      AUS/NZL        Asia
 852713             1019         394          28     252         145          806      123
 852732             1019         491          42     319         141          768      222
 852790             1008         192          91     126         140          645      277
 852712              823         253          28     186         88           665      252
 852729              778         286          58     221         139          545      279
 852692              542         191          15     110         54           408      90
 852731              533         180          13     151         79           355      47
 852812              467         149          72      90         31           306      159
 852520              456         139          23     112         82           298      52
 852691              352          82           6      95         46           247       31
 852540              295         120          12      88         60           205      15
 852719              187          86          11      49         46           135      37
 852821              152          73           3      61         35            75       17
 852739              130          37          10      17         20            78       7
 852813              115          28           3      29         28            71       9
 852530              109          45           4      35         24            56       18
 852822               95          16           7      10          20           47       17
 852510               61          22           1       7          8           36        11
 852721               48          17           1       9          6           20        9
 852610               46           6           2      10          8           24        7
 852691               34           7           0       5          8            18        3
 Sample Mean         394         67           22      94          58          277       80
 Sample Median       295          62          12      88          46          205      31

                 Appendix Table 2: Average Number of Entrants



two pioneers. There is never a case with more than two pioneers. Therefore, for
practical purposes, it is realistic to assume a single pioneer.
   In Appendix Table 2, we report the number of Chinese exporters for each of
the 6-digit products in our sample. In over 75% of the cases (16/21), the number
of exporters exceeds 100. The median and average numbers of exporters are
295 and 394, respectively. This means that these sectors are fairly competitive
and the number of potential exporters is large. On the other hand, for any
given destination and product, the number of (realized) exporters tends to be
substantially lower (often between 3 and 10). This re‡ects …rms’choices (e.g.,
in response to destination-speci…c entry costs).
   It may be useful to compare the characteristics of pioneers versus followers
to reveal the role of …rm heterogeneity. Recall that some consider pioneering
activities to occur for purely random reasons; See Wagner and Zahler (2011). In
comparison, Melitz-style models tend to imply that a …rm with high productivity
is more likely to be a pioneer (see Bernard et al., 2007, and Freund and Pierola,
2012, for evidence in this direction). Appendix Table 3 lists some cost and



                                        56
export characteristics of pioneers and followers. Due to data limitations, we only
consider three cost variables:15 (1) whether the …rm is a processing exporter;
(2) its ownership type; and (3) city-level local wage (using data in year 2000)
where the …rm is located. Panel A of Appendix Table 3 reports that 40% of
pioneer …rms engaged in processing trade, compared with 39% for followers.
Mean comparison test shows the di¤erence between a pioneer and a follower is
not statistically signi…cant. The ownership type seems to matter for a …rm’s
sequence of entry. 57% of pioneers are state-owned enterprises (SOE). As a
comparison, 26% of followers are SOEs. Besides, the local wage for pioneers
is lower than that for followers, indicating that pioneer …rms on average have
cost advantages. The di¤erences between pioneers versus followers in terms of
both ownership and local wage are signi…cant at the 1% level. However, since
many domestic private …rms and some foreign invested …rms exported through
intermediary trading …rms, especially before 2002, the role of SOEs might be
exaggerated.
    Panel B reports the statistical results based on a sub-sample of …rms that
exclude intermediary …rms (i.e., they are all manufacturing …rms). The patterns
are similar to the full sample, only with less distinction on the share of SOEs
between pioneers and followers. The di¤erence regarding processing share is
more signi…cant than before.
    Panel C further compares the initial export value and export experiences of
pioneers and followers. We focus on the new markets that emerged in 2001 and
2002 in Panel C (385 markets), so as to study the …rms’initial characteristics
in 2000 before they made entry decisions into new markets. Data show that
pioneers have better performance in terms of being a larger exporter, with more
relevant export experience in the new market (both on the product side and
destination side). Speci…cally, the average export value of pioneers was US$ 500
million in 2000, compared with US$ 124 million for followers. In addition, 43%
of pioneers had exported the same product to other countries and 35% exported
other products to the same country, which are both signi…cantly higher than
  1 5 The data used in our estimation are all obtained from the General Administration of

Customs of China, which shed little light on …rm’s cost variables, such as wage and capital.
Although some researchers have employed a matched dataset between the customs data and
China’s annual survey of manufacturing …rms to gain more detailed cost information, this
won’t work for our study. Our estimation requires the full sample of pioneers and correspond-
ing non-pioneers to identify the discovery cost and FMA. However, in our selected sector
only 44% of the …rms (3356 out of 7694 …rm-market pairs) could be matched, and around
64% of the pioneer …rms are out of this sample. As a substitute, we use the city-level local
wage to re‡ect …rm’s labor cost, where local wage is calculated using …rm-level data in the
manufacturing survey data.


                                             57
 Variable                                                      Pioneer   Follower   Mean comparison
 A. Full sample
 Processing …rm                                                  40%        39%       Insigni…cant
 SOE                                                             57%        26%     Signi…cant at 1%
 Local wage                                                      1.05       1.15    Signi…cant at 1%
 B. Non-intermediary …rm
 Processing …rm                                                  61%        56%     Signi…cant at 5%
 SOE                                                             35%        18%     Signi…cant at 1%
 Local wage                                                      1.09       1.15    Signi…cant at 1%
 C. Entrant for new market that emerged in 2001 and 2002
 Mean export value in 2000 (US $ million)                        500        124     Signi…cant at 1%
 Exporter of this product in 2000                                43%        9%      Signi…cant at 1%
 Exporter to this country in 2000                                35%        14%     Signi…cant at 1%

        Appendix Table 3: Comparison between Pioneers and Followers


followers.
   Note that in our structural model, we allow a …rm’s marginal cost to be a
function of …rm ownership, whether it is a processing exporter or not, and local
wage rate (as well as of its productivity and other terms).




                                       58
