NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SENTIMENTS AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY:
EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATES
Jess Benhabib
Mark M. Spiegel
Working Paper 23899
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23899

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

Helpful comments were received from Simon Gilchrist, Christian Gillitzer, Oscar Jorda, Atif
Mian, Jianjun Miao, Morten Ravn, Amir Sufi, Dan Wilson, Tao Zha, the SWUFE International
Macro-Finance Conference in Chengdu, China, seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, and two anonymous referees. Rebecca Regan and Ben Shapiro provided
excellent research assistance. Our views are our own and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jess Benhabib and Mark M. Spiegel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Sentiments and Economic Activity: Evidence from U.S. States
Jess Benhabib and Mark M. Spiegel
NBER Working Paper No. 23899
October 2017
JEL No. E20,E3,E32
ABSTRACT
We examine whether sentiment influences aggregate demand by studying the relationship
between the Michigan Survey expectations concerning national output growth and future
economic activity at the state level. We instrument for local sentiments with political outcomes,
positing that agents in states with a higher share of congressmen from the political party of the
sitting President will be more optimistic. This instrument is strong in the first stage, and our
results confirm a positive relationship between sentiments and future state economic activity that
is robust to a battery of sensitivity tests.

Jess Benhabib
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jess.benhabib@nyu.edu
Mark M. Spiegel
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
mark.spiegel@sf.frb.org

An electronic appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23899

1. Introduction
There is some evidence of a contemporaneous correlation between measures of consumer
sentiment and economic activity. The headline University of Michigan Index of Consumer
Sentiment (ICS) has been shown to be closely correlated with growth in personal consumption
expenditures over the postwar period [Carroll, et al (1994)]. This observed correlation in the
data can be interpreted in different ways. It is possible that sentiments only reflect knowledge
about current or future economic fundamentals. Some of the empirical literature has therefore
concentrated on testing the restrictions that predict a causal link between sentiment changes and
economic activity. Along these lines, there is also some evidence that sentiment measures
unexplained by economic fundamentals are associated with spending shocks [e.g. Oh and
Waldman (1990), Carroll, et al (1994), Starr (2012)]. However, the contribution of sentiment
shocks “unrelated” to other measures of fundamentals has been found to be only temporary [e.g.
Starr (2012)] and small [e.g. Ludvigson (2004)]. 1
Nonetheless, some theories suggest that shifts in consumer sentiments, like positive
shocks to expectations concerning future output or future output growth, can indeed be “selffulfilling,” and therefore constitute multiple rational expectations equilibria. Indeed these
sentiment-driven, self-fulfilling rational expectations equilibria can arise in various models of
endogenous growth, in models of real business cycles with external effects, in models with
collateral or borrowing constraints, or in search models with aggregate demand externalities, as
well as in OLG models. Stochastic sentiments or sunspots can randomize locally over a
continuum of rational expectations equilibria converging to an indeterminate steady state, or
Most of these studies concentrate on the implications of sentiment changes on consumption. Permanent income
theories however suggest that agents should spread the impact of improved economic prospects on their
consumption over the course of their lifetime. Observed responses over longer time horizons may also be difficult
to identify as new shocks emerge and fundamentals respond to changes caused by sentiment shocks.

1

1

alternatively across distinct multiple steady states. 23 Alternatively, even if the fundamentalsbased equilibrium is unique, information frictions and incomplete markets can give rise to
distinct sentiment driven stochastic rational expectations equilibria. 4
Barsky and Sims (2012) distinguish between “animal spirits” shocks and news or
information shocks using a VAR framework. 5 They only consider “animal spirits” shocks that
are “erroneous” or irrational, and explicitly exclude sunspot shocks that are self-fulfilling under
rational expectations. They argue that such animal spirits shocks unrelated to fundamentals are
likely to have an immediate but transitory impact on economic activity. Therefore positive
shocks to animal spirits are likely to look like positive aggregate demand shocks in the short run,
but eventually will peter out if they are not followed by real increases in productivity. Using this
assumption as an identification strategy in their VARs, they find that unexplained innovations to
consumer confidence are the result of slowly building news about “apparently permanent”
current and future economic fundamentals, rather than emanating from changes in “animal
spirits” or self-fulfilling expectation shifts that can drive the economy across multiple equilibria
or across multiple steady states.

See for example Benhabib and Farmer (1999), Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2000, 2001), Benhabib and
Wang (2013), Howitt and McAfee (1988), and Kaplan and Menzio (2013)].

2

Self-fulfilling changes in consumer sentiment have also been identified in the literature in a number of alternative
ways, as self-fulfilling prophecies [e.g. Azariadis (1981), Farmer (1999), herding [e.g. Blanchard (2016)], and animal
spirits [e.g. Keynes (1936) and Akerlof and Shiller (2010)]. Here, unless indicated otherwise, we use changes in
sentiments to describe changes in beliefs unrelated to fundamentals.4 See for example Shell (1977) and Cass and
Shell (1983), Maskin and Tirole (1987), Aumann, Peck and Shell (1988), and more recently Angeletos and La’O
(2013)], and Benhabib, et al (2015).
4
See for example Shell (1977) and Cass and Shell (1983), Maskin and Tirole (1987), Aumann, Peck and Shell (1988),
and more recently Angeletos and La’O (2013)], and Benhabib, et al (2015).
3

2

This interpretation is based on the assumption that sentiment shocks or expectation
shocks that do not reflect news about fundamentals only have temporary effects in equilibrium.
However many economic models generate persistent stochastic fluctuations under rational
expectations, driven by sunspot randomizations over multiple equilibria, or by correlated
stochastic equilibria driven by sentiment or expectation shocks. Furthermore, the stochastic
properties of such self-fulfilling equilibria depend, at least in part, on the stochastic processes
driving the sunspots or sentiment shocks, in addition to model-specific internal propagation
mechanisms for such shocks. The sentiment shocks themselves can be driven by general Markov
processes with arbitrary degrees of persistence. Indeed, the fluctuations induced by sentiments
can take the form of randomizations over multiple equilibrium paths around a locally
indeterminate steady state, or alternatively of stochastic fluctuations across multiple steady
states, all under full rational expectations. Depending on the model, these fluctuations can be in
either levels or in growth rates.
In this paper, however, we do not focus on stochastic properties of sentiments
themselves, which could be highly persistent, or alternatively could be temporary or i.i.d. Instead
we focus on the empirical question as to whether consumer sentiments directly influence output
levels over certain time horizons. It is of course quite possible that sentiment shocks that affect
output growth rates are indeed temporary, and our analysis does not exclude this possibility.
What we demonstrate instead is that sentiment or consumer confidence shocks at the state level
do have a measurable impact on state outputs and consumptions, certainly at one year horizons,
and possibly over longer horizons.
We concentrate on U.S. state economic activity as the focus of our analysis. We examine
the responses of overall state economic activity to changes in sentiment about national economic
3

conditions. Our identification strategy relies on the notion that changes in local sentiment about
national economic prospects are likely to induce local changes in consumption and investment
expenditures. As both consumption and investment expenditures are in play, a focus on
aggregate demand and overall economic activity seems useful. Moreover, the output response is
useful as a guide to the implications of sentiment shocks for optimal stabilization policy.
The use of state data also allows us to condition for aggregate shocks, facilitating the
identification of the direct impact of sentiment changes on economic activity at the state level.
We use Michigan Surveys (2016) questions concerning national economic conditions.
Our base specification uses the question, “Looking ahead, which would you say is more likely -that in the country as a whole we'll have continuous good times during the next 5 years or so, or
that we will have periods of widespread unemployment or depression, or what?” Our maintained
hypothesis is that states are sufficiently small that attitudes about the local economy will not
distort the response about national economic conditions. Given this assumption, our crosssectional treatment should isolate the impact of differences in sentiment across states on future
differences in state economic activity.
While sentiment data is available at the county level, it seems plausible that substantive
leakage is likely to occur across county lines. This is of course a compromise, as leakages across
state lines are also likely to take place, but they are much less likely to be prevalent than those
across county lines.
A potential problem with our specification is that household expectations about future
national economic activity may be positively related to local experiences, raising the prospect of
reverse causality in our empirics. We test for this possibility by examining the impact of past
state growth on current sentiment. We do find evidence of such a relationship in the data, as our
4

coefficient of interest enters at statistically significant levels. We respond to this reverse
causality challenge using instrumental variables estimation. Instrumental variables estimation
will also serve to address the also-likely issue that answers to the Michigan Survey are noisy
measures of consumer sentiment.
We turn to political data as an instrument for local sentiment levels that vary
systematically across states. There is a large literature that demonstrates a positive relationship
between partisanship and economic assessments. A survey respondent that self-identifies as a
member of one of the major political party is more optimistic about the national economic
picture when the sitting national leader is from that same party. In an early paper, Gerber and
Huber (2009) demonstrate that consumption changes following a political election are correlated
with whether or not the election was won by the preferred political party of the respondent. They
interpret this correlation as working through the sentiment channel.
Political partisanship has also been used as an instrument for identifying a connection
between sentiment and consumption. Mian, et al (2015) demonstrate that presidential elections
are associated with changes in sentiment about the effectiveness of government policy in line
with political partisanship. However, they find no statistically significant relationship between
changes in the presidential party at the county level in the United States and changes in actual
consumption. 6 In contrast, Gillitzer and Prasad (2015) show in Australian survey data that
higher sentiment is associated with having a member from your political party in office at the
federal level. These changes in sentiment associated with elections are also associated with
increased future vehicle purchase rates.

Mian, et al (2015) examine the cases of the 2000 and 2008 elections. While in neither case do they find evidence
of significant changes in consumption at the county level, they do find a significant correlation between the 2008
election outcome and planned consumption measures consistent with the predictions of a partisanship model of
politically-driven sentiment changes.

6

5

One distinction that favors the Australian study is that Australian survey data has a direct
question about political affiliation. U.S. consumer data, such as that used by Mian, et al (2015) and also used in this study – require proxies for political partisanship. The Mian, et al study uses
county-level data on voting in presidential elections. Below, we use the share of state
congressional representatives from the same political party as the sitting president. The latter
proxy has the advantage of changing every two years, yielding more variability in our sample
and allowing us to use our full panel sample. This is desirable because our use of state-level data
to mitigate consumption leakages across counties results in a smaller cross-section than the
Mian, et al (2015) county-level study.
We demonstrate below that our proxy is a strong instrument in the first stage of our IV
specification, and that the instrumented measure of consumer sentiment is shown to be positively
and statistically significantly associated with State output growth over the following four
quarters.
These results are shown to be robust to the inclusion or exclusion of state and time fixed
effects, as well as a variety of sensitivity tests. These include weighting observations by either
state size or the number of respondents, or changes in the sample population, dropping specific
time periods, states with exceptionally high or low incomes, investment levels or populations, or
dropping states identified as outliers based on residual values. 7 We also examine robustness to
the use of conventional, rather than heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors, random instead
of fixed effects, and regional instead of state dummies. The results are also robust to a change to

We do find that our results disappear when we drop the pre-crisis portion of our sample. However, this appears
to be the result that we have a relatively small number of non-crisis years available in our sample. As we discuss
below, our results are also weaker when we drop the post-crisis years (and strengthen when the crisis years are
dropped). It appears that the relationship we identify between sentiment and economic activity broke down
during the crisis period.
7

6

annual frequencies, and to the inclusion of lagged state and national output growth in our
specification.
We also examine other sentiment questions. Here our results are more mixed, but they
remain relatively robust for most alternative sentiment measures. We also consider the impact of
sentiment shocks on state consumption, in the form of personal consumption expenditures at the
state level. Sentiment is found to play a positive role in the determination of consumption a year
out of sample as well.
Finally, we consider longer-horizon sentiment impacts. We repeat our base specification
to investigate the impact of sentiment on state activity and personal consumption expenditures
over 2 and 3 year horizons. Our results for these longer horizons generally remain strong for
both activity and consumption effects, but we find that our longer horizon activity results lose
their significance when we include time dummies and cluster our standard errors by state.
The remainder of this paper is organized into 7 sections. The following section
introduces our data summary statistics. Section 3 discusses our IV methodology. Section 4
describes our base specification results. Section 4 subjects these results to a battery of robustness
tests. Section 5 discusses our IV specification and results. Section 6 reports our results for
longer horizons. Section 7 concludes.

2. Data
Quarterly sentiment data is obtained from 2004 through 2015 from the University of
Michigan Surveys of Consumers (2017). Our base gauge of consumer sentiment is the answer to
question BUS5 in the survey, “Looking ahead, which would you say is more likely -- that in the
country as a whole we'll have continuous good times during the next 5 years or so, or that we

7

will have periods of widespread unemployment or depression, or what?” Respondents’ answers
are scored 1 through 5, with 1 representing the answer “Good times,” 2 representing “Good with
qualifications,” 3 representing “Pro-Con,” 4 representing “Bad with Qualifications,” 5
representing “Bad Times.” There are also a modest number of responses characterized as
“depends,” scored 6 through 99 based on the response. The distribution of responses for the
entire sample is shown in Figure 1. It can be seen that extreme responses of 1 or 5 are most
common.

Figure 1
Distribution of responses to base sentiment question

Source: Michigan Survey of Consumers, 2004-2013. Histogram of percentages of each answer to survey
question BUS5. See text for question.

8

Figure 2 displays the relationship between national sentiment and national economic
activity. As in much of the literature, sentiment appears to track current economic activity
closely. For example, it is clear that sentiment declines sharply in tandem with the onset of the
Great Recession. Still, sentiment does not track activity perfectly. Sentiment reaches its lowest
level in 2011, reflecting volatility in financial markets associated with the euro area debt crisis.
Needless to say, while there is a decline in output at this time, it does not match that experienced
during the Great Recession. During that period, sentiment appears to have held up on average
while the US economy fell into recession, and then continued to fall after the recession had
ended. The great recession periods is notable, as sentiment appears to track activity much more
closely both before and after the event.

Figure 2
Average sentiment and national output growth (2004-2015)

Note: Source: Michigan Survey of Consumers, 2004-2015. Sentiment measured by average share of
“GOOD” responses (1 or 2) to question BUS5. See text for question. Output growth from current quarter
to four quarters in future.

9

It is also difficult to draw any causal inferences from this national picture. Changes in
sentiment may be following national economic conditions, rather than leading them. For that
reason, we turn to state activity data for identification. Reassuringly, there appears to be no
apparent cross-sectional pattern to state responses, either by income, education, geography, or for
the purposes of our IV specification below, political partisanship. In the latter case, note that our
sample period spans years with sitting Presidents from both political parties. 8
As our base measure of lagged sentiment, GOOD, we consider the share of a state i at
time t-4 whose respondents’ answers were scored 1 or 2.
We include other variables obtained from the Michigan Surveys to condition on the
characteristics of individual respondents. As our observation is at the state level, these are
measured as state respondent averages, also at time t-4. Our conditioning variables include
income levels by state, INCOME, which is calculated as the average of reported levels of
respondent incomes within a state, EDUC, which is the average of the highest year of education
reported by respondents within a state, and INVEST, which is the share of state respondents who
said that they hold investments. Growth at the state level from period t-4 to t, GGDP, is obtained
from Haver analytics, as is our measure of the national output gap, YGAP.
Summary statistics are shown in Table 1. It can be seen that there is a lot of variability in
the data in both growth and sentiment measures, unsurprising since our sample includes the
Great Recession period as well as the boom that preceded it. The final three columns show
average growth rates in our pooled sample for states exhibiting high (more than one standard
deviation above the mean) sentiment levels, HGGDP, neutral (within one standard deviation of

Appendix Table A1 displays average consumer sentiment over our sample by state. For our sample period,
respondents in the state of Virginia are most optimistic about future national economic activity on average, while
those from New Mexico proved the most pessimistic on average.
8

10

the mean) sentiment levels, MGGDP, and low (more than one standard deviation below the
mean), LGGDP, sentiment levels. As expected, it can be seen that subsequent growth on
average is higher following reports of high sentiment levels, and lower for states where low
levels of sentiment on average are reported. However, t-tests for differences in these populations
are not statistically significant.

Notes: See text for variable definitions. Test for HGGDP > MGGDP has p-value 0.016; test for HGGDP >
LGGDP has p-value 0.17, while test for MGGDP > LGGDP has p-value 0.16. Data is taken for sample years
2004-2015.

3. Methodology
3.1 Base specification
Our base specification is a conventional panel estimator:

∆yit = α + β GOODit − 4 + γ X it − 4 + {δ i } + {ε t } + ηit

(1)

where ∆yit represents income growth in state i from period t − 4 to the present, GOODit − 4 represents
the share of respondents with positive sentiment responses in state i in period t − 4 , X it − 4 is a vector of
controls linked to state growth via a set of nuisance parameters γ , {δ i } and {ε t } are respectively state
and time-specific fixed effects, and ηit is a is a residual, assumed to be well behaved. Our coefficient of

11

interest is β , the partial-correlation between sentiment and subsequent state income growth. We use
three covariates in X it − 4 to control for other determinants of state growth available from the respondent
survey, including, INCOME, EDUC, and INVEST, all described above.

We consider two alternative methods for conditioning for prevailing economic
conditions. First, we include the start-of-period output gap, YGAPt − 4 . Alternatively, we include
yearly time dummies, {ε t } . Quarterly time dummies are included below in our robustness
checks. 9
It is also quite possible that our data may exhibit heteroscedasticity and correlations
within and across state groups. We therefore use heteroscedasticity-corrected standard errors
throughout, and also allow for cross-sectional or state-specific dependence. For cross-sectional
dependence, which is likely across states in our panel, we use Driscoll-Kraay (1998) estimators.
Hoechle (2007) demonstrates that Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are well-calibrated when crosssectional dependence is present. For state-specific dependence, we include state dummies and
cluster by state.
For those specifications that include a comprehensive set of both time and state-specific
fixed effects, our specification can be interpreted as a difference-in-differences estimator of the
impact of changes in the share of agents within a state holding positive sentiment about future
national economic prospects or not.

We use yearly time dummies because estimating the full set of quarterly dummies results in a substantial loss of
degrees of freedom. Still, as we show in Table 5, our results are robust to the inclusion of quarterly dummies, with
our coefficient of interest retaining significance at least at a 10% confidence level for all estimation methods.

9

12

3.2 Endogeneity issues
One potential challenge in identifying a causal relationship between sentiment and
activity is that opinions about future national economic performances may be based on
individual experiences, and hence tied to the fortunes of the local economy. 10 This would render
a least-squares identification strategy invalid. To test if this is the case, we first examine the
relationship between current state economic growth and current sentiment levels. Our reverse
specification satisfies

GOODit = α + β∆yit + γ X it − 4 + {δ i } + {ε t } + ηit

(2)

where variable definitions are the same as in our base specification and we include the same
nuisance covariates in X it − 4 to control for other determinants of state growth available from the
respondent survey, INCOME, EDUC, and INVEST. We run this specification using ordinary least

squares, with the same variety of error specifications as those in our base specification.
Our results are shown in the appendix of this paper (Table A2). The data do appear to
indicate that sentiment is associated with local activity, although statistical significance is lost
when time dummies are substituted for the national output gap. Overall, however, there does
indeed seem to be a risk of reverse causality.
We address this potential issue through instrumental variables (IV). We follow the
literature in turning to political data as an instrument for differences in sentiment levels that vary
systematically across regions. Our posited relationship is that survey respondents will be more

We do find positive, albeit modest, correlations in the survey between responses to our national outlook
question and individual household experiences and expectations. The estimated correlation coefficient between
positive responses to the national economic outlook and positive responses to the question about whether a
household’s financial condition is better or worse off than it was a year ago (question PAGO in the survey) is 0.32,
while the estimated correlation coefficient between expected future national economic conditions and expected
household financial conditions five years in the future (question PEXP5 in the survey) is 0.23.
10

13

optimistic about national economic prospects if the sitting president is from his or her political
party.
Sentiment has been shown in the literature to correspond to economic activity, as in
Gerber and Huber (2009), who identify a positive relationship between partisanship and
economic activity, as consumption changes following a political election are correlated with
whether or not the election was won by the preferred political party of the respondent.
We expect that the primary channel through which partisanship can affect economic
activity is through changes in sentiment. A positive relationship between political partisanship
and economic sentiment has been demonstrated in the literature. Mian, et al (2015) find that
presidential elections are associated with changes in sentiment about the effectiveness of
government policy in line with political partisanship. However, they find no statistically
significant relationship between changes in the presidential party at the county level in the
United States and changes in actual consumption. In contrast, Gillitzer and Prasad (2015) show
in Australian survey data that higher sentiment is associated with having a member from your
political party in office at the federal level. Changes in sentiment associated with elections are
shown to be associated with increased future vehicle purchase rates.
One distinction that favors the Australian study is that Australian survey data has a direct
question about political affiliation. U.S. consumer data, such as that used by Mian, et al (2015)
have to use proxies for political partisanship. Their study uses county-level data on voting in
presidential elections. Our study using U.S. data faces the same challenge. To proxy for
political partisanship at the state level, we use the share of state congressional representatives
from the same political party as the sitting president, which we term CONGPRES. Our proxy

14

has the advantage of changing every two years, with each congressional election, and therefore
yields more variability in our sample.
We follow this literature in using changes in partisan fortunes as an instrument for
sentiment changes. However, such an instrument would be invalid if the political situation
directly affected underlying economic fundamentals. In particular, it is possible that states with a
higher number of congressional representatives from the same political party as the sitting
president will be favored in political outcomes in a manner that directly supports local economic
conditions. For example, decision about military base closures may be made in geographically
partisan manners.
Mian, et al (2015) provide two pieces of evidence against this possibility. First, they look
at income growth in U.S. counties before and after Presidential elections. They find no evidence
that Presidential elections are systematically related to changes in county growth in manner
associated with local political leanings. Second, they also find no relationship between election
outcomes and changes in government transfers to localities.
We provide additional evidence against this potential problem below, by adding taxes
and transfers from the federal government to our base specification. As in these previous
studies, our demonstrated relationship between sentiment and economic activity is robust to
conditioning for federal government economic transfers.

4. Base specification results
We first examine the first stage of our IV specification to demonstrate that we have a
strong instrument. We include our base specification conditioning variables as well. Our panel
results are shown in Table 2. We consider six variations: Models 1 through 3 include the lagged

15

output gap, while models 4 through 6 include annual time dummies. Models 1 and 4 use robust
standard errors, models 2 and 5 use the Driscoll-Kraay estimators, and models 4 and 6 allow for
clustered standard errors by state. We include state fixed effects throughout.

Notes: * p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01. Dependent variable is GOOD. OLS estimation with T-statistics
in parentheses. Models 1 and 4 use robust standard errors, models 2 and 5 use the Driscoll-Kraay
estimators, and models 4 and 6 allow for clustered standard errors by state. Data is taken for sample
years 2004-2015.

Our variable of interest, CONGPRES, consistently enters significantly with its expected
positive sign at a 1% confidence level, indicating significant correlation with our sentiment
16

variable. Our point estimate for this variable is also largely invariant to perturbations in our
specification. We therefore conclude that we have a strong instrument and proceed with our IV
estimation using a two-stage least squares approach.
The second stage results are shown in Table 3. It can be seen that our variable of interest,
GOOD, enters significantly positively. The instrumented coefficient point estimate in our IV

Notes: * p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01. IV estimation with CONGPRES as instrument for GOOD. Tstatistics in parentheses. Models 1 and 4 use robust standard errors, models 2 and 5 use the DriscollKraay estimators, and models 4 and 6 allow for clustered standard errors by state. Data is taken from
sample years 2006-2016.

17

specification is large. With the income gap included, it comes in at 0.19 and with state fixed
effects included it comes in at 0.13.
Overall, the data support a non-trivial sentiment channel for differences in economic
growth across US states. Indeed, if anything, these point estimates appear to be too high. Under
our Model 1 sample, a one standard deviation increase in sentiment would be associated with an
3.6 percentage point increase in state output growth in Models 1 through 3, and a 2.5 percentage
point increase in Models 4 through 6. 11 However, the 95% confidence intervals for these
coefficients allow a one standard deviation increase in sentiment to be associated with an
increase in state output of as low as 1.1 percentage points, a much more plausible figure, for our
base specification with robust standard errors and the income gap included (Models 1-3), and as
low as 75 basis points with robust standard errors and state fixed effects included (Models 4-6).
Our point estimate for the coefficient of interest, changes in the sentiment share, with the
output gap included is equal to 0.19 with the income gap included, implying that a one standard
deviation increase in our sentiment measure would be associated with a predicted increase in
annualized state GDP growth of approximately 3.6 percent. This seems to be a non-trivial effect,
but one that is not too large to be plausible. Our point estimate with time dummies instead of the
output gap is qualitatively similar, albeit modestly smaller at 0.13.
All of the specifications are statistically significant, at a 1% confidence level using White
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors, at a 1% confidence level, using Driscoll-Kraay
standard errors, and at a 5% confidence level with standard errors clustered by states using the
output gap and at a 10% confidence level with clustered standard errors with time dummies
instead of the output gap.

11

The estimated standard deviation of the variable GOOD in our base sample is equal to 0.19.

18

The performances of the conditioning variables are mixed. Only the INCOME variable
enters with statistical significance, and then only in our output gap specifications (Models 1
through 3).

5. Sensitivity analysis
In this section, we demonstrate that our base results, that state sentiments about national
economic prospects have a direct impact on future state output, are quite robust. We first
demonstrate that our base specifications results are largely robust to a wide variety of sample
perturbations (Table 4).
For each sample perturbation, we report the point estimate and standard error for the
coefficient of interest, GOOD, for the six Models in our base specification in Table 3. It can be
seen that the variable of interest is robust to a large majority, but not all permutations. First, we
drop the financial crisis period, which we interpret as spanning from 2007Q4 to 2009Q2. It can
be seen that our results get stronger with the removal of the crisis period, as we experience
increases in point estimates and significance for all specifications. 12 The increased significance
when the crisis period is dropped -- which indicates that our results are not driven by the crisis -suggests that our overall results are likely to strengthen as more data becomes available.
We next drop observations from “high” (more than one standard deviation above the
mean) and “low” (more than one standard deviation below the mean) average state income
levels. We do the same for high and low reported share of households with investments, and
We also tried dropping the first and last 8 quarters of our sample period, but experienced more sensitivity. In
particular, the GOOD variable of interest drops out with the early sub-sample omitted for all specifications. The
results are more robust with final 8 quarters dropped, entering at a 5% confidence level for all output gap
specifications, but only at a 10% confidence level for the White and Driscoll-Kraay specifications with time
dummies, and narrowly misses significance at a 10% level with standard errors clustered by state. These results
are available from the authors on request.
12

19

states with large and small GDPs. Finally, we drop outlier observations, measured as those with
residuals more than two and a half standard deviations above or below zero in our base
specification.

Notes: * p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01. IV estimation with CONGPRES as instrument for GOOD.
Coefficient estimates are for GOOD sentiment values. T-statistics in parentheses. Models 1 and 4 use
robust standard errors, models 2 and 5 use the Driscoll-Kraay estimators, and models 4 and 6 allow for
clustered standard errors by state. Data is taken from years 2006-2016.

20

Our base specification results are robust to dropping high or low incomes, high and low
investments, and large GDP states for all specifications. However, we do observe some
sensitivity to either dropping small GDP or outlier observations. Our results for both sample
perturbations remain significant at least at a 10% level with White heteroscedasticity standard
errors for our base specification with the output gap included, but both alternative samples drop
out with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors and only our drop outliers alternative sample is
significant with standard errors clustered by state.
Table 5 considers the robustness of our results to changes in estimation methodology and
specification. First, given our sample sensitivity to dropping small GDP states, one might be
concerned that averages of sentiment responses from larger states might be more informative, as
these are taken from a larger sample of individual responses. We respond with two types of
weighted least squares estimators, weighting by both state GDP and the number of Michigan
Surveys respondents in the state for that time period. The results for the six specifications with
these weighting schemes for the sample are in the first two rows of Table 5.
Weighting in either manner leaves our coefficient estimate for the variable of interest
significant for all model specifications, with the majority entering at least a 5% confidence level.
Moreover, the change does not qualitatively change our point estimate for output gap
specifications. It falls modestly when weighted by state GDP and marginally rises when
weighted by the n umber of survey responses. We observe larger point estimate declines using
time dummies, where weighting by GDP and the number of responses yield 0.11 and 0.10
point estimates respectively. These lower point estimates seem more plausible, as a one standard
deviation increase in the GOOD variable is predicted here to result in 2.1 and 1.9 percentage
point increases in state GDP growth respectively.

21

* p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
Notes: IV estimation with CONGPRES as instrument for GOOD. Coefficient estimates are for GOOD
sentiment values. Taxes and transfers are measured as growth in the ratio of state Federal income taxes
paid to state income and transfers from the federal government relative to the previous year. These are
introduced as separate variables. T-statistics in parentheses. Quarterly data except where indicated
and for lagged specifications which have annual frequency. The number of observations for annual is
588; Taxes is 539; and the rest is 2148. Robust standard errors ((1) and (4)), Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors ((2) and (5)) and standard errors clustered by state ((3) and (6)) in parentheses. Data taken from
2006-2016.
22

We also consider conventional, rather than robust standard errors, random, rather than
fixed effects, quarterly, instead of annual, time dummies, and regional dummies instead of state
fixed effects. All specifications continue to enter at standard confidence levels.
We next consider annual, rather than quarterly data. Our annual data is available a year
earlier, and so our sample spans from 2005-2016 and has 588 observations. Our coefficient
estimates for the annual frequency are almost identical to those we obtain with quarterly data,
and our variable of interest remains statistically significant for all specifications.
The use of annual data allows for the consideration of lagged GDP under the same time
period as our base specification. We consider the inclusion of lagged state GDP, lagged US
GDP, and both variables. All specifications enter with qualitatively similar values on our GOOD
variable of interest, and remain statistically significant. The coefficient point estimates are
modestly smaller, but still indicative of a substantive impact of positive sentiment on output.
Given a one standard deviation increase in our GOOD variable, our point estimate for our base
specification indicates a 2.3 percentage point increase in state output growth. 13
Finally, as we discuss above, our instrument may be rendered invalid if the political
situation directly affects underlying economic fundamentals. In particular, if states with a higher
number of congressional representatives from the same political party as the sitting president are
favored in political outcomes that support local economic conditions. We therefore also
condition for federal taxes and growth in transfers in Table 5. 14
13
We lose a year of data when adding lagged state GDP at a quarterly frequency, leaving our time series only
spanning 2007-2016. Our variable of interest, GOOD, is positive but insignificant with this truncated sample.
However, we run the specification under our original sample by linearly interpolating our 2005 annual state output
data. Using this sample, the statistical significance for the variable of interest is restored. This alternative sample
was provided to the referees and is available on request from the authors.

Taxes are measured as the ratio of state Federal income taxes paid to state income. We measure transfer
growth as the growth in transfers from the federal government relative to the previous year. These are introduced
as separate variables in our regressions.
14

23

It can be seen that our results are qualitatively the same with these variables included, as
our point estimates are roughly the same and enter significantly for all specifications. Given this
evidence, we proceed under the assumption that the sentiment channel is the only channel
through which the political characteristics of a state influence its economic activity, rendering
our IV specification valid.
Table 6 considers several alternative sentiment measures to the Michigan Surveys as well
as the impact of sentiment on consumption. Among the alternative sentiment measures, we first
we consider negative responses to the question about future national economic conditions, i.e.
those that answered response “5” to the question above. We term this variable “BAD5”.
Second, we consider the share of respondents in state i at time t that answered the question above
that national economic conditions over the next five years would be “good,” without
qualifications, i.e. with responses that were coded “1” to the question above. We term this
variable “GOOD1.” We also consider responses to question BAGO (109) which asks whether
business conditions are better or worse than the previous year, which we term “BETTER1”.
Finally, we use the sentiment measure studied by Mian, et al (2015) on the quality of government
performance, which we term “GOVT.” We measure this variable as the share of respondents
who answered “1,” indicating that they thought that the government was doing a “good job” in
its economic policy.
Our results for these alternative sentiment measures continue to enter with their expected
signs, but their performances in terms of statistical significance is uneven. Our results for
negative sentiment responses, “BAD5,” universally enters negatively at statistically significant
levels. Our point estimates for this variable indicate a comparable response to what we saw for

24

our positive sentiment measure. Given the standard error for this variable in our sample of 0.19,
our point estimate of, for example, our base specification with the income gap included and

* p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
Notes: IV estimation with CONGPRES as instrument for indicated sentiment variable. Coefficient
estimates for alternative sentiment variables. See text for definitions. Last row reports IV results for
consumption, measured by PCE, with GOOD variable as sentiment. GOOD1, BAD5, Better1, GOVT had
2148 observations; PCE is annual data and had 539 Observations. Robust standard errors ((1) and (4)),
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors ((2) and (5)) and standard errors clustered by state ((3) and (6)) in
parentheses. Data is taken from years 2006-2016 for everything but PCE which is taken from 2005-2015.

robust standard errors (Model 1) implies that a one standard deviation increase in the share of
negative sentiment is associated with a 2.7% percentage point decrease in state output growth.

25

Our coefficient estimates for the GOOD1 variable are larger than those in our base
specification above (which is unsurprising as it is on average a more positive reponse), and are
universally statistically significant at standard confidence level for all of our specifications.
Our results are not as strong over a shorter horizon, as the impact of those with higher
expectations concerning business conditions a year from now, BETTER1, consistently obtains a
positive coefficient estimate, but is statistically insignificant for our output gap specifications,
and is also insignificant for the clustered regression with time dummies included.
We obtain stronger results for the specifications where sentiment is measured in terms of
attitudes about the government’s performance, GOVT. These enter significantly for all of the
specifications except Model 6, which clusters and includes time dummies. In that specification,
the variable of interest just barely misses a 10% confidence level of statistical significance.
All of the alternative measures considered enter with their expected signs in all of our
specifications. Not all of these are statistically significant for our sentiment variable of interest,
but then, neither were the specifications with our base sentiment measure in Table 3. Overall,
then, while we acknowledge some sensitivity to the sentiment measure used, our results continue
to indicate a positive (negative) impact on state output with higher (lower) measures of sentiment
about future economic activity used.
Finally, a number of papers in the literature [e.g. Gillitzer and Prasad (2015)], examine
the implications of sentiment shocks for consumption, rather than income. These need not go
together, as positive responses in income to sentiment shocks may more reflect movements in
local investment, rather than consumption. We therefore look at the impact of sentiment shocks
on consumption, as measured by movements in personal consumption expenditures. Data for
this variable is available by state only at an annual frequency.

26

Our results are also shown in Table 6. It can be seen that we find a statistically
significant and positive response by state in consumption to sentiment differences as well.
Moreover, the point estimates for our specifications appear to indicate responses of a plausible
and economically significant magnitude, as a one standard deviation increase in GOOD is
predicted to result in a 2.3 percentage point increase in PCE consumption.

6. Impact on activity over longer horizons
Finally, we consider the impact of sentiment over longer horizons. We redo our base
specifications with a two-year lag for sentiment. As the start of our quarterly sample is
constrained by data availability for quarterly growth by state, we estimate over these longer lags
at an annual frequency over our base sample. 15 Our dependent variable is now GGDPit ,t + 2 ,
average annual state growth from period t through period t+2.
Our results for the variable of interest, GOOD, over a two-year horizon are shown in
Table 7. Our base specifications estimated using OLS are shown in the first row. Our
specifications are significant at standard confidence levels for all methods of estimating standard
errors with the output gap included (models 1 through 3). The coefficient point estimates are a
little smaller, as would be expected over a longer horizon, but still indicate a substantive impact
on state growth from changes in sentiment.
The results are more mixed for growth over a two year horizon with state fixed effects
included. The coefficient point estimates are smaller, but still indicate a notable impact on
growth. However, while we obtain significant coefficient estimates with robust standard errors,

Recall that coefficient point estimates for our variable of interest are very close for quarterly and annual
frequencies.
15

27

our results over a two-year horizon are weaker using either Driscoll-Kraay or clustered standard
errors. As above, we have some reservations about our standard error estimates for these
clustered specifications because our panel is small in the time dimension. Our point estimates

* p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
Note: IV estimation for state GDP and state PCE growth over 2 and 3 years, with CONGPRES ans
instrument for GOOD variable. Coefficients shown for GOOD variable. T-statistics in parentheses.
Models 1 and 4 use robust standard errors, models 2 and 5 use the Driscoll-Kraay estimators, and
models 4 and 6 allow for clustered standard errors by state. For 2 year PCE we are sampling from 20062015 data. For 1 year IV we are sampling from 2007-2016.

28

suggest that under our sample a one standard deviation increase in sentiment is associated with
an 1.6 percentage point increase in average state growth over the next two years for the
specifications with the income gap included (Models 1 through 3), and even smaller effects with
state fixed effects. However, a 95% confidence interval would include values similar to our
point estimates for the one year horizon.
The point estimates for average annual growth are even smaller and less significant over
a three year horizon, as might be expected. Our point estimates suggest that under our sample a
one standard deviation increase in sentiment is associated with a still-substantial 0.9 percentage
point increase in average state growth over the next two years for the specifications with the
income gap included (Models 1 through 3), and even smaller effects with state fixed effects
included. Again, a 95% confidence interval includes values similar to our point estimates for the
one year horizon. Moreover, it is important to remember that as the impact period increases in
length, the probability that further unmeasured sentiment shocks took place increases, which
adds noise to our analysis.
Our estimates over the 3-year horizon for state growth are in the second row. These
results appear to be weaker, as our point estimates fall, for example to 0.05 in the case of output
gap specifications (Models 1 through 3), and we only obtain statistically significant coefficient
estimates at standard confidence levels under robust standard error estimation. Our coefficient
estimates for models 1 through 3 suggest that a one standard deviation increase in sentiment
results in a 1.0 percentage point increase in average annual output growth over a three year
horizon.
Our results suggest a more modest, but still positive impact of sentiment shocks over
these longer term horizons. Still, we acknowledge that our results over these longer –term

29

horizons are weaker than those we found over a 1 year horizon, indicating that the positive
impact of state sentiment shocks on output growth that we find in the data appears to be
temporary.
We next turn to longer-term impacts on PCE consumption by state, which is only
available at an annual frequency. Our results for two and three year horizons are shown in rows
three and four of Table 7. It can be seen that our point estimates are modestly lower, but all of
our specifications over both longer horizons are statistically significant at standard confidence
levels.
Overall, our results confirm a longer-term relationship between sentiment and future
consumption at the state level is persistent. We also obtained positive, but weaker, estimates of
the implications of sentiment shocks for state economic activity.

7. Conclusion
We revisit the relationship between consumer sentiment and economic activity. Our
identification strategy is based on using the cross-sectional information in state data. We
examine individual responses to survey questions about long-term prospects for the national
economy. If sentiment drives activity, states in which agents hold more optimistic outlooks
about national economic prospects should undertake higher levels of economic activity:
Sentiments about economic prospects can thereby affect output at the state level.
A potential problem with our strategy is that it is possible that agents’ responses to
questions about future national economic conditions may reflect local conditions. Our reverse
regression results suggest that reverse causality along these lines may indeed be an issue,
although formal Hausman tests do not indicate endogeneity at statistically significant levels. To
30

address this potential problem, we turn to IV estimation, based on a predicted relationship
between political partisanship and economic sentiment concerning national economic prospects.
Our results demonstrate a strong first stage relationship between our instrument and our
sentiment measure. Our instrumented sentiment measure confirms a statistically significant
relationship between state sentiment about national economic prospects and next year’s state
economic activity under a variety of specifications. Our point estimate under our base
specification indicates that a one standard deviation increase in sentiment is associated with
additional 49 basis points of growth in the following year. This result is robust to a wide variety
of robustness tests, including sample perturbations, changes in estimation methods, and the use
of alternative sentiment measures. Moreover, we find a significant and robust relationship at
annual frequency between state sentiment and next year’s PCE consumption at the state level.
We also consider the impact of sentiment over two and three year horizons. Our results
over these longer horizons are weaker for state output, always entering positively but except for
the specifications with robust standard errors, only statistically significantly at a two-year
horizon for our specifications with Driscoll-Kraay or clustered standard errors with the national
output gap included instead of state fixed effects. At the three year horizon, our point estimates
are smaller and only enter at statistically significant levels for our robust standard error
estimates.
Our results for longer horizons with state PCE consumption are stronger. All of
specifications enter positive at statistically significant levels, regardless of model or estimation
method. Still, our point estimates diminish with horizon, indicating that our data indicate a
persistent positive one, but not necessarily a permanent one.

31

Our overall results therefore support the notion of a positive empirical relationship
between sentiments and future economic activity, as well as future consumption expenditures.
We find weaker and sometimes insignificant impacts of sentiment shocks in economic growth at
the state levels at longer than two and three year horizons, but robust evidence of measurable
impacts on consumption at those horizons.
Still, under our specifications it is possible that new sentiment shocks that occur late
under the longer horizons add noise to our sample and preclude finding statistically significant
results. Therefore, we remain skeptical of rejecting the possibility of measurable and significant
sentiment effects on output at longer horizons because of the weaker results we obtain under
clustered standard errors. Our quarterly sample is by necessity small in the time dimension, and
with longer samples we may obtain stronger results over time.

32

References
Akerlof, George A. and Robert J. Shiller, (2010), Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology
Drives the Economy, and Why It Matters ..., Princeton University Press.
Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La’O, (2013). Sentiments, Econometrica, 81, 739-779.
Azariadis, Costas, (1981), “Self-Fulfilling Prophecies,” Journal of Economic Theory, 25, 380396.
Barsky, Robert B. and Eric R. Sims, (2012), “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of
Innovations in Consumer Confidence,” American Economic Review, 102(4), 1343-77.
Benhabib, Jess and Roberto Perli (1994), "Uniqueness and Indeterminacy: On the Dynamics of
Endogenous Growth," Journal of Economic Theory, 63, 113-142.
Benhabib, Jess, and Roger Farmer, (1999), “Indeterminacy and Sunspots in Macroeconomics,”
in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Amsterdam: North
Holland/Elsevier, 387-448.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe and Martin Uribe (2001), “The Perils of Taylor Rules,”
Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 96, Jan 2001, 40-69.
Benhabib, Jess, Pengfei Wang, and Yi Wen, (2015), “Sentiments and Aggregate Demand
Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 83(2), 549-585.
Blanchard, Olivier, (2016), “The Price of Oil, China, and Stock Market Herding,” mimeo,
January 17, http://blogs.piie.com/realtime/?p=5341.
Cameron, Colin A., and Pravin K. Trivedi, (2005), Microeconometrics, Cambridge University
Press, New York.
Carroll, Christopher D., Jeffrey Fuhrer, and David W. Wilcox, (1994), “Does Consumer
Sentiment Forecast Household Spending? If So, Why?,” American Economic Review, 84(5),
1397-1408.
Cass, David and Karl Shell, (1983), “Do Sunspots Matter?,” Journal of Political Economy,
91(2), 193-227.
Farmer, Roger, (1999), The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling Prophecies,” MIT Press, Boston.
Gerber, Alan S., and Gregory A. Huber, (2009), “Partisanship and Economic Behavior: Do
Partisan Differences in Economic Forecasts Predict Real Economic Behavior?,” American
Political Science Review, 103(3), 407-426.
Gillitzer, Christian, and Nalini Prasad, (2015), “The Effect of Consumer Sentiment on
Consumption: Cross-Sectional Evidence from Elections,” mimeo, September.
Hoechle, Daniel, (2007), “Robust Standard Errors for Panel Regression with Cross-Sectional
Dependence,” Stata Journal, 7(3), 281-312.
33

Kaplan, Greg, and Guido Menzio, (2013), “Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling
Unemployment Fluctuations,” NBER Working Paper no. 18777, Ferbruary.
Keynes, John Maynard, (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money,
Palgrave Macmillan, United Kingdom.
Ludvigson, Sydney C., (2004), “Consumer Confidence and Consumer Spending,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 18(2), 29-50.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Nasim Khoshkhou, (2015), “Government Economic Policy,
Sentiments, and Consumption,” NBER Working Paper 21316, July.
Oh, S. and Michael Waldman, (1990), “The Macroeconomic Effects of False Announcements,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(4), 1017-1034.
Shell, Karl , (1977), “Monnaie et allocation intertemporelle,” mimeo, Seminaire d'Econometrie
Roy Malinvaud, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, November, 1977. [title and
abstract in French, text in English]
Starr, Martha A., (2012), “Consumption, Sentiment, and Economic News,” Economic Inquiry,
50(4), 1097-1111.
Stewart, Charles III and Jonathan Woon, (2016), Congressional Committee Assignments, 103rd
to 112th Congresses, 1993—2011, [updated].
University of Michigan, (2016), “Surveys of Consumers,” http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/.

34

APPENDIX
A.1 Variable definitions and sources
GDP Growth (GGDP) – This refers to GDP growth by state (unless stated US GDP) over the
past 4 quarters (year over year growth rate). The source for all GDP was Haver Analytics.
Income (INCOME) – Average of reported levels of respondent incomes within a state for that
particular time period. Source for income was the Michigan Survey.
Education (EDUC) – Average of reported highest level of education attained within a state for
that particular time period. Source for education was the Michigan Survey.
Investment (INVEST) – The share of state respondents who said that they held investments for
that particular time period. Source for investment was the Michigan Survey.
Output Gap (YGAP) – US output gap as percent of potential GDP. Source for output gap is
Haver Analytics.
High Growth Rate (HGGDP) – High growth rate are growth rates more than one standard
deviation above the mean.
Neutral Growth Rates (MGGDP) – Neutral growth rate are growth rates within one standard
deviation of the mean.
Low Growth Rates (LGGDP) – Low growth rate are growth rates more than one standard
deviation below the mean.
Instrument (Congpres) – Percent of Congress representatives in each state that share the same
party as the sitting president. Source for congress data was collected at Charles Stewart's
Congressional Data Page.
Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) – This is Personal Consumption Expenditure over
the past year (year over year growth rate). The source for PCE was Haver Analytics.
Primary Sentiment Measure (GOOD) – GOOD measures the share of a state i at time t-4
whose respondents’ answers were scored 1 or 2 to “bus5” survey question (think the country will
be doing “Good times” or “Good with qualifications” in the next 5 years). The source is the
Michigan Survey.
Business Sentiment Condition (BETTER1) – The percentage of people who answered 1 to the
“bago” survey question (think business conditions are “better now” than they were one year
ago). The source is the Michigan Survey.

35

Strictly Good Sentiment Condition (GOOD1) – The percentage of people who answered 1 to
the “bus5” survey question (think the country will be doing “Good times” in the next 5 years).
The source is the Michigan Survey.
Bad Sentiment Condition (BAD5) – The percentage of people who answered 5 to the “bus5”
survey question (think the country will be doing “Bad time” in the next 5 years). The source is
the Michigan Survey.
Government Sentiment Condition (GOVT) – The percentage of people who answered 1 to the
“govt” survey question (think the government is doing a “good job” on economic policy). The
source is the Michigan Survey.
Taxes – This is the ratio of state Federal income taxes paid to state income over the past year
(year over year growth rate). The source is the Haver Analytics.
Transfers – This is the growth in transfers from the federal government relative to the previous
year (year over year growth rate). The source is the Haver Analytics.

36

Note: Data sampled from 2005-2015
37

* p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
Notes: Dependent variable GOOD. Data sampled from 2006-2015. Robust standard errors ((1)
and (4)), Driscoll-Kraay standard errors ((2) and (5)) and standard errors clustered by state ((3)
and (6)) in parentheses.

38

