NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UBER VS. TAXI: A DRIVER’S EYE VIEW
Joshua D. Angrist
Sydnee Caldwell
Jonathan V. Hall
Working Paper 23891
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23891

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised October 2017

Special thanks go to Emily Oehlsen for indispensable project management, to the staff of Uber’s
Boston city team for hosting and assisting with our study, and to Phoebe Cai, Gina Li and Yulu
Tang for research assistance. Thanks also go to seminar participants at Chicago, Harvard, MIT,
Princeton, the Stanford Graduate School of Business, and Uber and to Daron Acemoglu, David
Card, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Henry Farber, Ed Glaeser, Nathan Hendren, Guido Imbens,
Michael Ostrovsky, Amanda Pallais, and Frank Schilbach for helpful discussions and comments.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of Uber
Technologies, Inc., MIT, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Angrist and Caldwell’s
work on this project was carried out under a data use agreement executed between MIT and Uber.
This study is registered in the AEA RCT Registry as trial no. AEARCTR-0001656. Caldwell
thanks the National Science Foundation for support under Graduate Research Fellowship No.
1122374.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23891.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joshua D. Angrist, Sydnee Caldwell, and Jonathan V. Hall. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Uber vs. Taxi: A Driver’s Eye View
Joshua D. Angrist, Sydnee Caldwell, and Jonathan V. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 23891
September 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. J18,J22,J41,J58
ABSTRACT
Ride-hailing drivers pay a proportion of their fares to the ride-hailing platform operator, a
commission-based compensation model used by many internet-mediated service providers. To
Uber drivers, this commission is known as the Uber fee. By contrast, traditional taxi drivers in
most US cities make a fixed payment independent of their earnings, usually a weekly or daily
medallion lease, but keep every fare dollar net of expenses. We assess these compensation
models from a driver’s point of view using an experiment that offered random samples of Boston
Uber drivers opportunities to lease a virtual taxi medallion that eliminates the Uber fee. Some
drivers were offered a negative fee. Drivers’ labor supply response to our offers reveals a large
intertemporal substitution elasticity, on the order of 1.2. At the same time, our virtual lease
program was under-subscribed: many drivers who would have benefitted from buying an
inexpensive lease chose to opt out. We use these results to compute the average compensation
required to make drivers indifferent between ride-hailing and a traditional taxi compensation
contract. The results suggest that ride-hailing drivers gain considerably from the opportunity to
drive without leasing.
Joshua D. Angrist
Jonathan V. Hall
Department of Economics, E52-436
Uber Technologies
MIT
jvh@uber.com
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and IZA
and also NBER
angrist@mit.edu
Sydnee Caldwell
Department of Economics, E52
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
sydneec@mit.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1656

1

Introduction

Traditional taxi drivers in most large American cities must own or lease one of a limited
number of medallions granting them the right to drive. Limited supply of taxi medallions
has made medallions into valuable assets, typically held by investors or fleet owners, and
trading for hundreds of thousands of dollars. Most big city taxi drivers therefore lease their
medallions by the shift, day, or week. Taxi drivers can drive as much or as little as they want,
but they’re on the hook for the lease. The rise of ride-hailing platforms, including Uber, means
that many workers now have the opportunity to add to their earnings by oﬀering hackney
services in private vehicles, no medallion lease required. In the summer of 2016, Uber had
almost 20,000 active drivers in Boston, a figure that can be compared with Boston’s long-fixed
1,825 taxi medallions.
In additional to reducing entry barriers and perhaps taxi fares, an important feature of
the ride-hailing model is a proportional compensation scheme, with few or no fixed costs. In
return for a percentage of their earnings known to drivers as a fee or commission, ride-hailing
drivers can set a work schedule without having to worry about covering a lease. Drivers
who work long hours are still better oﬀ leasing because they keep every dollar earned on
a relatively high farebox. But drivers with low hours should prefer work on a ride-hailing
platform.1
This paper looks at the economic value of ride-hailing work opportunities for drivers,
focusing on diﬀerences in the compensation arrangements available to traditional taxi and
ride-hailing drivers. We assess these compensation models from a driver’s point of view with
the aid of an experiment that oﬀered random samples of Boston Uber drivers a virtual lease
that eliminates or reduces the Uber fee. Some lease-paying drivers were oﬀered a negative
fee, capturing a possibly higher-than-Uber taxi wage. The response to our oﬀers reveals a
large, precisely estimated intertemporal substitution elasticity for the Uber wage eﬀect on
Uber hours, on the order of 1.2. These estimates are broadly consistent with experimental
estimates reported for Swiss bicycle messengers by Fehr and Goette (2007), and belie claims
that taxi driver labor supply is mediated by an empirically important degree of income
1

Some cities, including New York and (until recently) Houston, impose one-time or infrequent licensure
and training costs on ride-hailing drivers.

1

targeting as argued in, e.g., Camerer et al. (1997).2 Our estimated substitition elasticities
are also in line with the Mas and Pallais (2017) experimental estimates of compensated
elasticies for part-time workers with flexible hours.
The labor supply elasticity is a key parameter in our evaluation of the ride-hailing compensation contract. A large intertemporal substitution elasticity (ISE) tends to make medalliontype contracts more attractive since the medallion system raises wages. Elastic drivers collect
additional surplus by driving longer hours when their hourly wage goes up. And many drivers
to whom we oﬀered a lease indeed took it. But many drivers who would have benefitted from
leasing failed to take advantage of the opportunity to do so, a phenomenon we call “lease aversion.” To quantify lease aversion, we compute a behavioral lease parameter that rationalizes
empirical lease take-up rates. The ISE and lease aversion are the key economic parameters
that determine the level of compensating variation required (that is, driver surplus lost) when
Uber’s proportional compensation scheme is replaced by leasing. Even without lease aversion, the opportunity to drive with no lease payment generates surplus for most Uber drivers
unless lease prices fall below about $100 per week. In the face of a $200 weekly lease, lease
aversion increases Boston drivers’ average ride-hailing surplus to nearly one-third of average
Uber earnings.
This paper focuses on the value of ride-hailing work opportunities for drivers, but our
theoretical framework and empirical strategy may be used to assess compensation schemes on
other jobs with entry barriers, where the “right to work” can be purchased at either a flat rate
or a rate proportional to earnings. Service professionals like hair stylists and cosmetologists
face this sort of choice, either working on commission or renting a chair, in which case they’re
independent contractors keeping what they make. Many franchise contracts make this tradeoﬀ explicit: potential franchisees often pay a fixed cost to the franchise owner, as well as or
instead of a royalty quoted as a percentage of sales.

2

Theoretical Framework

Our experiment is motivated by a stylized contrast between the compensation schemes embedded in ride-hailing and traditional taxi work arrangements. In Boston, until recently,
2

See Farber (2005; 2015) for more on taxi driver supply elasticities.

2

Uber took a flat fee of 20% or 25% of gross fares (referred to here as the Uber “farebox”;
these are base fares received plus any increase due to Uber’s surge multiplier; drivers who
started before September 2015 were grandfathered into the lower fee). Most taxi drivers
must lease a medallion (the legal right to drive) per shift, day, or week, but can then drive
commission-free. Expenses (mostly gas) are paid by drivers under both schemes. Taxi medallion leases may or may not cover use of a vehicle; Uber also oﬀers its drivers the opportunity
to rent or lease cars through a program known as “vehicle solutions,” though few drivers do
this.3
Our experimental lease amounts are well below the price of a traditional taxi medallion
lease: before the advent of ride-hailing, Boston medallion leases (including vehicle) ran around
$700/week and over $100/day. Our virtual medallions were priced from $50-$165/week.
These prices were calibrated to appeal to drivers with weekly earnings in particular ranges,
as explained below. As a measure of the contemporary empirical relevance of our design, it’s
noteworthy that in 2016 a Boston ride-hailing upstart (Fasten) oﬀered its drivers the option
to pay $80/week or $15/day to drive fee-free.4

2.1

Taking Taxi

We use the term “Taxi” to refer to hackney carriage jobs characterized by the compensation
schemes oﬀered to Uber drivers in our experiment. Fares are cast in terms of average hourly
earnings, w, taken to be the same for Uber and Taxi drivers. This is unrestrictive because
diﬀerences in wages can be modeled as part of the Uber fee, or reflected in a negative fee for
Taxi drivers.
3

Uber changed its pay policy in June 2017 to loosen the link between rider fares and driver earnings,
an innovation known as “up front pricing.” Lyft has experimented with similar schemes. Neither ride-share
operator requires drivers to make advance payments analogous to medallion leasing.
4
In 2010, the Boston medallion lease cost for a single driver was capped at $700/week, $139/day,
and $77/12-hour shift (BPD Circular Date 12-30-09 “2010 Standard Shift Rental Agreement”). Newer
cars leased for an additional 170/week.
Drivers could split a weekly lease for no more than
$800. Before the advent of ride-hailing, short supply meant medallions typically leased at the cap.
Side payments to Boston fleet owners also appear to have been entrenched (See the 2013 Boston
Globe stories linked under http://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/specials/taxi). Data on medallion prices
is spotty; a CommonWealth Magazine article (http://commonwealthmagazine.org/transportation/taximedallion-owners-under-water-and-drowning/) quotes a pre-ride-hailing Boston medallion price of over
$700,000, down recently to about half that. NYC medallion prices are said to have peaked at over one million dollars (http://seekingalpha.com/article/3177766-taxi-farebox-declines-a-harder-hit-to-medallion-ownerbottom-lines?page=2).

3

Drivers drive for h hours, so their weekly farebox is wh. Driver compensation schemes
can be described using this notation as follows:
1. Uber drivers earn y0 = w(1

t0 )h, where t0 is the Uber fee.

2. Taxi drivers earn y1 = w(1

t1 )h

possibly higher Taxi wage.

L, where L is a lease price and t1  0 reflects a

Drivers can choose not to work and earn 0 dollars, but leases must be purchased in advance.
The quantity t0

t1 is the diﬀerence in “tax rates” implicit in the two contracts.

Our analysis takes the wage rate, w, as given. Of course, the entry of thousands of new
drivers into the Boston cab market might change the equilibrium wage. Uber has almost certainly reduced the traditional taxi farebox, a fact reflected in steeply falling medallion prices.
The eﬀect on driver earnings is less clear, however, since rents generated by the traditional
system may be retained by medallion owners rather than distributed to drivers. Competitive
ride-hailing employment opportunities might therefore boost pay for some workers in the
hackney carriage sector. A diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences-style analysis of Uber entry eﬀects on
workers classified in the “Taxi Drivers and Chauﬀeurs” occupation in the American Community Survey suggests Uber reduced the hourly earnings of wage-employed drivers by 8-10%,
but this is oﬀset by much larger gains for the self-employed (Berger et al., 2017). Averaging
the two groups, driver pay looks to be essentially unchanged.
Our experiment ran for one week at a time, and many drivers indeed lease weekly, so it’s
natural to think of L as a weekly lease, with drivers choosing Uber and Taxi week by week.
Alternately, we can imagine Taxi as permanently displacing Uber or vice versa, in which
case the relevant decision-making horizon might be longer, with L scaled accordingly. After
laying out the basic framework, we briefly consider the contrast between Taxi and Uber in a
life-cycle framework where the opportunity to choose between ride-hailing and Taxi may be
transitory and future wages are uncertain.
Figure 1 sketches the Uber and Taxi budget sets when w = 20, L = 100, t1 = 0 and
t0 = .25, so the diﬀerence in tax rates in this example is just the Uber fee (these are realistic
values for wages and fees, but real-world medallion lease costs are much higher). In general,
the budget lines cross where the farebox solves
wh =

L
t0

t1
4

⌘ B,

a quantity we call the Taxi breakeven. This is $400 in the figure, attained by drivers who
drive at least 20 hours. Drivers who collect more than $400 in fares come out ahead under
Taxi, while drivers with a lower farebox take home more by driving for Uber. Note that
the indiﬀerence curves sketched in this figure reflect increasing utility as the curves shift
northwest. A driver with indiﬀerence curve u0 prefers Uber, while a driver with indiﬀerence
curve u1 prefers Taxi.
Figure 1 compares a pair of drivers with fareboxes above and below breakeven. Drivers
above breakeven always benefit from Taxi. Some drivers with below-breakeven farebox under Uber may respond to the higher Taxi wage by driving longer hours, thereby clearing
breakeven. This scenario is sketched in Figure (2). As in Ashenfelter (1983)’s analysis of
welfare program participation, we compute the theoretical opt-in farebox by expanding an
excess expenditure function that approximates the cash transfer required to attain a reference
utility level.
The expenditure function for a generic labor supply problem is
e(p, w, ū) ⌘ min px + wl s.t. u(x, l) = ū,
x,l

the minimum spent on consumption (x) at price p and leisure (l) at price w in the eﬀort to
reach utility ū. Excess expenditure is spending minus the value of drivers’ time endowment,
T , that is:
s(w, ū) ⌘ e(p, w, ū)

wT.

Using the fact that expenditure is minimized by compensated demand functions, xc and lc ,
we can write

s(w, ū) = pxc + wlc

wT = pxc

whc .

The cash needed to reach a given utility level is the diﬀerence between consumption spending
and driver earnings when these quantities are chosen optimally. Shephard’s lemma applied
to the excess expenditure function yields

hc , the negative of compensated labor supply.

We model Uber and Taxi in this framework by treating lease costs and ride-hailing fees
as parameters in an expanded excess expenditure function. Ignoring other earnings opportunities for the moment, the cash transfer needed to hit ū when driving under a scheme with
L and t as parameters can be written
f (w, ū; t, L) = (pxc + L)

w(1
5

t)hc = s(w[1

t], ū) + L.

Let u0 denote utility attained when driving for Uber, a contract described by L = 0, t = t0 .
Drivers prefer Taxi when the Taxi contract allows them to reach u0 for less than f (w, u0 ; t0 , 0).
Specifically, assuming t1 = 0, Uber drivers opt for Taxi when
f (w, u0 ; 0, L) < f (w, u0 ; t0 , 0),
{z
} |
{z
}
|
Taxi

or, equivalently, when

Uber

s(w, u0 ) + L < s(w0 , u0 ),

where w0 = w(1

(1)

t0 ) is the after-fee Uber wage. Using Shephard’s lemma to expand s(w, u0 )

around s(w0 , u0 ), the Taxi opt-in rule is
✓
◆
t0
1 @hc w(1 t0 )
t0 wh0
<0
L h 0 t0 w
2 @w
h0
1 t0
where h0 is Uber labor supply (we omit the superscript reminding us this is the level of work
determined by the compensated supply function).
The opt-in inequality can be rewritten
t0

L
where

2(1

t0 )

t0 wh0 < t0 wh0 ,

(2)

is the substitution elasticity evaluated at the after-fee Uber wage. That is,
⌘

@hc w0
@hc w(1 t0 )
=
.
@w
h0
@w h0

Finally, it’s useful to write the Taxi opt-in rule in terms of of the Taxi breakeven:
wh
|{z}0

>

Uber farebox

t0
L
(1 +
) 1.
t0
2 1 t0

(3)

This shows that a positive substitution elasticity reduces the opt-in threshold by the proportional amount

1
.
1 + .5 1 t0t0
Eligible drivers with an Uber farebox that clears breakeven should always prefer Taxi. But
some with a farebox below breakeven should also opt-in. With a unit-elastic compensated
response and an Uber fee of 25%, for example, we expect the opt-in farebox to be reduced
relative to breakeven by 1

1
1+.25/2⇥.75

⇡ 14.5%.

6

UI Instead of Taxi
When Taxi is the only option, some Uber drivers may prefer not to drive. We say that
these drivers “prefer unemployment insurance (UI) to Taxi.” Formally, these drivers have
negative consumption when constrained to be on u1 at zero hours driving. To determine
who prefers UI, we assume that drivers who face a wage of zero choose to drive zero hours,
so their expenditure, s(0, u1 ), is the u1 ordinate. Note also that s(w, u1 ) + L = f (w, u1 ; t =
0, L) = 0, since no transfer is needed for a lease-paying Taxi driver to obtain u1 . Expanding
s(0, u1 ) around s(w, u1 ) therefore delivers a simple expression (derived in the appendix) for
the condition that s(0, u1 ) < 0:
) < L.
(4)
2
Not surprisingly, a driver with Leontief preferences prefers UI to Taxi if his Taxi farebox fails
wh1 (1

to cover his lease. Drivers with a positive substitution elasticity will trade consumption for
leisure, so even when earning enough to cover a lease, some still prefer UI.

2.2

Compensating Taxi

We are interested in the level of compensation required for loss of the opportunity to drive
for Uber (evaluated in a sample of current Uber drivers). This is a measure of compensating
variation (CV), where the baseline condition is the Uber budget line with an interior solution
and the alternative is the Taxi budget set. Positive CV means payment is required for the
imposition of Taxi, while negative values arise for drivers who prefer Taxi. Although CV is
tied to the specifics of the Taxi compensation scheme on oﬀer, the results of our experimental
Taxi-Uber comparisons can be used to extrapolate compensation values to markets with
higher lease costs and various Taxi-Uber fare gaps.
Formally, CV is the diﬀerence in cash required to reach a reference utility level given the
Taxi and Uber budget lines:
f (w, u0 ; 0, L)

f (w, u0 ; t0 , 0),

where u0 is the Uber utility level. The second-order expansion that yields opt-in cut-oﬀs in

7

Section 2.1 likewise implies
f (w, u0 ; 0, L) ⇡ f (w, u0 ; t0 , 0) + L

1 @hc
(t0 w)2 .
2 @w

h 0 t0 w

(5)

Subtracting f (w, u0 ; t0 , 0) from f (w, u0 ; 0, L) or, equivalently, noting that f (w, u0 ; t0 , 0) = 0,
the CV required as compensation for Taxi is seen to be
CV = {L

t0 wh0 }

t0 wh0

t0
2(1

t0 )

.

(6)

This formula mirrors equation (2): Uber drivers for whom CV is negative drive Taxi when
it’s oﬀered.
A Leontief driver should be paid the diﬀerence between his lease costs and his Uber fees.
As with our opt-in equation, elastic labor supply favors Taxi, reducing CV. Even so, the
principal determinant of CV for most drivers is likely to be L

t0 wh0 . This diﬀerence is

largest for Uber’s low-hours drivers, of which there are many. Recall also that in the absence
of substantial income eﬀects on the demand for leisure, CV approximates the diﬀerence in
driver surplus yielded by the two compensation schemes (this in turn equals the corresponding
equivalent variation).
Figure 3 illustrates the CV calculation generated by a move from the Uber to Taxi budget
lines. An Uber driver working at point A drives 10 hours and is on indiﬀerence curve u0 .
Faced with a Taxi budget line, this driver drives 13 hours, but is worse oﬀ on u1 . It seems
natural to compensate this driver by an amount equal to the excess of his lease over what
he used to pay in Uber fees. But a payment of L

t0 wh0 puts non-Leontief drivers above

point C on u0 , as indicated by the blue line extending from point A with a slope equal to
the Taxi wage. Payments equal to lease costs minus ex ante Uber fees over-compensate for
Taxi because the Taxi scheme increases wages, yielding additional driver surplus. The term
wh0 2(1 t0t0 ) in equation (6) captures this surplus. The surplus generated by higher Taxi wages
is the product of the proportional Taxi wage advantage,

t0
,
1 t0

the substitution elasticity ( ),

and the driver’s Uber fees, t0 wh0 . This product approximates the area under the driver’s
supply curve between his after-tax Uber and Taxi wages.

8

Sitting Out
The compensation formula above presumes Uber drivers accept the Taxi budget line as a
condition for compensation. But we might also allow former Uber drivers to refuse Taxi,
taking some of their compensation in the form of increased leisure. Drivers who make this
choice have an Uber farebox below the UI opt-in defined by equation (4), and so end up at
the origin in Figure 3. They’re made whole by UI in an amount that takes them to the u0
ordinate, a scenario illustrated in Figure 4.
To compute the UI needed in this case, we again assume the marginal utility of leisure
is zero at h = 0, so drivers with a wage of zero choose zero hours. Expanding the excess
expenditure function for Uber utility with a wage of zero around Uber expenditure with a
fee of t0 , we have:
s(0, u0 ) = s(w0 , u0 ) + ( h0 )( w(1

1 @hc 2
w (1
2 @w

t0 ))

t0 ) 2 .

(7)

By definition of u0 , Uber drivers with no unearned income and no lease to cover have consumption equal to their Uber earnings, so s(w0 , u0 ) = 0. The compensation required for the
replacement of Uber with UI is therefore
U I = (1
= (1

t0 )wh0


t0 )wh0 1

1
2

✓

@hc w(1 t0 )
@w
h0

◆

([1

t0 ]wh0 )

(8)
(9)

2

The replacement rate for lost Uber earnings in this case is approximately one minus half the
compensated labor supply elasticity. For Leontief drivers,

= 0 and the replacement rate is

100%.
Life-Cycle Considerations
Drivers’ hourly wages are uncertain when medallions are leased, so it’s worth considering the
Uber-Taxi comparison in a multi-period environment. We do this here using the Browning et
al. (1985) duality framework built around the profit function. Just as the excess expenditure
function is the potential function for compensated labor supply at a fixed utility level, the
profit function is the potential function for Frisch labor supply. Frisch labor supply functions
characterize the response to perfectly anticipated wage changes (MaCurdy (1981) calls these
9

“evolutionary” wage changes) or to transitory changes that have little eﬀect on lifetime wealth
(more precisely, little eﬀect on the marginal utility of lifetime wealth). The derivative of Frisch
labor supply with respect to the wage rate is the intertemporal substitution elasticity (ISE).
With intertemporally additive preferences and a known path for wages, workers’ total
profit functions are given by the sum of period-s profit functions, ⇡s (r, ws , ps ), defined as
⇡s (r, ws , ps ) ⌘ max ru + ws (T
u,x,l

l)

ps x; u = vs (x, l),

where r is the reciprocal of the marginal utility of wealth, vs (x, l) is period s utility, and
wages and prices in period s are time-varying. The constant r is interpreted as a fixed “price
of utility”. The profit function imagines consumers valuing their utility at price r; profit is
then the monetary value of utility plus earnings, net of expenditure on inputs in the form of
consumption.
Consider a driver making a life-cycle plan in the face of known wages and prices, choosing
between Uber and Taxi at time (week) s. This driver prefers Taxi if the Taxi contract is
profitable for that week. That is, Taxi beats Uber in week s if,
⇡s (r, ws )

⇡s (r, ws [1

t0 ]) > L.

This comparison presumes the utility price is unchanged by Taxi, either because the Taxi
opportunity and parameters are known at the time plans are made, or because the Taxi
option is short-lived. We assume goods prices are constant, so ps is left in the background.5
Expanding ⇡s (r, ws ) around the value of Uber profits, ⇡s (r, ws [1 t0 ]), the life-cycle opt-in
rule for Taxi at week s is approximated by
@⇡s (r, ws [1
@w

t0 ])

w s t0 +

1 @ 2 ⇡s (r, ws [1
2
@w2

t0 ])

(ws t0 )2 > L.

(10)

Applying a life-cycle version of Shephard’s lemma, this expansion becomes
L
where hs0 ⌘ hfs (r, ws [1

t0 ws hs0

1 @hfs (r, ws [1
2
@w

t0 ])

(ws t0 )2 < 0,

t0 ]) is Frisch labor supply driving for Uber in period s. The earlier

opt-in rule therefore stands, but with the Hicks substitution elasticity replaced by the possibly
5

Our streamlined notation also ignores the the fact that wage and price variables determining profits in a
future period s are discounted back to the decision-making date; see Browning, Deaton, and Irish (1985) for
details.

10

larger ISE, denoted

f

:
wh
| s{zs0}

Uber earnings

where

f

⌘

@hfs (r,ws ) ws (1 t0 )
.
@ws
h

L
>
t0

✓

f

1+

t0

2 (1

t0 )

◆

1

,

(11)

The revision to CV in a life-cycle framework parallels that for opt-in. Specifically, CV is
the sum of the diﬀerence in within-period profits:
CV = [⇡s (r, ws )

L]

⇡s (r, ws [1

t0 ]).

Using the expansion yielding equation (10), this becomes:
f

CV = {L
This is the same as (6), with the ISE

t0 ws hs0 }
f

t0 ws hs0

t0
.
2(1 t0 )

(12)

again replacing the substitution elasticity, . Since

the ISE (weakly) exceeds the Hicks substitution elasticity, a life-cycle perspective tends to
favor Taxi. Because our experimental design oﬀers temporary wage changes, we interpret the
experiment as identifying

f

.

In this life-cycle framework, workers who make consumption and labor supply decision
in the face of uncertain wages can be shown to behave according to hfs (rs , ws ), where rs is
a time-varying price of utility that reflects the arrival of new information in period s. New
information potentially causes a revision in a driver’s marginal utility of wealth. Assuming
this information arrives before a prospective Taxi driver must buy a lease, uncertainty has
no implications for the Taxi-Uber comparison, since the utility price does not appear in the
opt-in inequality.
In practice, drivers must forecast next week’s wage (which determines farebox) when
considering a weekly lease. Suppose that an Uber driver who doesn’t know next week’s
wages is oﬀered the opportunity to buy a one-week lease. His marginal utility of lifetime
wealth presumably changes little either way, but he must predict w. Knowing how much
he will drive in response, the wage implies a predicted farebox. Our econometric framework
(outlined below) embeds farebox prediction in an empirical model for Taxi participation.
We also consider the possibility that Uber drivers find the risk inherent in this choice
unattractive, either because of conventional risk aversion or behavioral loss aversion. Risk

11

aversion comes into play because Taxi contracts increase the variance of wages by

h

1
1 t0

i2

.

Rabin (2000) argues, however, that globally concave utility is unlikely to produce a coherent
account of choices over small gambles (Chetty 2006 extends this argument to labor supply).
The appendix illustrates this argument for the Taxi-Uber comparison using statistics from
our data, which imply that the level of risk aversion required for concavity alone to explain
the lease aversion seen in our experiment is implausible.
Although risk aversion resurfaces in the model of consumption commitments proposed by
Chetty and Szeidl (2016), our narrative favors a loss aversion story since this leads directly
to an estimating equation for behavioral taxi take-up and produces a plausible loss aversion
parameter. In any case, we needn’t know precisely why Uber drivers find leasing unattractive.
Both risk aversion and loss aversion are captured by modeling drivers as behaving as if the
lease required for a Taxi contract exceeds the nominal lease. These excess costs then modify
the lease values in our CV formula.6

2.3

Don’t Quit Your Day Job

Many Uber drivers work at another job (Hall and Krueger, 2017). A leading Uber alternative
is likely to be driving for another ride-hailing platform such as Lyft. Drivers can move
easily between ride-hailing platforms, though not all do so. Lyft almost certainly provides
the alternative employment opportunity from which hours are most elastically substituted
towards Uber, though other jobs might also allow a transfer of hours. This section briefly
explores the theoretical consequences of multiple job-holding for our labor supply and welfare
analysis.
In Boston, Uber drivers can typically drive as much as they want at the implicit market
wage. The Uber wage may be higher at certain times of day, but Boston Uber drivers do not
6

The life-cycle framework highlights possible diﬀerences between long-run and short-run Uber vs Taxi
comparisons. The experimental scenario is a series of one-oﬀ weekly decisions, much as the lease decision
facing a traditional medallion-leasing taxi driver. Each of these decisions is essentially wealth neutral even
in an uncertain world. The labor supply response to higher Taxi wages therefore reflects intertemporal
substitution. A life-cycle plan involving “Taxi forever” may have consequences for the marginal utility of
wealth, in which case labor supply elasticities should be revised accordingly. On the other hand, many Uber
drivers drive for only a few months and only about half are still on the platform a year after activation (Hall
and Krueger, 2017). For many drivers, therefore, lifetime wealth eﬀects should play little role in Uber vs
Taxi comparisons even in the face of enduring ride-hailing policy or wage changes. We return briefly to this
issue in Section 6, below.

12

usually have to wait long between trips. It therefore seems reasonable to model movement
between Uber and alternative jobs as motivated by declining earnings opportunities on the
alternative job. For alternative jobs with institutional limits on hours, such as shift work or
salaried oﬃce work, the decline is likely to be precipitous. On other sorts of jobs, including
alternative ride-hailing platforms, any pay advantage over Uber may taper smoothly. We
might imagine, for example, that Lyft takes lower fees than Uber, but oﬀers its drivers less
steady trip demand. This market structure is captured by assuming that Uber drivers earn
e(a) for a hours worked on an alternative job, where e(a) is increasing but concave.7
The excess expenditure function for a driver who holds an alternative job is
sa (p, w, ū) = min px
x,h,d

wh

e(a) s.t. u(x, T

h

a) = ū,

where the a superscript indicates that this is excess expenditure for someone who works an
alternative job. As always, excess expenditure is minimized by the compensated demand
functions xc , hc , ac , so

sa (p, w, ū) = pxc

whc

e(ac ).

Writing f a (w, ū, L, t) for the cash required to reach utility ū in this scenario, when faced
with driving (Uber or Taxi) wage w and parameters L, t, yields the relevant excess expenditure
functions:
• Uber: f a (w, ū; t0 , 0) = pxc

t)hc

w(1

• Taxi: f a (w, ū; 0, L) = (pxc + L)

whc

e(ac ) = sa (w(1

t0 ), ū) = sa (w0 , ū)

e(ac ) = sa (w, ū) + L,

where it’s understood that compensated demand functions are diﬀerent in the two schemes.
The appendix derives the usual Shephard’s lemma result in this context:
@sa
@f a
=
=
@w
@w

(13)

hc ,

with the proviso that compensated labor supply now includes only hours worked as a driver.
We can also use Shephard’s lemma to show that Uber drivers with alternative jobs are
happy to drive Taxi when:
L
wh0 >
t0

✓

1+

1
2(1

7

t0 )

˜t0

◆

1

.

(14)

This setup is inspired by the Gronau (1977) model of home production, where workers get utility from a
single consumption good and from leisure, and can produce the consumption good under diminishing returns
at home or buy it with money earned on a job paying constant wages.

13

This looks like (3), but the substitution elasticity in this case, denoted by ˜, measures the
change in hours driving (Uber or Taxi), while total labor supply includes hours driving plus
hours worked on the alternative job, H = h + a. The formula for CV is adjusted similarly.
The wage elasticity of hours driving is likely to be larger than the elasticity of total hours
worked since changes in H may reflect substitution from h to a with little change in H. Such
substitution leaves our welfare analysis unchanged, while changing the interpretation of the
ISE identified by our experiment.

3

Experimental Design

Uber and its ride-hailing competitors routinely oﬀer drivers temporary increases in pay known
to drivers as promotions. Riders are typically unaware of these changes in driver pay. Promotions are used to increase trip supply, equilibrating supply and demand without the need
for surge pricing. We identified labor supply elasticities and lease aversion parameters using a randomized experiment pitched to drivers as an Uber promotion called the Earnings
Accelerator.
The Earnings Accelerator unfolded in three phrases: (1) selection and notification of
eligible drivers, (2) opt-in weeks, and (3) Taxi treatment weeks. Drivers were eligible for
inclusion in the experiment if they took at least four trips in the month prior to sample
selection and if they drove an average of 5-25 hours per week in the month prior to selection.
The omission of higher hours drivers–those with average weekly hours above 25–reduced
experimental costs and allowed us to focus on a sample of drivers with farebox values clustered
around modest Taxi breakevens. Higher hours drivers may diﬀer from other drivers, of course.
But our analysis of drivers grouped by hours driven within the eligible sample shows little
systematic variation in the behavioral parameters that go into the computation of CV.
Roughly 45% percent of Boston drivers were eligible for inclusion in the experiment.
Although the cap on hours per week reduces average hours in the eligible sample relative
to the city average, drivers in the eligible sample are otherwise similar to the pool of active
Boston drivers (that is, the group who took at least four trips in the previous month). For
example, 14% of both the active and eligible samples are female and both groups had used
the Uber platform for an average of 14 months. These comparisons appears in the first two
14

columns of table 1.
Eligible drivers were randomly selected for inclusion in the experiment within strata
defined by average hours driven in July, driver fee class (commission rate), and vehicle model
year.8 The low hours stratum includes drivers who averaged 5-15 hours per week in July,
while the high hours group averaged 15-25 hours per week. The 20% fee class includes
veteran drivers who signed up before September 2015, while others pay the current Boston
commission rate of 25%. Because Lyft requires its drivers to use cars no older than 2004, our
strata distinguish between drivers with cars from model year 2003 or older and drivers with
newer Lyft-eligible cars. We also report the proportion of drivers with cars newer than 2010
because Lyft’s most important promotion requires drivers operate newer vehicles. Drivers
were randomly sampled and randomly assigned to the first or second opt-in week within these
three strata. As can be seen in column 4 of table 1, which reports strata-adjusted diﬀerences
in means, the experimental sample has characteristics similar to those of drivers in the rest
of the eligible sample.

3.1

Opt-In Weeks

A total of 1600 drivers were selected randomly from the eligible pool. Half (Wave 1) were
oﬀered a week of fee-free driving in the first opt-in week. While the first wave was driving
fee-free, the second half (Wave 2) was oﬀered the opportunity to opt in for fee-free driving
the following week. This design mirrors the bicycle messenger experiment used by Fehr and
Goette (2007) to estimate labor supply elasticities. Appendix Table A2 shows that driver
characteristics are well balanced across waves. Appendix Table A1 sketches the experimental
timeline.
Drivers in both waves were oﬀered fee-free driving by e-mail, text message and in-app
notification on Monday morning of the relevant opt-in week; they had until midnight the
following Saturday to opt-in. Sampled drivers received up to three emailed reminders to optin by the deadline. Drivers who opted in paid no Uber fee on all trips taken in the subsequent
week. This was reflected in their immediate in-app trip receipts and weekly pay statements
(participating drivers saw a fee of zero in receipts and statements). Fee-free driving increased
8
More precisely, the relevant month for this purpose ran from the last 3 weeks of July 2016 through the
first week of August 2016.

15

a driver’s total payout by 25% in the 20% fee class (.25 =
class (.33 =

1
.75

1
.8

1) and by 33% in the 25% fee

1).

Roughly sixty-four percent of drivers (1031/1600) accepted our oﬀer of fee-free driving,
reflecting a take-up rate of 71% in Wave 1 and 58% in Wave 2. Lower take-up in Wave 2
likely reflects the fact that we stopped reminding most drivers to opt-in mid-week during the
second opt-in week (this was a budgetary consideration). Opt-in statistics for each of the
free week strata are reported in Table 2.
Higher wages should be attractive to all drivers, but Uber drivers receive many electronic
messages and oﬀers of promotions. Some of this daily barrage of texts, emails, and in-app
notifications is likely ignored.9 Drivers who opted in also gave consent for their data to
be used in academic research and consented to receive further Earnings Accelerator oﬀers.
Discussions with Uber’s Boston team suggest Earnings Accelerator take-up rates compare
favorably with the response rate to other no-lose driver promotions requiring an opt-in.
Table 3 shows that drivers who opted in drove and earned more than other drivers during
the opt-in week. In the pooled sample including both high and low hours drivers, those who
opted in had an opt-in-week farebox roughly $100 higher than the farebox of drivers who
opted out. Those who opted-in also drove 4 more hours that week. On the other hand,
these gaps are much smaller when averaged over the month of July. It’s also noteworthy that
drivers who agreed to participate in the Earnings Accelerator look to be otherwise similar to
those who opted out. We see little diﬀerence in average commission rates, percent female, or
months on platform, for example.

3.2

Taxi Treatments

The 1031 drivers who opted in to fee-free driving were randomly oﬀered Taxi treatments in
one or both of two weeks. Taxi treatments were also randomly assigned within strata defined
by average hours and fee. There were eight treatments in each Taxi week, two for each
hours/fee combination. Appendix Tables A3 and A4 show that random assignment balanced
the characteristics of drivers in the Taxi treatment and control groups.
Taxi treatments consist of a fee reduction, t1

t0 , and a lease price, L. Lease rates

and fee changes for both weeks of the Taxi trial are listed in Table 4. In the first Taxi
9

In view of this, Uber has moved recently to cap the number of promotion-related messages sent to drivers.

16

week, 40% of drivers in each stratum were were oﬀered the opportunity to buy another week
of fee-free driving and 20% were oﬀered negative fee driving in the form of a 12.5% wage
increase (t1 =

.125). Lease prices in the first Taxi week ranged from $45 to $165. The

treatments in week 2 were less generous–the negative fee treatment was replaced with a
half fee treatment–but also less expensive, with leases priced between $15 and $60. Each
week 2 treatment was oﬀered to 30% of drivers within strata. These design parameters are
summarized in Figure 5.
As was done during the week of solicitation for fee-free driving, drivers were oﬀered Taxi
contracts via e-mail, text message and in-app notification. The messages making these oﬀers
were sent one week in advance and highlighted the breakeven amount. For example, drivers
in the 25% fee class who were oﬀered a half-fee treatment for $35 were told “As long as your
weekly total fares+surge exceed $280, you’ll come out ahead.” Email and text messages
included links that clicked through to a simple table showing the revised fee calculation for a
sample trip. Emails and text messages also included links that clicked through to a calculator
that showed net earnings with and without the Earnings Accelerator for any driver-selected
value of fares+surge.
Experimental lease rates and fee changes were designed to be attractive to about 60% of
drivers in each stratum; in practice, about 45% accepted the oﬀer of a Taxi contract. Lease
payments were deducted from opt-in week pay and appeared as a negative entry on weekly
pay statements on the line that shows any (usually positive) payment drivers earn through
Uber promotions. These deductions were labeled “Earnings Accelerator buy-in.” It’s worth
noting that drivers did not have to wait for a weekly pay statement to see the benefits of fee
reductions: these were visible once any reduced-fee trip was completed.

4

Labor Supply Eﬀects

Our analysis of the labor supply response to reduced fees uses Uber’s data on driver earnings
and hours worked to estimate the eﬀects of fee reductions on participating drivers. The hours
data measure the time a driver is active on the Uber platform, that is, the time drivers spend
online either taking trips, driving to pick up passengers, or waiting for trips. Drivers are
discouraged from going or remaining online without accepting trips.
17

4.1

Participation 2SLS

The fee reductions oﬀered through the Earnings Accelerator were conditional on driver agreement to participate: drivers who failed to opt-in to either fee-free driving or to buy a Taxi
lease should have been unaﬀected by these oﬀers. Program participation is a choice that
might be correlated with potential labor supply outcomes, but opportunities to participate
were randomly assigned. We therefore use oﬀers as instruments in a two-stage least squares
(2SLS) setup that captures the impact of Earnings Accelerator participation on labor supply.
Because no one not oﬀered a treatment takes it, the 2SLS estimand in this framework is an
average causal eﬀect of participation on Earnings Accelerator participants. Formally, let Y1it
denote a potential outcome for driver i in week t when participating and let Y0it denote his
potential outcome otherwise. The 2SLS estimator using an oﬀer dummy to instrument Dit
identifies E[Y1it

Y0it |Dit = 1], where Dit indicates Earnings Accelerator participation (see,

e.g., Angrist and Pischke 2009).

The analysis sample for 2SLS estimation of treatment eﬀects on participants stacks data
for two pairs of weeks: the first pair contains data on 1600 drivers from the first two waves,
during which first one half then the other were oﬀered fee-free driving; the second pair includes
observations from the two Taxi weeks for the 1031 drivers who opted in to fee-free driving
and agreed to receive Taxi oﬀers later. The endogenous variable in this setup, Dit , indicates
fee-free driving in week t or purchase of a Taxi contract during the Taxi opt-in weeks, to be
used in week t. For example, Di1 is switched on for the 571 Wave 1 drivers who accepted fee
free driving in the first week of the experiment and for the 255 drivers who bought a Taxi
lease during the first week of the Taxi trial. The instrument, Zit , indicates oﬀers of fee-free
driving or a Taxi contract in week t. For example, Zi1 is switched on for the 800 drivers
oﬀered fee-free driving in Wave 1 and for the 619 drivers oﬀered a Taxi lease during the first
week of the Taxi trial.
For a set of weekly labor supply outcomes denoted by Yit , the 2SLS setup for estimation
of participation eﬀects can be written:
Yit = ↵Dit + Xit + ⌘it

(15)

Dit = Zit + Xit +

(16)

it ,

where Xit includes dummies indicating the strata used for random assignment, driver gender,
18

the number of months a driver has been on the Uber platform, one lag of log earnings, and
indicators for whether a driver uses Uber’s “vehicle solutions” leasing program and whether
a driver has a car from model year 2003 or older.
As can be seen in Figure 7, both free week and Taxi oﬀers boosted participating drivers’
hours and farebox considerably, with little eﬀect on the extensive margin (that is, on an
indicator for any Uber activity, whit > 0). The upper panel of the figure also suggest that
fee-free driving had no eﬀect on participants’ hours, farebox, and Uber activity rates in the
week before Wave 1 (this is opt-in week for Wave 1) or in the week following fee-free driving
for Wave 2. In weeks of fee-free driving, however, participating drivers’ hours and farebox
rose by about 35%, though their extensive margin activity rates were almost unchanged.
The estimates behind Figure 7, reported in appendix Table A6 show an eﬀect of .04 on Uber
activity during opt-in week. The absence of an eﬀect before and after treatment weeks weighs
against any wealth eﬀect from higher wages during one of the two treatment weeks.
The lower panel of Figure 7 shows that the Taxi treatment had a similar, though slightly
smaller, eﬀect on hours and farebox of around 30%. Eﬀects on hours and earnings were
smaller in the 2nd week of Taxi than in the first, most likely reflecting the fact that the treatments oﬀered that week were less generous. Appendix Table A6 shows that 2SLS estimates
of participation eﬀects are reasonably similar across hours groups. For example, the more
precisely estimated eﬀects in models with covariates show increases of .41 and .30 in the high
and low hours groups in response to Taxi participation and .35 and .36 in the high and low
groups during opt-in weeks. The estimated eﬀect of Taxi participation on Uber activity is
.01, and not significantly diﬀerent from zero.
The fact that the farebox and earnings eﬀects plotted in Figure 7 are similar suggests that
Uber drivers face reasonably constant Uber earnings opportunities, as hypothesized in our
model of Uber and non-Uber work opportunities. Appendix Table A7 reports 2SLS estimates
of Earnings Accelerator participation eﬀects on average hourly farebox and other measures of
driver eﬀort and labor supply, including the number of completed trips, the number of days
worked during the week, the proportion of weekly trips on surge, and the average rating on
rated trips during the week. Consistent with the hours and earnings estimates, these results
show clear increases in completed trips and the number of days with any driving in response
to experimental incentives. Eﬀects on other outcomes, however, including average hourly
19

farebox and ratings, are small and not significantly diﬀerent from zero.
Eﬀects on the Distribution of Hours
Fee free driving and Taxi participation shifted the entire distribution of hours that treated
drivers spent driving. This is clear from Figure 7, which plots estimated cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) for participating drivers’ potential hours driven during opt-in week and
the Taxi trial. The distribution of potential hours for treated drivers in the treated condition
can be written P [h1it < ⌫|Dit = 1], for a constant ⌫ in the support of the hours distribution.
This is an observed quantity. But potential hours for treated drivers in an untreated state,
written P [h0it < ⌫|Dit = 1], are counterfactual. Potential hours distributions are estimated
using the methods introduced by Abadie (2002; 2003). Specifically, we estimate models of
the following form:
1[hit < ](1

Dit ) = Xi0 0 (v) + ↵0 (v)(1

Dit ) + u0iv

1[hit < ]Di = Xi0 1 (v) + ↵1 (v)Dit + u1iv ,
for values of v between 0 and 80, where Dit is instrumented with oﬀers, Zit . The parameters
↵0 (v) and ↵1 (v) can be shown to describe the CDFs of potential hours for the population of
participating drivers, that is, P [h0it < ⌫|Dit = 1] and P [h1it < ⌫|Dit = 1].10
Figure 7 suggests that the distribution of hours worked among participating drivers first
order stochastically dominates their no-participation counterfactual in each of the four weeks
in which fees were reduced. Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests reject the null hypothesis of distributional equality between treated and untreated compliers with p-values of .02 or less.
Stochastic dominance of this sort weighs against the hypothesis that target earning behavior
causes a substantial number of drivers to reduce their hours worked.

4.2

Estimating the Uber ISE

The ISE for Uber hours is estimated by modifying (15) and (16), replacing the dependent
variable, Yit , with ln hit , and replacing the endogenous regressor, Dit , with ln wit . The hours
variable, hit , measures weekly hours with the Uber app toggled on; the log wage is average
10

Although P [h1it < ⌫|Dit = 1] is directly observable, we use the same estimating framework for both h1it
and h0it to ensure consistent control for covariates.

20

hourly earnings (that is, average hourly farebox net of the driver- and time-specific Uber fee).
The 2SLS estimate of the coeﬃcient on ln wit is an estimate of the ISE, denoted f in Section
2 (this is ˜ in the model with alternative jobs). Life-cycle logic suggests wealth eﬀects from
leasing should be small, so oﬀers of Taxi leasing and fee-free driving should generate similar
labor supply elasticities when estimated in the same population.
The first stage eﬀect of Earnings Accelerator oﬀers on log wages ( in equation 16) depends
on: (1) the experimental participation rate, and (2) the magnitude of experimentally-induced
fee changes. To see this, let wit0 denote a driver’s potential average hourly farebox in the
absence of treatment. Participation decisions determine average hourly earnings through
wit = wit0 (1
= wit0 (1

t0 )(1

Dit ) + wit0 (1

t0 ) + wit0 (t0

t1 )Dit

t1 )Dit .

Ignoring covariates and using the fact that randomly assigned treatment oﬀers are independent of wit0 , the first stage eﬀect of oﬀers on wages is
E[wit |Zit = 1, t0 , t1 ]
= (t0

E[wit |Zit = 0, t0 , t1 ]

t1 )E[wit0 |Dit = 1] ⇥ P [Dit = 1|Zit = 1].

(17)

In other words, wages go up in the treatment group in an amount given by the experimental
fee change times average wages for participants times the opt-in rate.11
The experimentally-induced proportional change in wages is obtained by dividing (17) by
average hourly earnings for controls, E[wit |Zit = 0] = E[wit0 ](1

t0 ). Assuming wages are

similar for participants and other drivers, a claim supported by Table 3, the proportional
wage increase generated by the Earnings Accelerator is:
E[wit |Zit = 1, t0 , t1 ] E[wit |Zit = 0, t0 , t1 ]
E[wit |Zit = 0, t0 , t1 ]
=

(t0
1

t1 )
P [Dit = 1|Zit = 1].
t0

(18)

In other words, the proportional first stage for wages is the experimentally-induced change in
fee divided by the baseline take-home rate, times the treatment take-up rate. For example,
with a take-up rate of 2/3, the proportional first stage for an experiment that eliminates a
11

0
The derivation here uses the fact that Dit = 1 implies Zit = 1, which in turn yields E[wit
|Dit = 1, Zit =
0
1] = E[wit |Dit = 1].

21

25% fee is roughly

.25
.66
.75

= .22.12

The first stage characterized by equation (18) is generated by a just-identified 2SLS estimator using a single dummy instrument. Over-identified estimates using multiple instruments
that distinguish diﬀerent sorts of oﬀers and diﬀerent experimental weeks generate more precise estimates. Fee-free driving oﬀers were made twice, once in each opt-in week, providing
a pair of instruments to identify the ISE using data from opt-in weeks. Taxi oﬀers produce
16 instruments, one for each lease, tax rate, and hours stratum in each of two Taxi weeks.
We compute just-identified and over-identified estimates of the ISE in models controlling for
random assignment strata and for a set of driver covariates listed in table notes. A parallel
set of 2SLS estimates controlling only for strata appears in the appendix.
Just-identified estimates of the ISE range from about 1.2 using data from opt-in week to
almost 1.8 in the Taxi sample. These estimates, reported in Panel A of Table 5, are not too
far from the experimentally-identified ISE estimates reported for Swiss bicycle messengers
by Fehr and Goette (2007).13 The over-identified estimate of the (pooled-sample) ISE using
Taxi variation falls to about 1.4. It’s perhaps unsurprising that drivers who find Taxi leasing
attractive are more elastic, but the gaps between the estimates using Taxi variation and
those using opt-in week are modest.14 In all cases, however, both the just-identified and
over-identified estimates are precise enough to rule out much smaller values. Moreover, we
see little in the way of systematic diﬀerences between low and high hours drivers. It’s also
noteworthy that the corresponding OLS estimates of equation (15), reported in Panel B, are
far smaller than the ISEs identified by random assignment.
Two further comments on the impressively elastic behavior of Boston Uber drivers are in
order. First, the ISE estimation sample omits the 23 percent of drivers who have zero hours
in a given week.15 But because Earnings Accelerator oﬀers are largely unrelated to drivers’
decisions as to whether to be active at all (a result shown in Figure 7), this extensive-margin
12

The first stage in logs is ln 11 tt10 ⇥ P [Dit = 1|Zit = 1], but ln 11 tt10 ⇡ (t10 tt01 ) .
Fehr and Goette (2007) estimate an ISE of between 1.12 and 1.25 for an all-male sample that is probably
younger than our sample of Uber drivers.
14
The argument that leads us to expect more elastic Taxi drivers parallels the phenomenon of selection
on moral hazard in health insurance markets. Einav, Finkelstein, Ryan, Schrimpf and Cullen (2013) argue
that health insurance plans are chosen partly in view of anticipated healthcare utilization while covered by
insurance.
15
Over the four weeks of the experiment, an average of 74% of drivers chose to drive. When adding lagged
earnings and hours controls we dummy out those who did not drive in the lagged week so as not to lose
additional drivers.
13

22

conditioning seems innocuous.
Second, as discussed in Section 2.3, the increase in Uber eﬀort may come at the expense
of work hours supplied elsewhere. Job-shifting to take advantage of higher Uber wages leaves
our welfare analysis unchanged (the relevant substitution elasticity reflects changes in Uber
hours), but it may be inappropriate to interpret our estimates of the ISE as conceptually
similar to those estimated using survey data on total hours worked (see, for example, Card
1996). The most elastic alternative job response is likely to be reduced hours driving for Lyft.
The appendix uses data on drivers with older vehicles to gauge the extent of cross-platform
substitution. The results of this investigation suggest that drivers who cannot drive for Lyft
or do not have access to Lyft’s most generous promotions increased their Uber hours about
as elastically as did other drivers. Although not entirely conclusive, this weighs in favor of a
more general interpretation of the ISE estimates in Table 5.

5

Lease Aversion

Traditional cab drivers lease a medallion in advance of driving, possibly losing money if
fares are scarce or non-work consideration such as driver health or the health of family
members increase the opportunity cost of time spent driving. The Earnings Accelerator
exposes drivers to the same sort of risk. In this section, we interpret driver response to this
risk by integrating a model of “lease aversion,” that is, the failure to exploit leasing gambles
with positive expected value. An economic parameterization of lease aversion is integrated
with statistical hypotheses about how drivers forecast their earnings when considering a
lease.16

5.1

Modeling Taxi Take-up

Figure 9 plots observed Taxi opt-in rates against predicted participation rates for each of
our sixteen Taxi contracts (four hours strata and commission groups times two treatments
per group, in each of two weeks). The predicted take-up rates in this figure are calculated
using the theoretical opt-in rule given by (14), with the pre-experiment opt-in week farebox
16

See Chen et al. (2017) for an alternative analysis of dynamic driver behavior.

23

playing the role of wh0 . A value of

f

= 1.2 is used to compute the driver surplus produced

by higher Taxi wages.17
The regression of observed participation rates on predicted participation rates plotted in
Figure 9 shows that empirical Taxi opt-in rates average well below predicted. Why did so
many drivers pass up a profitable opportunity to reduce their fees in return for a modest
payment? Risk aversion seems like a natural explanation since fee elimination increases the
proportional variance of earnings by

1
.
(1 t0 )2

But the degree of risk aversion required to

explain lease aversion is arguably outside a plausible range. This conclusion is supported
in the appendix, which uses data on expected gains and week-to-week farebox variation to
calibrate the relative risk aversion needed to explain low take-up among drivers for whom
the expected gain from Taxi participation was positive. As in Sydnor (2010)’s investigation
of homeowners’ choice of insurance deductibles, our calibration suggests drivers must be
extremely risk averse for concave utility alone to explain the degree of Taxi undersubscription
observed here.
An alternative and perhaps more compelling explanation of low Taxi take-up is loss
aversion. The decision to buy a lease may be a gamble that drivers hate to lose. Loss aversion
isn’t necessary to explain lease aversion; Chetty and Szeidl (2016) show that consumption
commitments can also make moderate stakes gambles unattractive. But a simple model of
loss aversion outlined in the theoretical appendix yields a one-parameter modification of the
rule given by (14) that fits our data well.
In the spirit of Fehr and Goette (2007), our loss aversion model motivates a parameterization in which loss averse drivers treat a nominal lease cost of L as if this is L for  > 1.
As in Andersen et al. (2014), this specification of loss aversion postulates a time-varying
reference point. In this case, it seems natural to assume that the potential earnings realized
under an Uber contract determines the reference point for Taxi. This produces a kink in the
utility of earnings when farebox crosses the Taxi breakeven.
17
The figure uses fareboxes of control drivers in the same hours stratum and commission as treated drivers.
The predicted opt-in rate for a treatment characterized by [L, t] is

⇢

Nj
1
1 X
L
(1 +
1 log wh0i > log
Nj i=1
t
2

t

f

1

t

)

1

where wh0i is opt-in week farebox and f = 1.2 for driver i in hours/commission group j, and Nj is the size
of the group. This rate therefore conditions on positive hours during opt-in week.

24

Our forecasting model supposes that driver i’s forecast of his potential farebox, y0i = wh0i ,
is drawn from a log Normal distribution. Specifically, conditional on driver characteristics,
forecast y0i is assumed to be distributed according to:
(19)

ln y0i |Xi ⇠ N (Xi0 0 , ⌧02 ),

where Xi includes opt-in week and/or earlier earnings and our experimental stratification
variables. Using this and (11), the probability driver i opts-in can be written:
#
" L
(ti ) Xi0
ln tii + ln 
q0 (Li , ti ; Xi ) = 1
⌧0
 ✓
◆
1
1
Li
0
=
(ti ) + Xi
ln
ln  ,
⌧0
ti
⌧0
where  is the behavioral lease rate, (ti ) is the proportional opt-in threshold reduction due
to higher Taxi wages, and (Li , ti ) describes the Taxi contract oﬀered to this driver. Again,
(ti ) is computed using

f

= 1.2.18

Assuming forecasts are correct on average,

is identified from a regression of log farebox

on Xi in the control sample. The parameters of primary interest in this model, ⌧0 and , can
then be estimated by inserting the regressor,
ŵi = ˆ (ti ) + Xi0 ˆ

ln

Li
,
ti

into a probit model for take-up. Specifically, probit regressions of individual driver opt-in
decisions on ŵi and a constant identify forecast variance and lease aversion parameters as
transformations of the slope and intercept in this conditional probability function:
✓
◆
1
1
ŵi
ln  .
P [Di = 1|Li , ti , Xi ] =
⌧0
⌧0

(20)

The estimates of (20) reported in column 1 of Table 6 are from a model in which drivers
make leasing decisions using a mean-preserving spread of the conditional farebox distribution
observed during opt-in week. In other words, this model hypothesizes that the forecast distribution equals the observed opt-in week distribution with an additional variance component
that causes forecast variance to exceed empirical variance. This model can be motivated
by the fact that many drivers will not have known their completed opt-in week farebox at
18



For example, a driver in the t0 fee class at Uber who was oﬀered a zero fee has (ti ) = ln 1 +

25

f

2(1

t0
t0 )

the time they decided to lease (most opt-in decisions were made shortly after receiving the
initial communication presenting the Taxi oﬀer). This first specification is implemented by
regressing the log of opt-in week farebox (for control drivers) on a set of covariates, Xi , that
includes lags farther back. The resulting estimate of  is about 1.5, with an estimated forecast standard deviation roughly 115% larger than the root mean-squared error (RMSE) of
the forecasting regression, (19).
The remaining columns of Table 6 show estimates from models using a forecasting equation that predicts farebox during the week Taxi drivers were exploiting their lease. These
specifications were implemented using a version of Xi that includes farebox data from the
Taxi opt-in week. Columns 3 and and 4 report the results of adding one and then two further
farebox lags to the list of predictors.19 The resulting estimates of , reported in columns 2-4
(along with bootstrapped standard errors computed as described in the empirical appendix),
are remarkably stable, yielding lease aversion values around 1.5 in all specifications. Estimates of the standard deviation of the forecast distribution are again quite a bit larger than
the RMSE of the corresponding forecasting variance. These estimates suggest that driver uncertainty indeed includes an idiosyncratic component beyond the conditional cross-sectional
variance of earnings. At the same time, allowing for this extra uncertainty is insuﬃcient
to rationalize Taxi undersubscription. The estimates in columns 1-4 of Table 6 consistently
indicate a degree of lease aversion captured by  values around 1.5.
Nonparametric Lease Aversion
Control drivers’ earnings are sampled from y0i , so the extent of driver lease aversion is identified without assuming a parametric distribution for y0i . To see this, note that incorporating
lease aversion in the opt-in rule given by (11), drivers opt in to Taxi if
ln y0i > ln

L
+ ln 
t

19

(t),

All forecasting models include indicators for each of the eight hours ⇥ fee ⇥ week strata. Lag coeﬃcients
vary by week oﬀered Taxi. Lagged log earnings are set to zero when lagged earnings are zero; models include
missing data dummies for this occurrence. The 2nd lagged farebox for Taxi 1 includes data from the week in
which Wave 2 was driving fee free. The 3rd lagged farebox for Taxi 1 includes data from the week in which
Wave 1 was driving fee free. See appendix Figure A1 for timing details.

26

for any distribution of ln y0i . Writing pLt for the Taxi take-up rate among drivers oﬀered
[L, t], this rule implies

L
+ ln 
(t)),
t
where F0 is the control drivers’ log farebox distribution. Distribution function F0 can then
1

pLt = F0 (ln

be inverted to produce a quantile regression that identifies :
L
F0 1 (1 pLt ) = ln  + ln
{z
}
|
t

(21)

(t)

opt out quantile

The dependent variable here is the opt-out quantile for drivers oﬀered [L, t], that is, the
farebox value that has pLt of drivers above and 1
Figure 10 plots the sample analog of F0 1 (1

pLt of drivers below it.
pLt ) against ln Lt

(t) for our 16 Taxi

treatment combinations. With no lease aversion (i.e.,  = 1), the quantiles plotted on the
y-axis should be close to the log breakeven minus an adjustment for driver response to higher
Taxi wages ( (t)), with deviations from this value due solely to sampling variance. The
black line in the figure is the forty-five degree line marking these points. As can be seen
in the figure, however, opt-out quantiles systematically exceed the adjusted log breakeven.
The average gap between predicted and treated opt-out quantiles is summarized by the blue
regression line, which has slope equal to that generated by a weighted regression of opt-out
quantiles on ln Lt

(t) , with weights given by the number of treated drivers in each hours

stratum. Although the estimated slope here is close to one, the set of opt-in quantiles is
clearly shifted up, implying that drivers typically set a higher bar than the breakeven when
deciding to buy a Taxi lease.
The intercept generated by the blue line in the figure implies a value of  equal to about
1.6 (that is, e.45 ). This value is reported in column 5 of Table 6, along with a bootstrapped
standard error computed as described in the appendix. This estimate is similar to those from
the parametric opt-in model, though considerably less precise. Interestingly, however, use
of control drivers’ farebox distribution during the week treated drivers were exploiting their
lease generates a much larger estimate of , close to 7 (reported in column 6 of the table).
This seems implausibly large, while the fact that the slope in this case is significantly below
one suggests misspecification in the model using “live week” farebox as the relevant reference
distribution. Moreover, the estimated  in this specification is even less precise than the
estimate in column 5. We therefore use the parametric estimates reported in columns 1-5 of
27

the table (rounded to 1.5) for the CV calculations discussed below.20
The theoretical appendix shows that  = 1.5 is consistent with a coeﬃcient of loss aversion
of about 2.5, not far from estimates reported in Tversky and Kahneman (1991). It’s also
noteworthy that data from the second-round Taxi subsample that had been oﬀered Taxi
in the first week generate values of  similar to those estimated in the full Taxi sample.
These results are reported in appendix Table A9 in a format similar to Table 6. Here too,
parametric estimates of  run around 1.5 (nonparametric estimates are exceedingly noisy in
this subsample). This weighs against the hypothesis that our Taxi treatment was undersubscribed simply because drivers found it unfamiliar. On the other hand, estimates of the
forecast variance in this subsample (⌧ ) are mostly closer to the corresponding prediction
equation RMSE than the corresponding estimates in the full sample. This suggests drivers
exposed to Taxi twice responded with less uncertainty regarding the consequences.

6

Compensating Taxi

We computed average weekly CV for the sample of 19,316 active Boston drivers described in
column 1 of Table 1. This sample drives more on average and therefore has higher weekly
earnings than the sample of eligible drivers, which was drawn conditional on having average
weekly hours between 5 and 25. Conditional on driving, the average weekly farebox in
the Boston active sample is around $541 in July 2016; weekly earnings are about $423.
This exceeds the average farebox (and earnings this implies) in Table 1 because here we’re
averaging over weeks rather than drivers and omitting weeks with zero earnings. Dropping
zeros sidesteps the issue of how or whether to compensate inactive drivers who buy a lease:
we might assume that inactive drivers neither drive Uber nor lease, in which case their CV is
zero; alternately, as in our experiment, inactive drivers who buy a lease might be presumed
to be stuck with it, in which case their CV should equal the lease price. The CV calculation
for active drivers uses equation 6, an estimated

f

= 1.2, and an estimate of  = 1.5.

Table 7 shows average weekly CV computed for a range of possible Uber-Taxi wage gaps
20

It seems reassuring that the parametric estimates in column 1-4 align with the nonparametric estimates
built around opt-in week data reported in column 5. Why not rely solely on a nonparametric model? The
Normal model provides a parsimonious specification for covariates, while also identifying the degree of driverspecific uncertainty unrelated to covariates, the parameter ⌧0 . As an empirical matter, the residuals from a
regression of log control farebox on the covariates used here fit a Normal distribution reasonably well.

28

and leases. Wage gaps are generated by the Uber fee, or by wage diﬀerences between Uber
in an imagined world with only Taxi and restricted entry. As can be seen in Panel A of
Table 7, for weekly lease rates in the range of the 2010 Boston lease cap of $700, the average
compensation needed to make a driver indiﬀerent between Uber and Taxi ranges from $166
with L = 600 and a wage diﬀerence of 50%, to $710 when L = 800 and the wage gap is
only 15%. With a 25% fee and a lease cost of $600, perhaps a realistic scenario, average
CV is $437. Almost all active drivers have positive CV in this case (the third entry in each
cell indicates the proportion of drivers who prefer an Uber contract to leasing). About ten
percent of drivers who opted in to our taxi treatments did not drive in the week covered
by their lease. These drivers presumably meant to drive when buying a lease, but were
precluded from doing so, perhaps for reasons related to health or family. Including these
drivers increases average CV to $453.21
With lower lease costs, CV is naturally smaller; in some low-lease scenarios, Taxi is a
better deal. For a lease rate of $150, for example, a wage gap of 25% makes leasing attractive
to many, with average CV equal to -$13, though 59% still prefer Uber (median CV is $35;
medians are reported in the second row of each cell). With a lease price of only $100, most
drivers (54%) prefer Taxi. A natural summary measure of CV is the after-compensation lease
price that sets CV equal to 0, that is, the lease rate that leaves drivers indiﬀerent between
Uber and Taxi. As can be seen in column 8, this averages $90 with a 15% wage gap and $434
with a 50% wage gap. These (average) maximum lease values are equal to the (average of
the) sum of the fees that would be paid to Uber without leasing plus the surplus generated
by higher Taxi wages. In the notation of equation (6), this quantity is t0 wh0 (1 +

t0
).
2(1 t0 )

Lease averse behavior typically makes CV positive even for a lease cost of only $150: the
Uber contract in this case generates average surplus of $62 with a 25% fee diﬀerential, though
50% higher Taxi wages make Taxi attractive to most drivers (40% still prefer Uber in this
case). A lease of $108 equates Uber and Taxi with a 25% fee diﬀerential. Even with a lease
as low as $100, however, most lease averse drivers prefer Uber to Taxi. These figures and
other CV scenarios with lease aversion are summarized in Panel B of Table 7.
As can be seen in column 5 of Panel B of Table 7, with a $400 lease and a 25% wage
21

CV including ten percent of drivers with zero hours driven under under a $600 lease is .9 ⇥ $437 + .1 ⇥
$600 = $453.

29

diﬀerence, CV averages $437, more than the nominal lease. Any excess of CV over the
nominal lease can be interpreted as an interest payment to drivers in return for lending the
Taxi and Limousine Commission (or other lease-granting authority) the value of the lease
until compensation is paid (presumably 1-2 weeks after lease purchase, that is, the week after
leased driving is completed). Interest of $37 on a $400 loan for a week or two sounds high,
but not out of line with the $15 fee typically paid for a $100 payday loan.22
The comparisons in Table 7 implicitly make driving Taxi a condition for receipt of compensation. An alternative compensation scenario allows former Uber drivers to stop driving
completely when the opportunity to drive Uber disappears, receiving UI instead (this is fanciful since Uber drivers who stop driving don’t currently qualify for UI). As noted in Section
2, UI reduces the monetary cost of compensation by allowing former Uber drivers to be compensating in part through additional leisure. Section 2 derives a rule determining who sits
out and the required UI replacement rate. The dollar compensation required to make idle
Uber drivers as well oﬀ as they were when driving for Uber is reported in appendix Table
A10, along with the proportion expected to take this option as determined by equation (4).
The estimates in this table are computed allowing drivers to first choose Taxi or UI when
Uber disappears, with those choosing UI awarded the UI replacement rate needed to return
them to their starting point (given by equation (9)). Drivers who take up the opportunity
to drive Taxi receive compensation according to equation (6).
Appendix Table A10 shows that the UI option greatly reduces the cash compensation
required to make former Uber drivers indiﬀerent to the disappearance of Uber. Importantly,
however, the UI compensation option reduces consumer welfare. With a $200 lease and
a 25% wage diﬀerence for example, 48% of non-lease-averse drivers take advantage of the
opportunity to receive compensation without driving (the proportion sitting out appears in
the second line of each cell). This reduces the number of hours supplied to the market by 17%
(these figures appear in the third row of each cell). In the UI version of this scenario with
lease averse drivers, UI reduces service by almost a third. Because appropriately compensated
drivers are necessarily just as well oﬀ either way, the contrast that requires Taxi driving as
a condition for compensation comes closer to a welfare comparison focused on drivers, while
22

The cost of payday loans is described in http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/10/reframingthe-debate-about-payday-lending.html.

30

leaving rider welfare improved or unchanged (in fact, the driving requirement weakly increases
trip supply). The non-UI scenario is also fiscally attractive: in principle, a benevolent Taxi
and Limousine Commission can implement the scheme described in Table 7 using the revenue
from leasing, with some money left over. It’s worth noting, however, that historically the
revenue from medallion sales has not been redistributed to drivers.
The counterfactual implicit in this CV calculation is the temporary or anticipated disappearance of Uber, so that intertemporal substitution elasticities are the relevant characterization of driver labor supply. A long-term, unanticipated removal of Uber may have income
eﬀects, meaning the relevant elasticity for welfare comparisons is the (theoretically smaller)
Hicksian substitution elasticity. A smaller elasticity makes Taxi less attractive, increasing
the compensation required when Uber disappears. It’s also interesting to imagine scenarios in which all ride-hailing platforms vanish. Labor supply is probably less elastic to the
ride-hailing industry as a whole than to individual operators, so this scenario also tends to
increase CV. At the same time, the distribution of total ride-share hours worked may diﬀer
from the distribution of Uber hours in our data. In this context, it’s worth noting that Uber
drivers appear to earn over 90% of their ride-hailing income from Uber (Koustas, 2017). This
suggests our CV computation for a sample of Uber drivers is not too wide of the mark.

7

Summary and Directions for Further Work

Driver surplus from ride-hailing is decreasing in the intertemporal substitution elasticity,
which makes Taxi contracts more attractive since elastic drivers gain more from higher wages.
On the other hand, surplus is increasing in a lease aversion parameter that raises nominal lease
rates by the amount needed to induce Taxi participation under favorable lease arrangements.
We interpret driver lease aversion as being generated by a coeﬃcient of loss aversion around
2.5. Our randomized Taxi experiment identifies an ISE on the order of 1.2, but this is not
large enough to overcome drivers’ lease aversion. Consequently, the compensation required
to make Uber drivers indiﬀerent to the loss of Uber earnings opportunities is substantial and
far exceeds the already mostly-positive CV computed using nominal lease rates.
Our economic analysis of ride-hailing focuses on the nature of the ride-hailing compensation contract. In principle, the experimental Taxi scheme evaluated here creates enough
31

additional surplus to allow drivers and platform owners to negotiate a lease-based contract
that is Pareto superior to compensation schemes based on a commission. The notion of an
eﬃcient bargain between workers and firms in an industry with rents has occupied labor
economists since Mcdonald and Solow (1981). As is the case with any system that taxes
output, the social cost of the Uber contract arises from the wedge the Uber fee inserts between wages and eﬀort. Medallion leasing eﬀectively “sells the firm to the worker,” a classic
solution to the problem of eﬃcient contracting (see, e.g., Lazear 1995). Provided drivers are
required to accept the Taxi contract as a condition for compensation, the required transfer
can be funded by lease revenue. But this possibility rests on the assumption that drivers
oﬀered nominal CV in return for driving Taxi will take it.
It’s also interesting to compare our results with the Mas and Pallais (forthcoming) estimates of workers’ willingness-to-pay for job amenities. Their findings suggest workers place
little value on hours flexibility for it’s own sake, though they prefer to avoid granting employers discretion when setting schedules. These findings seem consistent with the notion
that it’s the need to pay lease costs up front rather than hours constraints per se that make
leasing distasteful.
Our results hint at why the rapidly evolving ride-hailing market seems to have only briefly
flirted with virtual leasing of the sort explored in our Earnings Accelerator experiment. In
2016, Boston ride-share upstart Fasten oﬀered its drivers an $80 lease in return for “weekly
unlimited driving,” that is, driving with no fee. Fasten otherwise took a fee equal to a dollar
a trip; this probably amounts to an average fee of around 10%. As can be seen in Panel B of
Table 7, with a 15% fee, any lease under $90 is attractive. Fasten’s $80 lease therefore seems
likely to have been in the ballpark for many drivers. But this conclusion is overturned by lease
aversion, which reduces the maximum lease rate that drivers will pay to avoid a 15% fee to
$60. It’s unsurprising, therefore, that Fasten no longer oﬀers these contracts. Other evidence
for lease aversion comes from developments at the New York City TLC, which recently began
piloting “Fare Share contracts” allowing drivers to lease a medallion “for a set percentage of
the farebox revenue”.23
Looking down the road, a natural direction for further research on ride-hailing labor
markets is an exploration of how the Taxi-Uber contractual contrast varies as a function of
23

See http://www.nyc.gov/html/tlc/downloads/pdf/taxicab_leasing_resolution.pdf for details.

32

market structure, such as the presence of competing ride-hailing services. More competition
presumably means a more elastic labor supply response to individual platform operators,
which should make Taxi contracts more attractive (ceteris paribus). It is also interesting to
consider contractual comparisons from the point of view of driver populations that may be
more or less elastic, such as men and women, and those who do and do not own their own
vehicles. We are exploring these questions in ongoing work.

33

Table 1: Boston Uber Drivers

Female
Age
Hours Last Week of July
Average Hours/Week in July
Average Hourly Earnings in July

34

Average Weekly Farebox in July
Months Since Sign-up
Vehicle Solutions
Car Model Year 2003 or Older
Car Model Year 2011 or Newer
Commission
Number of Observations

All Boston
Drivers
(1)
0.14
(0.35)
40.90
(12.13)
14.99
(16.27)
14.42
(14.39)
15.39
(8.64)
372.06
(447.51)
13.89
(9.43)
0.08
(0.26)
0.03
(0.17)
0.64
(0.48)
22.34
(2.50)
19316

Eligible
Drivers
(2)
0.14
(0.34)
41.58
(12.20)
13.86
(10.49)
13.13
(5.69)
17.59
(6.19)
310.91
(192.04)
14.26
(9.25)
0.08
(0.27)
0.03
(0.17)
0.64
(0.48)
22.24
(2.49)
8685

Experimental Strata-Adjusted
Drivers
Difference
(3)
(4)
0.14
0.00
(0.35)
(0.01)
41.80
0.15
(12.29)
(0.36)
15.72
0.42
(11.26)
(0.28)
14.51
0.06
(5.81)
(0.08)
17.40
-0.10
(6.05)
(0.17)
342.82
-0.80
(198.12)
(3.93)
11.14
-0.08
(8.67)
(0.15)
0.08
0.01
(0.28)
(0.01)
0.12
0.00
(0.33)
(0.00)
0.56
-0.01
(0.50)
(0.01)
23.21
0.00
(2.40)
(0.01)
1600
8685

Note: Columns 1-2 compare Boston drivers to the subset of drivers eligible for the experiment. Eligible drivers are those with valid
vehicle year information who made at least 4 trips during the past 30 days and drove an average of between 5 and 25 hours/week in July
2016. Column 3 shows means for treated drivers. Treatment was randomly assigned within strata defined by hours (high/low), commission
(20/25% commission) and car age (older/newer than 2003). Column 4 shows the strata-adjusted diﬀerence between the treated sample and
the eligible pool. Average hourly earnings include surge but are net of fee. Vehicle solutions drivers lease a car through an Uber-sponsored
leasing program.

Table 2: Earnings Accelerator Opt-In Week Parameters and Take-up

Group
Hours Car
(1)
(2)
High

Low

New
New
Old

New
New
Old

Fee
(3)
20%
25%
--

Offers
Number
Rate
(4)
(5)
Wave 1
102
6%
202
17%
96
100%

Opt-Ins
Number
Rate
(6)
(7)
75
155
61

74%
77%
64%

--

400

13%

291

73%

20%
25%

100
200
100

4%
8%
54%

68
148
64

68%
74%
64%

--

400

7%

280

70%

Total

800

571

High

Wave 2
150
8%
250
21%

84
154

56%
62%

--

400

13%

238

60%

20%
25%

250
150

9%
6%

133
89

53%
59%

--

400

7%

222

56%

Low

New
New

New
New

20%
25%

800

460

35

Table 3: Who Opts In?

Female
Age
Commission
Vehicle Solutions
36

Vehicle Year
Months Since Signup
Hours Worked Week Starting 08/22
Farebox Week Starting 08/22
Average Hours/Week in July
Average Hourly Earnings in July
Average Weekly Farebox in July
Number of Observations

Pooled
Opt-Out Strata-Adjusted
Mean
Difference
(1)
(2)
0.13
0.03
[0.33]
(0.02)
42.75
-1.46**
[12.61]
(0.65)
23.11
0.16
[2.43]
(0.13)
0.06
0.03**
[0.24]
(0.01)
2010.40
-1.76
[4.45]
(1.96)
11.60
-0.71
[9.03]
(0.46)
11.28
4.01***
[13.35]
(0.69)
251.50
99.93***
[306.38]
(16.07)
14.16
0.53*
[6.01]
(0.31)
16.19
1.88***
[5.56]
(0.30)
310.06
50.85***
[180.52]
(9.90)
569
1600

High Hours
Opt-Out Strata-Adjusted
Mean
Difference
(3)
(4)
0.12
0.01
[0.32]
(0.02)
44.81
-3.06***
[12.68]
(0.95)
22.97
0.33*
[2.46]
(0.18)
0.07
0.04**
[0.26]
(0.02)
2010.56
-3.50
[4.39]
(3.82)
12.53
-1.61**
[9.19]
(0.67)
16.07
2.56**
[14.48]
(1.06)
358.77
71.83***
[340.60]
(25.15)
19.67
-0.18
[3.01]
(0.22)
17.46
2.30***
[4.80]
(0.38)
447.65
57.13***
[145.18]
(11.48)
271
800

Low Hours
Opt-Out Strata-Adjusted
Mean
Difference
(5)
(6)
0.14
0.05*
[0.35]
(0.03)
40.89
-0.08
[12.27]
(0.89)
23.24
0.00
[2.39]
(0.17)
0.05
0.02
[0.23]
(0.02)
2010.26
0.06
[4.51]
(0.33)
10.75
0.09
[8.81]
(0.63)
6.93
4.86***
[10.51]
(0.79)
153.95
114.05***
[232.39]
(17.91)
9.16
0.49**
[2.84]
(0.21)
15.03
1.26***
[5.95]
(0.45)
184.93
24.36***
[100.90]
(7.54)
298
800

Note: This table compares the characteristics of drivers who opted-in to fee-free driving with those of drivers who were oﬀered
fee-free driving but did not participate. Standard deviations appear in brackets. Average hourly earnings include surge but are
net of fee. Vehicle solutions drivers lease a car through an Uber-sponsored leasing program.

Table 4: Earnings Accelerator Taxi Parameters and Take-up

Group

Treatment

Hours
(1)

Fee
(2)

No. in
Group
(3)

BreakLease New Fee even
(4)
(5)
(6)
Week 1
$110
0
$550
$165
-0.125
$508

High

0.20

180

High

0.25

349

$110
$165

0
-0.125

Low

0.2

177

$45
$75

Low

0.25

325

Offers and Opt-Ins
Offer
Opt-In
Rate
Rate
(7)
(8)
0.4
0.2

0.42
0.53

$440
$440

0.4
0.2

0.28
0.33

0
-0.125

$225
$231

0.4
0.2

0.58
0.51

$45
$75

0
-0.125

$180
$200

0.4
0.2

0.48
0.34

$300
$250

0.3
0.3

0.50
0.46

High

0.20

180

$60
$25

Week 2
0
0.10

High

0.25

349

$55
$35

0
0.125

$220
$280

0.3
0.3

0.41
0.54

Low

0.2

177

$40
$15

0
0.10

$200
$150

0.3
0.3

0.43
0.58

Low

0.25

324

$35
$15

0
0.125

$140
$120

0.3
0.3

0.43
0.58

Note: 60% of each stratum was oﬀered treatment each week. Opt-in rates are reported as a
proportion of drivers oﬀered.

37

Table 5: Estimated ISEs

First Stage

Opt-In Week
Pooled High Hours Low Hours
Pooled
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. 2SLS Estimates
0.21***
0.19***
0.23***
0.12***
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)

Taxi
High Hours Low Hours
(5)
(6)
0.10***
(0.02)

0.13***
(0.02)

38

2SLS

1.16***
(0.12)

1.22***
(0.16)

1.09***
(0.17)

1.83***
(0.42)

2.22***
(0.73)

1.45***
(0.49)

Over-identified
Model

1.19***
(0.12)

1.25***
(0.16)

1.13***
(0.17)

1.41***
(0.27)

1.57***
(0.40)

1.26***
(0.37)

0.26***
(0.06)

0.27***
(0.08)

B. OLS Estimates
0.26***
0.14*
(0.08)
(0.08)

0.07
(0.09)

0.23*
(0.13)

1344
2485

721
1367

462
836

402
708

OLS

Drivers
Observations

623
1118

864
1544

Note: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the intertemporal substitution elasticity (ISE). The endogenous variable is log
wages, instrumented with dummies indicating treatment oﬀers. Models control for the strata used for random assignment, time
dummies, gender, whether a driver uses Uber’s vehicle solutions program, the number of months since sign-up, whether the car
is older than 2003, and one lag of log earnings and log hours. Standard errors are clustered by driver. A total of 1600 drivers
were oﬀered fee-free driving in opt-in week; 1031 accepted the oﬀer and were eligible for Taxi leasing. Sample sizes in columns
1 and 4 are lower because the data used to construct this table omit zeros.

Table 6: Taxi Participation Models

Parametric
(1)
0.66***
(0.09)
-0.27***
(0.07)

(2)
0.73***
(0.09)
-0.30***
(0.08)

(3)
0.81***
(0.08)
-0.34***
(0.07)

(4)
0.80***
(0.08)
-0.33***
(0.07)

1.51***
(0.12)
1.52***
(0.20)

1.51***
(0.11)
1.37***
(0.17)

1.52***
(0.10)
1.24***
(0.13)

1.52***
(0.10)
1.26***
(0.13)

Forecasting regression RMSE

0.71

0.82

0.80

0.79

Number of Drivers

954

938

938

Predicted
Opt-In
Week
1
Yes

Predicted
Live Week
1
Yes

Slope
Intercept

Implied Kappa
Implied Tau

Non-Parametric
(5)
(6)
0.98***
0.73***
(0.09)
(0.09)
0.45
1.91***
(0.53)
(0.50)
6.75*
(3.93)

938

954

938

Predicted
Live Week

Predicted
Live Week

Opt-In
Week

Live Week

2
Yes

3
Yes

N/A
No

N/A
No

39

1.57*
(0.93)

Earnings Distribution

Number of Earnings Lags
Covariates

Notes: Parametric models are fit to micro data on participation using equation (20) in the text. Non-parametric models fit
empirical quantiles using a version of equation (21)weighted by sample size. Standard errors are bootstrapped as described in
the appendix. Each column uses data from the control drivers’ earnings distribution.

Table 7: Compensating Variation
Weekly Lease Rates
$200
$400
(4)
(5)
A. Nominal Lease
$110
$310
$137
$337
89%
99%

$50
(1)

$100
(2)

$150
(3)

15%

-$40
-$13
42%

$10
$37
66%

$60
$87
80%

20%

-$75
-$38
33%

-$25
$12
55%

$25
$62
69%

$75
$112
79%

25%

-$113
-$65
26%

-$63
-$15
46%

-$13
$35
59%

$37
$85
70%

50%

-$384
-$256
10%

-$334
-$206
20%

-$284
-$156
29%

15%

-$15
$12
56%

$60
$87
80%

$135
$162
92%

$210
$237
97%

$510
$537
100%

20%

-$50
-$13
45%

$25
$62
69%

$100
$137
83%

$175
$212
91%

25%

-$88
-$40
37%

-$13
$35
59%

$62
$110
74%

50%

-$359
-$231
15%

-$284
-$156
29%

-$209
-$81
40%

Wage Gap

$600
(6)

$800
(7)

Max Lease
(8)

$510
$537
100%

$710
$737
100%

$90

$275
$312
97%

$475
$512
100%

$675
$712
100%

$125

$237
$285
91%

$437
$485
98%

$637
$685
100%

$163

-$234
-$34
$166
-$106
$94
$294
37%
59%
74%
B. Behavioral Lease

$366
$494
83%

$434

$810
$837
100%

$1,110
$1,137
100%

$60

$475
$512
100%

$775
$812
100%

$1,075
$1,112
100%

$83

$137
$185
83%

$437
$485
98%

$737
$785
100%

$1,037
$1,085
100%

$108

-$134
-$6
49%

$166
$294
74%

$466
$594
87%

$766
$894
94%

$289

Notes: Panel A shows compensating variation (CV, paid to Uber drivers to induce them
to work under Taxi), computed for the nominal lease rates listed in columns 1-7. Column
8 reports the mean lease that makes a driver indiﬀerent between Taxi and Uber. Panel
B evaluates CV using behavioral lease rates computed from Taxi take-up. The behavioral
lease is fifty percent greater than the nominal lease. The ISE is set at 1.2. The first row of
each cell shows average CV. The second row shows median CV. The third row reports the
proportion of drivers with positive CV. CV is evaluated using weekly earnings and hours data
for all Boston Uber drivers in the month of July who completed at least 4 trips. Weeks with
zero trips are omitted. The mean farebox conditional on driving is 541. The mean payout
conditional on driving is 423.

40

800

u1

earnings
L = 100 w = 20
t0 = .25 B = 400
600

L + wh
wh(1

400

300 = (1

t0 )B = B

t0 )

u0

L

200
hours
5

0

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

L

200

Figure 1: Uber and Taxi Budget Lines

1,000 earnings
800
⇤
⇤
600 h =20 solves wh =L/t0

u1

400

u0

200

h0
5
200
400

10

Prefers Uber

15

hours

h1
20

Prefers Taxi
(h < h⇤ )

25

30

35

Prefers Taxi
(h > h⇤ )

L

Figure 2: Driven and Elastic Drivers Opt for Taxi

41

40

earnings

u0

400
L

t0 wh0

u1
A

200

C

B
hours
5

10
15
20
25
Point A under Uber
Point B under Taxi
CV of L t0 wh0
moves
a Taxi driver to point C on u0

-200
-L

Figure 3: Uber vs Taxi Compensating Variation

earnings

u0

400

C

u1

200

Point A under Uber
generates wh0 (1 t0 )

A
B

UI
5

-200

hours

10

15

20

25

At point B under Taxi, a driver prefers
UI in amount (1

-L

t0 )wh0 (1

2

)

Figure 4: Uber vs Taxi Compensating Variation with UI
42

Figure 5: Earnings Accelerator Experimental Design
Eligible Pool Chosen
(n=8685)

Wave 1 Opt-In (Fee Free) Week
(n=800)
Offers: 08/22-08/28
Treatment: 08/29-09/04

Wave 2 Opt-In (Fee Free) Week
(n=800)
Offers: 08/29-09/04
Treatment: 09/05-09/11

Taxi Week 1
Offers: 09/12-09/18
Treatment: 09/19-09/25

Zero Fee Treatment
40% of sample
(n=413)

Bonus .125 Fee Treatment
20% of sample
(n=206)

Control Group
40% of sample
(n=412)

Taxi Week 2
Offers: 10/10-10/16
Treatment: 10/17-10/23

Zero Fee Treatment
30% of sample
(n=310)

Half Fee Treatment
30% of Sample
(n=310)

Note: dashed lines denote random assignment.

43

Control Group
40% of Sample
(n=410)

Figure 6: Boston Market Conditions

600

75th Percentile

Median

200

400

Farebox ($)

800

1000

Farebox During the Experiment

Aug 22
FW1 Optin

25th Percentile

Aug 29
FW2 Optin
FW1 Live

Sept 5
FW2 Live

Sept 12
Taxi 1 Optin

Sept 19
Taxi 1 Live

Sept 26

Oct 3

Oct 10
Taxi 2 Optin

Oct 17
Taxi 2 Live

Week

40

Hours Worked During the Experiment

10

20

Hours

30

75th Percentile

Aug 22
FW1 Optin

Median

25th Percentile
Aug 29
FW2 Optin
FW1 Live

Sept 5
FW2 Live

Sept 12
Taxi 1 Optin

Sept 19
Taxi 1 Live

Sept 26

Oct 3

Oct 10
Taxi 2 Optin

Oct 17
Taxi 2 Live

Week

Notes: These figures show the evolution of farebox and hours worked (excluding promotions) over
the course of the Earnings Accelerator experiment for the sample of eligible Boston drivers not
selected for the experiment. Eligible drivers are those with valid vehicle year information who
made at least 4 trips during the past 30 days and drove an average of between 5 and 25
hours/week in July 2016.

44

-.2

0

Treatment Effect
.2
.4

.6

Figure 7: Participation Eﬀects on Labor Supply
A. Opt-in Week

Aug 22

Aug 29
Wave 1
Treated

Sept 5
Wave 2
Treated

Hours

Sept 11

Farebox

Active

Treatment Effect
-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6

B. Taxi

-1

0
Relative to treatment week; Taxi 1

1

2

-2

-1

0
Relative to treatment week; Taxi 2

1

2

Treatment Effect
-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6

-2

Hours

Farebox

Active

Note: These figures report treatment eﬀects on hours, earnings and an indicator of any Uber
activity for drivers who opted in to the Earnings Accelerator. Panel A reports estimates for drivers
who accepted the opportunity to drive fee-free. Panel B reports estimates for drivers who bought a
Taxi lease. Eﬀects are computed by instrumenting experimental participation with experimental
oﬀers as described in the text.

45

Figure 8: Distribution Treatment Eﬀects

Opt-In Week (Fee Free Driving)
Hours Worked Sept 5 - Sept 11 (Opt-In Week 2)

.6

.6

.8

.8

1

1

Hours Worked Aug 29 - Sept 4 (Opt-In Week 1)

.4

K-S test stat: .08
Bootstrap p-value: <.001

0

0

.2

.2

.4

K-S test stat: .15
Bootstrap p-value: <.001

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

Hours

40

60

80

Hours

46

Taxi Treatment
Hours Worked Oct 17 - Oct 24 (Taxi 2)

.6

.6

.8

.8

1

1

Hours Worked Sept 19 - Sept 25 (Taxi 1)

.4

K-S test stat: .08
Bootstrap p-value: .02

0

0

.2

.2

.4

K-S test stat: .1
Bootstrap p-value: <.001

0

20

40

60

80

Hours

0

20

40

60

80

Hours

Untreated Compliers

Treated Compliers

Notes: These figures report estimated CDFs of potential hours driven in treated and non-treated states for drivers who participated in
the Earnings Accelerator. Top panels show estimates for drivers who accepted the opportunity to drive fee-free during the opt-in week.
Bottom panels show estimates for drivers who bought a Taxi lease. CDFs are estimated by instrumenting participation with
experimental oﬀers as described in the text, using a grid of 200 points. CDFS are smoothed using a 5 point moving average.

40

Observed [p(L,t)]
50
60
70

80

90

Figure 9: Taxi Under-Subscription

50

60

70
Predicted [q0(L,t)]

Predicted = Observed

80

90

Linear Fit

Notes: For each of 16 strata defined by pre-experimental hours driven, treatment week, and Taxi
treatment oﬀered, this figure plots empirical Taxi participation (lease purchase) rates against the
theoretical rate predicted by the treated groups’ earning distributions during opt-in week. The
ISE is set at 1.2. The red indicates the locus of equality for theoretical and empirical take-up.
Rates are calculated on the sample of drivers who drove during opt-in week.

47

Control Earnings Quantile
5
5.5
6

6.5

Figure 10: Comparing Empirical and Theoretical Opt-in Quantiles

Slope: .98

4.5

Intercept: .45

4.5

5

5.5
Log Opt-In Earnings

6

Estimated Quantiles

95% Confidence Interval

Regression Fit

45 Degree Line

6.5

Notes: For each of 16 strata defined by pre-experimental hours driven, treatment week, and Taxi
treatment oﬀered, this figure plots the quantile of opt-in week earnings for the control group
against the log of theoretical opt-in earnings, defined as breakeven minus a labor supply
adjustment. Quantiles are evaluated using empirical opt-in rates. Whiskers indicate 95%
confidence intervals for each quantile. A weighted regression line fit to the plotted points appears
in blue. A 45 degree line is plotted in black.

48

References
Abadie, Alberto, “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Eﬀects in Instrumental
Variable Models,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, March 2002, 97 (457),
284–292.
, “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment Response Models,” Journal of Econometrics, April 2003, 113 (2), 231–263.
Andersen, Steﬀen, Alec Brandon, Uri Gneezy, and John A List, “Toward An Understanding of Reference-Dependent Labor Supply: Theory and Evidence From A Field
Experiment,” Working Paper 20695, National Bureau of Economic Research November
2014.
Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steﬀen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009.
Ashenfelter, Orley, “Determining Participation in Income-Tested Social Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1983, 78 (383), 517–525.
Berger, Thor, Chinchih Chen, and Carl Benedikt Frey, “Drivers of Disruption? Estimating the Uber Eﬀect,” Working Paper, University of Oxford, Oxford Martin School
January 2017.
Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton, and Margaret Irish, “A Profitable Approach to
Labor Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle,” Econometrica, May 1985,
53 (3), 503–543.
Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Lowenstein, and Richard Thaler, “Labor Supply of New York Taxi Drivers: One Day at a Time,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May 1997, 112 (2), 407–441.
Card, David, “Intertemporal Labour Supply: An Assessment,” in Christopher A Sims, ed.,
Advances in Econometrics: Volume 2: Sixth World Congress, Vol. 2 of Econometric Society
Monographs Econometric Society Cambridge University Press Cambridge, UK March 1996,
pp. 49–78.
49

Chen, M Keith, Judith A Chevalier, Peter E Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen, “The Value
of Flexible Work: Evidence from Uber Drivers,” Working Paper 23296, National Bureau
of Economic Research March 2017.
Chetty, Raj, “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion,” The American Economic Review, December 2006, 96 (5), 1821–1834.
and Adam Szeidl, “Consumption Commitments and Habit Formation,” Econometrica,
March 2016, 84 (2), 855–890.
Cohen, Alma and Liran Einav, “Estimating Risk Preferences From Deductible Choice,”
The American Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 745–788.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R
Cullen, “Selection on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance,” The American Economic Review, February 2013, 103 (1), 178–219.
Farber, Henry S, “Individual Preferences and Union Wage Determination: The Case of the
United Mine Workers,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1978, 86 (5), 923–942.
Farber, Henry S., “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York City
Cabdrivers,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 46–82.
, “Why you Can’t Find a Taxi in the Rain and Other Labor Supply Lessons from Cab
Drivers*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (4), 1975–2026.
Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Goette, “Do Workers Work More if Wages are High? Evidence
from a Randomized Field Experiment,” The American Economic Review, March 2007, 97
(1), 298–317.
Gronau, Reuben, “Leisure, Home Production, and Work– The Theory of the Allocation of
Time Revisited,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1977, 85 (6), 1099–1123.
Hall, Jonathan V and Alan B Krueger, “An Analysis of The Labor Market For Uber’s
Driver-Partners in The United States,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, forthcoming
2017.
50

Koszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin, “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2006, 121 (4), 1133–1165.
Koustas, Dmitri, “Labor Supply and Consumption Insurance: Evidence from Rideshare
Drivers,” Working Paper, UC Berkeley 2017.
Lazear, Edward P, Personnel Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
MaCurdy, Thomas E, “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting,”
Journal of Political Economy, December 1981, 89 (6), 1059–1085.
Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, “Labor Supply and the Value of Non-Work Time:
Experimental Estimates from the Field,” Working Paper 23906, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2017.
and

, “Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements,” American Economic Review, forth-

coming.
Mcdonald, Ian M and Robert M Solow, “Wage Bargaining and Employment,” The
American Economic Review, December 1981, 71 (5), 896–908.
Rabin, Matthew, “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem,”
Econometrica, September 2000, 68 (5), 1281–1292.
Sydnor, Justin, “(Over)insuring Modest Risks,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October 2010, 2 (4), 177–199.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A ReferenceDependent Model,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1991, 106 (4), 1039–
1061.

51

Appendices
Theoretical Appendix
Who Takes UI?
Recall that the indiﬀerence curve attained under Taxi is labelled u1 . We identify the u1
ordinate by assuming that drivers choose 0 hours when w = L = 0. Drivers for whom
expenditure is negative at this point on u1 prefer not to drive when faced with the Taxi
compensation scheme. To determine who is in this category, we expand s(0, u1 ) around
excess expenditure under Taxi, s(w, u1 ):
@s
)( w) +
@w
1
L + ( h1 )( w) + (
2

s(0, u1 ) = s(w, u1 ) + (
=

1 @ 2s 2
w
2 @w2
@hc 2
w ).
@w

(22)

The second line here uses the fact that s(w, u1 ) + L = f (w, u1 ; t = 0, L) = 0. By definition,
a lease-paying Taxi driver is on u1 , no transfer is needed to put him there.
Using

@hc 2 @hc w
w =
wh1 = wh1 ,
@w
@w h1
the inequality s(0, u1 ) < 0 can be written:
wh1 (1

2

(23)

)<L

This is equation (4) in the text.
Uber Theory with Alternative Jobs
Recapping notation for the alternative job scenario, the cash required to reach utility ū is:
• Uber: f a (w, ū; t0 , 0) = pxc

w(1

• Taxi: f a (w, ū; 0, L) = (pxc + L)

t0 )hc
whc

e(ac ) = sa (w(1

t0 ), ū) = sa (w0 , ū)

e(ac ) = sa (w, ū) + L,

where again it’s understood that compensated demands diﬀer under the two compensation
schemes. Replicating the proof of the envelope theorem, we write excess expenditure for an
Uber driver as
sa (w0 , u0 ) = px0

w 0 h0

e(a0 )
52

(u(x0 , l0 )

u0 ),

where

is the relevant Lagrange multiplier and subscript 0 indicates Uber demand and

supply functions. Diﬀerentiating with respect to after-tax wages, w0 :

◆
✓
@x
@h
@a
@a
@sa
@h
@x
0
=p
e (a0 )
h0 w0
ux
ul
+
@w
@w
@w
@w
@w
@w @w
@x
@a
@h
=
(p
ux ) + ( ul e0 (a0 ))
h0 + ( ul w0 )
@w
@w
@w
where we use the fact that l = T

(a + h) and the derivatives are evaluated at Uber

parameters. The dual problem’s first-order conditions for an interior solution with Uber
parameters ensure that ul = w(1

t0 ) = w0 and p = ux , so we can simplify:

@sa
= (w(1
@w

t0 )

e0 (a))

@a
@w

(24)

h0

The scenario we have in mind has positive hours driving for Uber and working on the alternative job, so we also have w(1

t) = e0 (a0 ). This implies
@f a
=
@w

(25)

h0 ,

as in the model without alternative jobs. Here, however, hours driving diﬀer from total hours
worked.
As in the one-job world, Uber drivers prefer Taxi when
f a (w, u0 ; 0, L) < f a (w, u0 ; t, 0) = sa (w[1

t], u0 )

Using (25):
f a (w, u0 ; 0, L) = sa (w, u0 ) + L ⇡ sa (w0 , u0 ) + L +

1 @ 2 sa
@sa
(tw) +
(tw)2
@w
2 @w2

(26)

✓
◆
@h0
1
(tw)2
= L + tw ( h0 ) +
2
@w
✓
◆
t
1 @h0 (1 t)w
twh0 ,
= L twh0
2 @w
h0
1 t
where derivatives are evaluated at Uber parameters, so Shephard’s Lemma produces compensated Uber labor supply and its derivative. As before, Uber drivers are happy to drive
✓
◆
Taxi when:
1
L
˜
1+
t 1
wh0 >
t
2(1 t)
53

This looks like (3), but the substitution elasticity here, ˜, measures the change in hours
driving Uber or Taxi, while total labor supply includes hours driving plus hours worked on
the alternative job.
Also as before, CV for those who drive Taxi when Uber disappears is the diﬀerence in
the excess expenditure functions evaluated at u0 , the utility obtained when the driver drives
for Uber:

CV = f a (w, u0 ; 0, L)

f a (w, u0 ; t0 , 0)

Rearranging (26) yields:
CV ⇡ (L

twh0 )

twh0

˜t
.
2(1 t)

This is (6), with ˜ replacing .
What about UI with alternative jobs? The calculation that produces UI formula (9) goes
through: the alternative job term disappears by virtue of Shephard’s lemma. This reflects
the fact that Shephard’s lemma calculates the expenditure consequences of small changes.
The disappearance of Uber, which can be modeled as a drop in the Uber wage to zero, may
shift Uber hours into the alternative job. But the marginal earnings gained on the alternate
job, e0 (a0 ), equals the old Uber wage, w(1 t0 ). The change in alternate job hours in response
to the changing Uber wage therefore has no net eﬀect on excess expenditure, that is:
(w(1

t)

e0 (a0 ))

@a
= 0.
@w

In practice, of course, some alternative jobs may not be very flexible, and the marginal gain
from extra eﬀort may fall below the Uber wage.
Finally, which alternative job holders choose to drive Taxi when Uber disappears? In a
world with alternative jobs, excess expenditure under Taxi equals:
f a (w, u1 ; 0, L) = (pxc + L)

whc

e(ac ) = sa (w, u1 ) + L.

As before, we compute the opt-in rule by expanding sa (0, u1 ) around sa (w, u1 ).
1 @ 2 sa 2
@sa
)( w) +
w
s (0, u1 ) = s (w, u1 ) + (
@w
2 @w2
a

Note that sa (w, u1 ) =

a

L since here drivers are on u1 . In this case, however, the Taxi wage

may be high enough to drive alternative job hours to zero, in which case w > e0 (a1 ). The

54

envelope theorem in this case leaves us with:
@sa
= (w
@w

e0 (a1 ))

@a
@w

(27)

h1

But if alternative job hours are zero at Taxi wages, then the requirement that a 0 implies
@a
= 0 since higher Taxi wages must weakly reduce alternative job hours. The UI opt-in
@w
rule (22) therefore applies to the alternative job scenario.
Calibrating Risk Aversion
We calibrate the risk aversion required to justify observed Taxi participation decisions using
an argument similar to those in Farber (1978), which estimates the risk aversion implicit in
United Mine Worker contracts, and Sydnor (2010), which calibrates the risk aversion required
to justify the choice of home insurance deductibles.24
We start with approximations for any increasing concave utility function, u(y):
1
E[u(y)] ⇡ u(E[y]) + u00 (E[y])
2
u(b) ⇡ u(a) + u0 (a)(b

2
y

a)

Let x denote the Uber farebox and let w denote baseline wealth, assumed to be fixed. Using
the first expansion, expected utilities for Taxi and Uber are approximated by
E[u(w + x
E[u(w + [1

L)] ⇡ u(w + E[x]
t]x] ⇡ u(w + (1

1
L) + u00 (E[w + x
2
1
t)E[x]) + u00 (w + (1
2

We’re interested in the scenario where E[x] >

L
t

L])

(28)

2
x

t)E[x])(1

t)2

2
x

(29)

but E[u(w +(x L)] < E[u((1 t)x], that is,

the case where a driver would (in expectation) come out ahead by taking Taxi, but chooses
not to do so because Uber has lower expected utility.
We can use the second expansion to approximate utility at mean Taxi earnings around
mean Uber utility:
u(w + E[x]

L) ⇡ u(w + (1

t)E[x]) + u0 (w + (1

t)E[x])(tE[x]

L)

Plugging this into the formulas approximating expected utility under Taxi and Uber, equa24

Sydnor (2010) uses simulation to this end; as in Cohen and Einav (2007), our calibration uses a secondorder expansion.

55

tions (28) and (29), we have:
E[u(w + x

L)

t)x] ⇡ u0 (w + (1

E[w + u((1

+

2
x

2

t)E[x])(tE[x]

{u00 (w + E[x

where
E[x]

=

u0 (w+E[x] L)
u0 (w+(1 t)E[x])

u00 (w + (1

L])

Since u0 > 0, the left hand side here is less than zero when
⇢ 00
2
u (w + E[x] L)
u00 (w + (1
x
(tE[x] L) +
2 u0 (w + E[x] L)
u0 (w + (1

L)

t)E[x])
(1
t)E[x])

< 1, since in the scenario of interest, u0 (w + (1

t)E[x])(1

t)2

t)2 }

<0

t)E[x]) > u0 (w +

L) as we’re above breakeven and marginal utility is diminishing. Therefore,
2(tE[x]

L)

2
x

< r[

(1

t)2 ]

where r is the CARA risk aversion parameter. Note that we require

> (1

t)2 for this to

hold. Equivalently, therefore,

2(tE[x] L)
(1 t)2 ]
To translate this into a bound on ⇢, the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, multiply both
r>

sides by E[x(1

2
x[

t) + w], expected wealth in the Uber scenario:
rE[w + x(1

t)] = ⇢ >

2E[w + x(1 t)](tE[x]
2
(1 t)2 ]
x[

L)

Finally, note that since we’re fixing baseline wealth (this is usually understood to be permanent income), the relevant variance here is just the variance of the Uber farebox.
To bound ⇢ we use data on weekly fareboxes for 8 weeks in July and August 2016. We
first calculate driver-specific farebox means (E[x]) and variances ( x2 ) using these eight weeks
of labor supply data (excluding weeks where a driver chose not to drive). We then calculate
an individual-specific bound on ⇢ for all drivers who should have opted in (on the basis of
their prior farebox) but chose not to. Setting

⇡ 1 provides an conservative lower bound on

⇢.
The table below shows the results of this calibration for diﬀerent levels of wealth. Specifically, the table shows the average and quartiles of the distribution of calibrated driver-specific
⇢. With even low levels of wealth ($5,000), the median driver (among those who would have
benefitted from taxi) would have to have a coeﬃcient of risk aversion near 20 in order to
rationalize the observed take-up decisions.
56

Bounds on Risk Aversion
Quantile
Mean
25th
50th
Wealth
(1)
(2)
(3)
$0 14.19
0.43
1.03
$500 35.92
1.22
2.85
$5,000 231.47
8.91
19.67
$10,000 448.74
17.06
38.36
$20,000 883.30
33.26
75.74
$50,000 2186.97
82.28
187.74
$100,000 4359.74
164.17
374.07

75th
(4)
2.68
7.76
50.09
97.45
193.54
481.79
962.22

Loss Aversion Around an Uber Earnings Reference Point
Suppose as in Fehr and Goette (2007) that drivers have a linear utility function with a kink
8
at reference point c:
>
< (x c)
x c
u(x r) =
(30)
>
: (x c) x < c,
where

> 1 is a coeﬃcient of loss aversion and c is the reference point. In particular, drivers

are averse to a scenario where Taxi reduces earnings relative to their Uber counterfactual.

We simplify further by assuming wages can take on one of two values, wH , wL with
probabilities [p, 1

p], while labor supply is fixed at h̄, so the only choice is whether to drive

Uber or Taxi. The farebox is therefore W H = wh h̄ and W L = wL h̄. Drivers want to avoid
money-losing Taxi contracts, so we imagine that
WH (1

t) < WH

L

WL (1

t) > WL

L.

When wages are high, farebox exceeds Taxi breakeven, but not otherwise.
Taking the reference point to be potential Uber earnings, Taxi driver utility in each state
is
high :
low :

[WH
[WL

L
L

WH (1
WL (1

t)] =
t)] =

[tWH

L]

[tWL

L] .

Although motivated by a variable reference point of the sort discussed by Andersen et al.
(2014) and Koszegi and Rabin (2006), this model implies a fixed kink at the earnings level
determined by Taxi breakeven.
57

A driver accepts Taxi if the expected utility from doing so is positive, that is, if
p [tWH

L] + (1

p)

[tWL

since Uber utility is normalized to zero. Without loss aversion (i.e.,
E[W ] = pWH + (1

(31)

L] > 0,

= 1) this simplifies to

p)WL > L/t.

In other words, without loss aversion, linear utility means that drivers opt in when expected
earnings exceed the Taxi breakeven. Writing WL as a fraction ⇡ of L/t, the opt-in rule with
loss-aversion simplifies to:
E[W ] >

L (p + (1

p)[⇡ + (1
t

⇡) ])

=

L
t

where  > 1. Loss aversion therefore acts like a proportional increase in lease costs.
Because loss averse drivers act as if lease costs are L, we replace L with L when
computing CV. Our empirical results suggest that  ⇡ 1.5. We can use this estimate to

calculate the implied coeﬃcient of loss aversion, , since  is a function of loss aversion and

the parameters of the Uber-Taxi gamble. This implies:
=

 p ⇡(1 p)
(1 ⇡)(1 p)

Averaging across the two weeks of Taxi, the probability a driver oﬀered Taxi earned more
than breakeven was approximately 53%; this is an estimate of p. Conditional on being below
breakeven, the expected loss was 27% of breakeven. This is an estimate of ⇡. These values
suggest a coeﬃcient of loss aversion of approximately
=

1.5 .53 .27(1 .53)
⇡ 2.46
(1 .27)(1 .53)

Empirical Appendix
Randomization Balance
The two Taxi experiments oﬀered contracts to the 1031 drivers who opted in to fee-free
driving. One of these drivers left Boston between the first and second Taxi weeks and is
therefore omitted from week 2 data. The Taxi experiment randomized oﬀers within the
four strata defined by previous hours and fee class. Columns 4 and 5 of tables A3 and A4
58

show that, conditional on strata, drivers are balanced across Taxi treatments and the control
group.
Estimates Without Covariates
Table A8 presents estimates of the ISE from models of the form
log hit = ↵ log wit + Xit + ⌘it

(32)

log wit = Zit + Xit +

(33)

it

where Xit includes only dummies for randomization strata. These results are qualitatively
similar to the results presented in section 4.2, but the model without covariates produces a
wider range of estimates: the over-identified models produce estimates ranging from 1.06 to
1.73 (versus 1.09 to 1.4). Results without covariates are also somewhat less precise.
Platform Substitution
Our experimental estimates of the intertemporal substitution elasticity may reflect substitution between jobs. A likely substitution opportunity for Uber drivers is driving for Lyft.
We assess the relevance of Lyft substitution for labor supply estimates by estimating the
ISE for drivers whose car is too old for Lyft or for whom Lyft is likely to be less attractive
than Uber. Those with cars from 2003 or earlier are ineligible to work for Lyft while those
with cars from 2010 or older are ineligible for key Lyft promotions. The categorical no-Lyft
sample is small and was sampled only during Wave 1 of opt-in week. Our investigation of
Lyft substitution therefore combines two empirical strategies, one using random assignment
to reduced fees and one using a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences (DD) approach.
Columns 1-2 of appendix Table A11 report estimates of the ISE computed using randomized assignment to Taxi treatments in the Lyft-ineligible and Lyft-limited groups. In the Taxi
experiment, older-car drivers were randomly assigned to treatment or control on the basis
of their hours stratum and fee class without further stratification. The estimated ISEs here
range from about .9 to 1.3, not very diﬀerent from those in Table 5, though considerably less
precise. Columns 3-4 report the results of adding data on drivers of older cars during the
first opt-in week. This enlarged sample increases precision considerably and produces a pair
of estimates in line with those in Table 5.
59

Our DD strategy combines data from Wave 1 of opt-in week and the week prior to opt-in
week, pooling all Wave 2 drivers with the subset of Wave 1 drivers who drive an old car.
Wave 2 drivers provide an opt-in week control group for the Lyft-ineligible/limited subset of
Wave 1, while the week prior to opt-in week captures any time-invariant diﬀerences between
Lyft-ineligible/limited drivers and a random sample. In particular, the DD strategy uses this
sample to estimate a model that can be written
ln hit =

ln wit +

ln wit =

(di ⇤ livet ) + ↵0 livet + ↵1 di + ⌘it ,

0 livet

+

1 di

+ ✏it

where the variable livet indicates data from the first opt-in week when Wave 1 drivers drove
fee-free and di indicates Wave 1 drivers. The parameter

is the DD estimate of the first

stage eﬀect of being a Wave 1 driver during opt-in week. Columns 5 of Table A11 reports
the resulting 2SLS estimate of

pooling hours groups. At 1.32, this estimate is also similar

to the ISE estimates reported in Table 5, though again not as precise.
Standard Errors for Parametric Opt-In Analysis
Bootstrap standard errors for the estimates reported in columns 1-4 of Tables 6 and Table
A9 were computed as follows:
1. Draw bootstrap samples of treated and control drivers, stratifying on commission, fee
class, and week.
2. Use the control drivers to fit models of the form
E[ln y0i |Li , ti , Xi ] = E[ln wh0 |Li , ti , Xi ] = Xi0
where Xi includes the sets of covariates discussed in the text.
3. Construct the regressor

Li
ti
ˆ
for treated drivers using
calculated in step 2, and an intertemporal substitution
ŵi = ˆ (ti ) + Xi0 ˆ

ln

elasticity of 1.2. Recall that (ti ) is the proportional opt-in threshold reduction due to
higher Taxi wages.

60

4. Estimate a Probit model for opt-in decisions in the treated sample as a function of ŵi
and a constant
5. The bootstrap standard error is the standard deviation of the estimates of the parameters of interest in 500 bootstrap replications
Standard Errors for Non-Parametric Opt-In Analysis
Bootstrap standard errors for the estimates reported in columns 5-6 of Tables 6 and A9 were
computed modifying steps 2-4 as follows:
1. Draw bootstrap samples of treated and control drivers, stratifying on commission, fee
class, and week.
2. Compute the fraction of treated individuals who opt-out of treatment in each of the 16
groups, that is, 1

p̂Lt

3. Compute the quantile of the log earnings distribution for the corresponding hours stratum, commission, and week, that is, F̂0 1 (1
4. Regress the 16 quantiles F̂0 1 (1
breakeven, ln Lt

p̂Lt ).

p̂Lt ) from step 3 on estimated surplus-adjusted log

ˆ (t), weighting by the number of treated drivers in each group

61

Figure A1: Taxi Messaging

Figure A2: Taxi Slider

Table A1: Experimental Timeline

Week Beginning
August 22
August 29
September 5
September 12
September 19
September 26
October 3
October 10
October 17

Action
Wave 1 Notifications and Opt-In
Wave 1 Opt-Ins Drive Fee-Free; Wave 2 Notifications and Opt-In
Wave 2 Opt-Ins Drive Fee-Free
Taxi 1 Offers and Opt-In
Taxi 1 Live

Taxi 2 Offers and Opt-In
Taxi 2 Live

62

Table A2: Covariate Balance for Wave 1 and Wave 2

Wave 1
Mean
(1)
0.14

Female
Hours the Week Before Selection

16.23

Average Hours/Week the Month Before Selection

14.56

Average Earnings/Hour the Week Before Selection

17.64

Average Earnings/Hour the Month Before Selection

17.14

Months Since Signup

10.70

Vehicle Solutions

0.07

F-statistic
p-value
Number of Observations

800

Strata-Adjusted
Difference
(2)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.66
(0.60)
-0.06
(0.31)
-0.38
(0.43)
0.27
(0.32)
0.01
(0.25)
0.00
(0.02)
0.79
0.59
1600

Note: Column 1 reports covariate means for drivers oﬀered fee-free driving in the first opt-in week.
Column 2 reports the strata-adjusted diﬀerence in means between drivers oﬀered fee-free driving in
week 1 and week 2. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Earnings are net of the
Uber fee.

63

Table A3: Covariate Balance for Taxi 1

Female
Hours Last Week of July
Average Hours/Week in July
Average Hourly Earnings Last Week of July
Average Hourly Earnings in July
Months Since Signup

64

Vehicle Solutions
Farebox Week Starting 08/22
Hours Worked Week Starting 08/22
Car Model Year 2003 or Older
Car Model Year 2011 or Newer

Control
T=0
T=.125
Mean Treated Mean Treated Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.16
0.16
0.14
[0.37]
[0.36]
[0.34]
16.66
16.01
16.78
[11.71]
[10.71]
[11.60]
14.53
14.81
14.80
[5.66]
[5.71]
[5.69]
18.31
18.41
18.53
[8.08]
[7.98]
[8.31]
17.86
18.40
17.82
[6.16]
[6.01]
[6.69]
11.05
10.82
10.67
[8.61]
[8.24]
[8.58]
0.08
0.10
0.10
[0.27]
[0.31]
[0.30]
348.28
356.50
347.56
[309.29]
[312.33]
[308.88]
15.31
15.15
15.54
[13.13]
[12.69]
[13.70]
0.11
0.13
0.12
[0.32]
[0.34]
[0.33]
0.58
0.57
0.55
[0.49]
[0.50]
[0.50]

F-statistic
p-value
Number of Observations

412

413

206

T=0-Control
Difference
(4)
0.00
(0.03)
-0.67
(0.70)
0.27
(0.20)
0.10
(0.54)
0.54
(0.40)
-0.21
(0.32)
0.03
(0.02)
8.08
(21.04)
-0.17
(0.87)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.94*
0.50

T=125-Control
Difference
(5)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.09
(0.89)
0.25
(0.24)
0.22
(0.69)
-0.05
(0.53)
-0.34
(0.41)
0.02
(0.02)
-1.20
(25.05)
0.21
(1.10)
0.01
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.04)
0.54
0.88

825

618

Note: The 1031 drivers who opted in were randomly assigned within 4 strata defined by hours (high/low) and commission (20/25%
commission). Columns 1-3 report sample means for the control group and the two treatment groups. Columns 4 and 5 report the strataadjusted diﬀerence between the means in each treatment group and the control group. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Average hourly earnings include surge but are net of fee. Vehicle solutions drivers lease a car through an Uber-sponsored leasing program.

Table A4: Covariate Balance for Taxi 2

Female
Hours Last Week of July
Average Hours/Week in July
Average Hourly Earnings Last Week of July
Average Hourly Earnings in July
Months Since Signup
Vehicle Solutions

65

Farebox Week Starting 08/22
Hours Worked Week Starting 08/22
Car Model Year 2003 or Older
Car Model Year 2011 or Newer
Treated During Week 1

Control
T=0
Half Fee
Mean
Treated Mean Treated Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.15
0.15
0.17
[0.35]
[0.36]
[0.38]
16.41
16.43
16.40
[11.35]
[11.30]
[11.25]
14.76
14.59
14.73
[5.65]
[5.75]
[5.69]
18.90
18.15
17.97
[8.62]
[7.83]
[7.58]
18.22
17.93
18.04
[6.70]
[5.94]
[5.80]
11.15
10.53
10.88
[8.53]
[7.94]
[8.86]
0.08
0.10
0.10
[0.28]
[0.30]
[0.30]
380.58
359.39
394.38
[393.89]
[399.69]
[387.86]
12.94
12.52
14.09
[12.95]
[13.50]
[13.45]
0.12
0.13
0.12
[0.32]
[0.34]
[0.33]
0.59
0.55
0.55
[0.49]
[0.50]
[0.50]
0.59
0.63
0.59
[0.49]
[0.48]
[0.49]

F-statistic
p-value
Number of Observations

410

310

310

T=0-Control
Difference
(4)
0.00
(0.03)
0.03
(0.76)
-0.16
(0.21)
-0.74
(0.60)
-0.27
(0.44)
-0.56*
(0.34)
0.01
(0.02)
-20.44
(28.67)
-0.40
(0.97)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.04
0.04
0.76
0.69

Half Fee-Control
Difference
(5)
0.02
(0.03)
0.01
(0.76)
-0.02
(0.22)
-0.91
(0.59)
-0.16
(0.44)
-0.21
(0.36)
0.02
(0.02)
14.44
(28.63)
1.17
(0.97)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.00
0.04
1.26
0.24

720

720

Note: All but one of the 1031 drivers who opted in to the opt-in week promotion were randomly assigned within the 4 strata defined by
hours (high/low) and commission (20/25%). The excluded driver left Boston. Columns 1-3 report sample means for the control group
and the two treatment groups. Columns 4 and 5 report the strata-adjusted diﬀerence between the means in each treatment group and
the control group. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Average hourly earnings include surge but are net of fee. Vehicle
solutions drivers lease a car through an Uber-sponsored leasing program.

Table A5: Sample Sizes

Eligible
Positive Hours in Treatment Week
Positive Hours in Lagged Week

Opt-In Week
Taxi
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Pooled Sample
1600
1600
1031
1030
1302
1254
793
751
1181
1123
738
683

Eligible
Positive Hours in Treatment Week
Positive Hours in Lagged Week

800
706
654

B. High Hours
800
529
683
431
626
401

529
405
374

800
596
527

C. Low Hours
800
502
571
362
497
337

502
346
309

Eligible
Positive Hours in Treatment Week
Positive Hours in Lagged Week

Note: This table shows how the sample size changes with the use of log earnings and with the
inclusion of lags of log earnings.

66

Table A6: Participation 2SLS Models for Labor Supply
Pooled
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(1)
(2)

Opt-In Week
High Hours
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(3)
(4)

Low Hours
Pooled
Control Treatment
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
Mean
Effect
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A. Strata Only
0.70
0.04*
0.75
0.05
(0.02)
(0.04)
1600
2062

0.78

0.04***
(0.01)
3200

0.85

0.03**
(0.02)
1600

Log Hours

2.55

0.34***
(0.05)
2556

2.80

0.34***
(0.06)
1389

2.26

0.34***
(0.08)
1167

2.69

Log Earnings

5.84

0.36***
(0.04)
2486

6.05

0.33***
(0.05)
1367

5.59

0.38***
(0.06)
1119

5.96

Active (wh>0)

0.78

0.04***
(0.01)
3200

0.85

0.03**
(0.02)
1600

0.70

Log Hours

2.55

0.35***
(0.05)
2556

2.80

0.35***
(0.05)
1389

2.26

0.36***
(0.07)
1167

Log Earnings

5.84

0.37***
(0.04)
2486

6.05

0.35***
(0.05)
1367

5.59

0.40***
(0.06)
1119

67

Active (wh>0)

Taxi
High Hours
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(9)
(10)

Low Hours
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(11)
(12)

0.79

-0.02
(0.06)
1058

0.71

0.12**
(0.06)
1004

0.32***
(0.08)
1545

2.82

0.42***
(0.11)
836

2.54

0.22**
(0.11)
709

0.28***
(0.09)
1545

6.08

0.37***
(0.13)
836

5.81

0.19
(0.12)
709

0.01
(0.03)
2062

0.79

-0.04
(0.04)
1058

0.71

0.05
(0.04)
1004

2.69

0.37***
(0.07)
1545

2.82

0.41***
(0.10)
836

2.54

0.30***
(0.09)
709

5.96

0.34***
(0.08)
1545

6.08

0.37***
(0.11)
836

5.81

0.28***
(0.10)
709

B. Strata and Covariates
0.04**
0.75
(0.02)
1600

Note: This table reports 2SLS estimates of eﬀects on labor supply. The endogenous variable is participation, instrumented with treatment
oﬀers. Models controls for the strata used for random assignment and for time dummies. Models with covariates contain additional
controls for gender, months driving for Uber, car age (2003 or newer), and one lag of log earnings. Standard errors are clustered by driver.
The number of observations contributing to each estimate appears beneath the standard error.

Table A7: Participation 2SLS Models for Other Outcomes

Completed Trips

Pooled
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(1)
(2)
33.40
12.48***
(1.00)
3200

Opt-In Week
High Hours
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(3)
(4)
42.27
14.38***
(1.50)
1600

Low Hours
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(5)
(6)
24.54
10.48***
(1.30)
1600

Pooled
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(7)
(8)
34.51
11.92***
(3.14)
2062

Taxi
High Hours
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(9)
(10)
39.91
14.22***
(4.95)
1058

Low Hours
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
(11)
(12)
28.83
9.84**
(3.85)
1004

3.68

0.69***
(0.08)
3200

4.34

0.64***
(0.11)
1600

3.03

0.74***
(0.12)
1600

3.56

0.72***
(0.25)
2062

3.88

0.72**
(0.37)
1058

3.23

0.74**
(0.32)
1004

Hourly Farebox

24.73

0.33
(0.25)
2485

24.78

-0.20
(0.28)
1367

24.67

0.95**
(0.42)
1118

27.44

-0.72
(0.71)
1545

27.54

-1.20
(1.07)
836

27.33

-0.42
(0.92)
709

Proportion Trips on Surge

0.18

-0.01
(0.01)
2485

0.18

-0.01
(0.01)
1367

0.18

0.00
(0.01)
1118

0.26

-0.01
(0.02)
1545

0.26

0.00
(0.03)
836

0.26

-0.03
(0.02)
709

Average Rating

4.78

-0.01
(0.01)
2474

4.79

-0.01
(0.01)
1362

4.78

-0.01
(0.02)
1112

4.80

-0.01
(0.02)
1537

4.81

-0.01
(0.03)
832

4.80

-0.01
(0.03)
705

Proportion Rated

0.79

0.00
(0.01)
2474

0.78

0.00
(0.01)
1362

0.79

0.00
(0.01)
1112

0.78

0.00
(0.01)
1537

0.78

0.01
(0.01)
832

0.79

0.00
(0.01)
705

68

Number of Days Worked

Note: This table reports 2SLS estimates of eﬀects on other outcomes. The endogenous variable is participation in fee-free driving or
Taxi, instrumented with treatment oﬀers. Models controls for the strata used for random assignment and for time dummies. Models with
covariates contain additional controls for gender, months driving for Uber, car age (2003 or newer), and one lag of log earnings. Standard
errors are clustered by driver. The number of observations in each regression appears beneath the standard error.

Table A8: Estimates of the ISE Without Covariates

First Stage

Opt-In Week
Taxi
Pooled High Hours Low Hours
Pooled High Hours Low Hours
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. 2SLS Estimates
0.20***
0.19***
0.22***
0.11***
0.10***
0.13***
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)

69

2SLS

1.13***
(0.12)

1.20***
(0.17)

1.06***
(0.18)

1.68***
(0.46)

2.22***
(0.76)

1.14**
(0.58)

Over-identified
Model

1.16***
(0.12)

1.22***
(0.17)

1.10***
(0.18)

1.39***
(0.29)

1.73***
(0.41)

1.06**
(0.42)

0.37***
(0.06)

0.37***
(0.09)

B. OLS Estimates
0.36***
0.38***
(0.09)
(0.09)

0.33***
(0.10)

0.45***
(0.15)

1344
2485

721
1367

462
836

402
708

OLS

Drivers
Observations

623
1118

864
1544

Note: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the ISE. The endogenous variable is log wages, instrumented with treatment oﬀers. Models
control for the strata used for random assignment and time dummies. Standard errors are clustered by driver. A total of 1600 drivers
were oﬀered fee-free driving in opt-in week; 1031 accepted the oﬀer and were eligible for Taxi leasing. Sample sizes in columns 1 and 4
are lower because the data used to construct this table omit zeros.

Table A9: Taxi Participation Models for Drivers Oﬀered Taxi Twice

Parametric
(1)
0.65***
(0.15)
-0.07
(0.13)

(2)
0.93***
(0.20)
-0.41**
(0.19)

(3)
0.94***
(0.17)
-0.39**
(0.17)

(4)
0.90***
(0.17)
-0.37**
(0.17)

1.11***
(0.20)
0.67
(0.35)

1.55***
(0.21)
1.07***
(0.23)

1.52***
(0.19)
1.06***
(0.20)

1.51***
(0.20)
1.11***
(0.21)

Forecasting regression RMSE

0.67

0.83

0.80

0.78

Number of Drivers

289

291

291

Predicted
Opt-In
Week
(Controls)
1

Predicted
Live Week
(Controls)
1
Yes

Slope
Intercept

Implied Kappa
Implied Tau

Non-Parametric
(5)
(6)
1.06***
0.92***
(0.26)
(0.29)
-0.02
0.94
(1.38)
(1.54)
2.55
(19.35)

291

289

291

Predicted
Live Week
(Controls)

Predicted
Live Week
(Controls)

Opt-In
Week
(Controls)

Live Week
(Controls)

2
Yes

3
Yes

N/A
No

N/A
No

70

0.98
(2.97)

Earnings Distribution

Number of Earnings Lags
Covariates

Yes

Notes: Parametric models are fit to micro data on participation using equation (20) in the text. Non-parametric models fit empirical
quantiles using a version of equation (21)weighted by sample size. Standard errors are bootstrapped as described in the appendix. Each
column uses data from the control drivers’ earnings distribution. The sample used to construct the estimates in this table includes only
drivers oﬀered a Taxi contract twice.

Table A10: Compensating Variation with UI
$50
(1)

$100
(2)

15%

-$44
17%
-2.4%

-$5
31%
-8%

Weekly Lease Rates
$150
$200
$400
(3)
(4)
(5)
A. Nominal Lease
$27
$53
$124
43%
53%
77%
-14%
-21%
-51%

20%

-$78
15%
-2.1%

-$39
29%
-6.7%

-$6
41%
-13%

$23
50%
-19%

$99
75%
-47%

$139
87%
-69%

$159
94%
-84%

25%

-$116
14%
-1.9%

-$75
28%
-6.0%

-$41
39%
-11%

-$12
48%
-17%

$71
72%
-43%

$117
85%
-65%

$142
93%
-80%

50%

-$385
8%
-1%

-$341
18%
-2.8%

-$301
27%
-6%

-$264
34%
-9%

-$147
56%
-25%

-$65
71%
-41%

-$7
80%
-56%

$179
97%
-92%

$183
100%
-98%

Wage Gap

$600
(6)

$800
(7)

$159
89%
-73%

$175
96%
-87%

15%

-$23
24%
-5%

$27
43%
-14%

B. Behavioral Lease
$65
$95
$159
57%
67%
89%
-25%
-36%
-73%

20%

-$57
23%
-4%

-$6
41%
-13%

$35
54%
-23%

$67
64%
-33%

$139
87%
-69%

$165
97%
-89%

$172
99.3%
-97%

25%

-$95
21%
-3.8%

-$41
39%
-11%

$2
52%
-21%

$36
62%
-31%

$117
85%
-65%

$149
95%
-86%

$159
98.8%
-96%

50%

-$362
14%
-1.8%

-$301
27%
-6%

-$247
37%
-11%

-$200
46%
-16%

-$65
71%
-41%

$15
84%
-62%

$62
92%
-78%

Notes: Panel A shows compensating variation (CV, paid to Uber drivers to induce them to work
under Taxi), computed for the nominal lease rates listed in columns 1-7. Panel B evaluates CV using
behavioral lease rates computed from Taxi take-up. The behavioral lease is fifty percent greater than
the nominal lease. The ISE is set at 1.2. The first row of each cell shows average CV. The second
row reports the percent of drivers on UI and the third reports the percent change in aggregate hours
supplied, relative to a scenario without UI. CV is evaluated using weekly earnings and hours data
for all Boston Uber drivers who completed at least 4 trips in July 2016. Weeks with zero trips are
omitted. The mean farebox conditional on driving is 541. The mean payout conditional on driving
is 423.

71

Table A11: No-Lyft and Low-Lyft Uber ISEs

First Stage

Random Assignment
Taxi
Taxi + Wave 1
2003201020032010(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.07
0.09*
0.17***
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.02)

DD
(Opt-in Waves)
2003(5)
0.22***
(0.03)

2SLS

1.16
(1.97)

1.27
(0.84)

1.18**
(0.58)

1.34***
(0.24)

1.32***
(0.38)

OLS

0.22
(0.22)

0.14
(0.14)

0.09
(0.11)

0.16***
(0.06)

0.13
(0.09)

94
136

344
492

508
328

1653
1181

1542
841

Number of Observations
Number of Drivers

Note: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the ISE for drivers with cars older than 2003 and 2010.
The first group cannot drive for Lyft; the second receives limited Lyft promotions. The row labeled
OLS reports estimates from a regression of log hours on log wages. The row labeled 2SLS reports IV
estimates generated by instrumenting wages. ISE estimates in columns 1-4 use random assignment
of older-car drivers during Taxi weeks and the first opt-in week. Column 5 reports diﬀerence-indiﬀerences estimates of the ISE using data from the first opt-in week and the week priors, pooling
all Wave 2 drivers with the subset of Wave 1 drivers who drive an old car, and instrumenting
with a dummy for being treated during opt-in week. Standard errors are clustered by driver. All
specifications control for hours bandwidth, commission, and time dummies. Columns 1-4 control for
one lag of log earnings.

72

30

Observed [p(L,t)]
40
50

60

70

Figure A3: Taxi Under-Subscription

30

40

50
Predicted [q0(L,t)]

Predicted = Observed

60

70

Linear Fit

Notes: For each of 16 strata defined by pre-experimental hours driven, treatment week, and Taxi
treatment oﬀered, this figure plots empirical Taxi participation (lease purchase) rates against the
theoretical rate predicted by the treated groups’ earnings distribution during opt-in week. The red
indicates the locus of equality for theoretical and empirical take-up. Rates use the full sample of
drivers, including those who did not drive during opt-in week.

73

