                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              GROUP-BASED VOTING IN MULTICANDIDATE ELECTIONS

                                       Laurent Bouton
                                      Benjamin G. Ogden

                                      Working Paper 23898
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23898


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 2017, Revised June 2018




A previous version of this paper was circulated under the title “Ethical Voting in Multicandidate
Elections”. We benefited from the comments and suggestions by Christian Basteck, Micael
Castanheira, Andrew Eggers, Vincent Pons, Randy Stevenson, and Clemence Tricaud, by
seminar participants at the London School of Economics, Université Lille 1, University of
Chicago, and the Political Economy Webinar, and by conference participants at the American
Political Science Association, the D-TEA Workshop 2017, the Econometric Society Winter
Meetings, the European Political Science Association, and the Public Choice Society. This
project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 637662). Special
thanks to Yewon Kwan for her work on the figures. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Laurent Bouton and Benjamin G. Ogden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Group-based Voting in Multicandidate Elections
Laurent Bouton and Benjamin G. Ogden
NBER Working Paper No. 23898
October 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. C72,D72

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the properties of the group-based model of voting in elections with more than two
candidates. We consider two of the most widely used electoral rules around the world: plurality
and majority runoff. We fully characterize the set of equilibria under both rules and identify the
features of an election that favor different types of voting behavior: either sincere voting or
coordination behind a limited number of candidates. Comparing plurality and majority runoff, we
find that the incentives to vote sincerely are stronger under the latter, in line with empirical
evidence. Our analysis uncovers several strengths of the group-based model of voting: it is
tractable, the predictions are empirically sound, and, due to equilibrium uniqueness for a broad
set of parameter values, quite crisp. Some results appear sensitive to the composition of groups in
the electorate, highlighting the structure of group identity as a key determinant of voting
behavior.


Laurent Bouton
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
37th & O Streets, NW
Washington,DC 20057
and CEPR
and also NBER
boutonllj@gmail.com

Benjamin G. Ogden
Texas A&M University
300D N Parker Ave
Bryan, TX 77803
bgogden@tamu.edu
1       Introduction

Voters ought to be a central piece within formal models of politics. Yet, more often
than not, they take the backstage: they are assumed to support the alternative they like
most without pondering the consequences of their actions. They are expressive. While
not supported by the facts1 , this approach to voters’ behavior is, in the minds of many,
not necessarily dominated by the fully rational workhorse model of strategic voting, i.e.
the pivotal voter model (see, e.g., Riker and Ordeshook 1968, Ledyard 1981, Palfrey and
Rosenthal 1983,1985, Myerson and Weber 1993, Cox 1997, Myerson 1998, 2002, Myatt
2007). Indeed, this model is also aﬄicted by serious weaknesses: the most salient being the
counterfactually low turnout levels it predicts–highlighting the so-called paradox of voting.2
These weaknesses have made this approach the target of frequent and sometimes scathing
criticisms (see, e.g., Fiorina 1989, Grofman 1993, Green and Shapiro 1994). Political
science as a ﬁeld is impeded by this lack of consensus about how formally model voters’
behavior.
    The challenge of ﬁnding improved formal models of voter behavior has not been left
unanswered.      The so-called group-based model of voting is one of those alternatives
(Harsanyi 1977, 1992, Ulhaner 1989, Morton 1987, 1991, Shachar and Nalebuﬀ 1999,
Coate and Conlin 2004, Feddersen and Sandroni 2006a, 2006b, Herrera and Martinelli
2006, Ali and Lin 2013, and Levine and Mattozzi 2016). In that model, for diﬀerent rea-
sons spanning ethical motives, leaders’ inﬂuence, and mobilization eﬀorts, voting decisions

    1
      There are various pieces of evidence that go against the assumption of purely expressive voting.
First, the literature comparing each voter’s actual vote to her preferences ﬁnds a fraction of voters casting
misaligned votes (i.e., voting for another candidate than their most-preferred) ranging from 3% to 17%
(e.g., Alvarez and Nagler 2000, Blais, Nadeau, Gidengil, and Nevitte 2001 and papers cited therein).
Second, recent studies (Kawai and Watanabe 2013, Spenkuch 2017) ﬁnd that a larger fraction of voters are
strategic (estimates range from 40% to 85%), but they do not necessarily cast a misaligned vote. Third,
the experimental literature ﬁnds evidence of strategic voting both in two-candidate elections (for both the
costly voting side, e.g., Palfrey and Levine 2007; and the Condorcet jury theorem side, e.g., Guarnaschelli
et al. 2000, Battaglini et al. 2008, 2010, Goeree and Yariv 2011, Bhattacharya et al. 2014, Bouton et
al. 2017a) and in multicandidate elections (e.g., Forsythe et al. 1993 and 1996, Fisher and Myatt 2001,
Morton and Rietz 2008, Bouton et al. 2016, 2017b). Fourth, studies also ﬁnd evidence of strategic voting
through its implications on the number of “serious” candidates under diﬀerent electoral systems (e.g.,
Fujiwara 2011). Finally, the empirical literature that studies voter turnout uncovers voting behavior that
is not coherent with the sincere voting assumption (e.g., Coate and Conlin 2004, and Coate, Conlin and
Moro 2008).
    2
      Feddersen (2004) deﬁnes this paradox eloquently: “If each person only votes for the purpose of
inﬂuencing the election outcome, then even a small cost to vote (...) should dissuade anyone from voting.
Yet, it seems that many people will put up with long lines, daunting registration requirements and even
the threat of physical violence or arrest in order to vote” (p. 99).


                                                     2
end up being made as if at the group level. That model predicts high turnout level (no
paradox of voting), and produces comparative statics that appear empirically sound (see
the discussion in Feddersen and Sandroni 2006a). Moreover, direct tests of this model
(both on observational and experimental data) are quite encouraging (Coate and Conlin
2004, Feddersen, Gailmard, and Sandroni 2009, Morton and Tyran 2012).
    While promising, all of these results concern elections with two alternatives. But,
most real-life elections involve more than two candidates or parties (Jones 2001). In those
elections, the strategic behavior of voters is more involved: on top of deciding whether to
vote, they have to determine for whom to vote. To have a chance of being endorsed more
widely, the group-based model of voting must also perform well when applied to the study
of multicandidate elections.
    In this paper, we develop a group-based model of voting in multicandidate elections.
Our focus is on voters’ decisions for whom to vote. We study two of the most-widely
used electoral rules around the world: the plurality rule3 and the majority runoﬀ rule.4
Our initial results conﬁrm the promises of the group-based model. The predictions are
empirically sound and, due to equilibrium uniqueness for a broad set of parameter values,
quite crisp. Moreover, the model is tractable. Some results appear sensitive to the number
and types of groups in the electorate, further emphasizing that the structure of group
identity is a key determinant of voting behavior. This calls for a better understanding of
the formation of voting groups and the coordination of their members; an understudied
topic (see Herrera and Martinelli 2006 for an exception).
    The main novelty of this paper is that we consider a setup with more than two can-




   3
       In plurality elections (a.k.a. ﬁrst-past-the-post), voters can vote for one of the candidates in the
running, and the candidate with the largest number of votes wins. This system is used in many countries,
e.g. the U.K. and the U.S., to elect members of the lower house of their legislature.
     4
       In a majority runoﬀ election, there are up to two rounds of voting. In each round, voters can vote for
one of the participating candidates. In the ﬁrst round, all candidates participate, and a candidate wins
outright if she obtains an absolute majority of the votes. If no candidate wins in the ﬁrst round, then a
second round is held between the top-two vote getters. The winner of that round wins the election. This
is the most-widely used system to elect presidents around the world (Bormann and Golder 2013).


                                                     3
didates.5 In our baseline case, we consider the so-called divided majority setting.6 There
are three candidates (A, B, and C) and three types of voters (a, b, and c). A majority
of voters prefer both A and B (the majority candidates) over C (the minority candidate).
The majority is divided: a-voters prefer candidate A over candidate B, but b-voters prefer
candidate B over candidate A. The support for candidate C is suﬃciently large so that
she is a serious threat. This simple case is useful to discuss key features of the strategic
behavior of voters and highlights important characteristics of the set of equilibria. We
then extend the model in several directions in order to reﬁne our results and/or show their
robustness. In particular, we allow for (i) a more sophisticated structure of preferences
(which nests the ubiquitous case of a policy space with single-peaked preferences), (ii)
more voting groups, and (iii) the presence of expressive voters, who always vote for their
most-preferred candidate.
    Our analysis focuses ﬁrst on (pure strategy) equilibria under plurality rule. In our
baseline model, there are two types of equilibria: (i) the sincere voting equilibrium (in
which voters vote for their most-preferred candidate), and (ii) Duverger’s Law equilibria
(in which all majority voters vote for the same majority candidate, either A or B).7 We
prove that an equilibrium always exists, and that it is unique for a broad range of pa-
rameter values. Moreover, equilibrium multiplicity only happens when the two Duverger’s
law equilibria exist. In other words, the sincere voting equilibrium never coexists with
Duverger’s law equilibria. Thus, our model uniquely predicts the number of candidates
receiving a positive share of the votes. This later result proves only partially robust to the
inclusion of some additional groups of voters: it remains true when the number of groups
    5
      In an independently developed paper, Li and Pique (2016) explore ethical motives for strategic voting
in multicandidate elections. Their approach is complementary to ours: they work under the assumption
that it is costly for voters to cast a misaligned vote but that ethical motives may nonetheless lead them to
do so. One crucial diﬀerence between their results and ours is about the eﬀect of the strength of a voter’s
least preferred candidate on her propensity to cast a misaligned vote. Their model predicts that this eﬀect
is non-monotonic whereas ours predicts it is monotonic. As we discuss below, empirical evidence seems
to support our ﬁnding. Another important diﬀerence is that they focus on plurality elections, while we
consider both plurality and runoﬀ elections.
    6
      The divided majority setting is tractable but still captures the fundamental coordination problems
that voters face in multicandidate elections. As a consequence, this setting is widespread in the literature
on strategic voting in multicandidate elections (e.g., Palfrey 1989, Myerson and Weber 1993, Cox 1997, Fey
1997, Piketty 2000, Myerson 2002, Dewan and Myatt 2007, Myatt 2007, Bouton and Castanheira 2012,
and Bouton 2013).
    7
      Adding groups of voters with diﬀerent preference orderings to the model allows for a third type of
equilibria: partial Duverger’s law equilibria, in which some, but not all, supporters of a candidate abandon
their most-preferred candidate in order to rally behind a more serious contender. We study those equilibria
in Section 5.2.


                                                     4
increases but not as the number of preference orderings present in the electorate becomes
suﬃciently large. In that sense, the predictions of the group-based model of voting are
sensitive to the structure of group identity in the electorate. This sensitivity generates
interesting predictions about Duverger’s law: it is more likely to hold when groups with
similar interests are fragmented. This may help explain the mixed empirical evidence on
the topic (e.g., Grofman, Blais and Bowler (2009).
    Our equilibrium characterization allows us to identify the features of an election that
favor sincere voting–that is, when Duverger’s law should fail.8 Quite intuitively, the in-
centives to vote sincerely are stronger when (i) the utility diﬀerential between the two
majority candidates is large, (ii) the utility diﬀerential between the less preferred majority
candidate and the minority candidate is small, (iii) the minority group is small, and (iv)
the majority is evenly divided. The importance of cardinal utilities for equilibrium behav-
ior in large elections is a distinguishing feature of the group-based voting model. These
results ﬁnd support in the empirical literature (e.g., Blais and Nadeau 1996, and Bouton,
Castanheira, and Llorente-Saguer 2016).
    We also characterize the set of equilibria under the majority runoﬀ rule. In the ﬁrst
round, voters incentives are qualitatively similar as under plurality, but quantitatively
diﬀerent. Comparing the two systems, we ﬁnd that the incentives to vote sincerely are
stronger under majority runoﬀ.9 In particular, if the sincere voting equilibrium exists
under plurality, it also exists (and is unique) under majority runoﬀ. Conversely, if a Du-
verger’s law equilibrium exists under majority runoﬀ, then it also exists under plurality.
This result is consistent with the empirical ﬁndings that Duverger’s law forces are some-
times (see Fujiwara 2011, on Brazilian data), but not always (see Bordignon et al. 2016,
on Italian data) stronger under plurality than under runoﬀ. Moreover, we identify the
characteristics of the election for which the diﬀerence in the strengths of the Duverger’s
law forces should be noticeable: that is, when Duverger’s law and hypothesis should both
hold.10 This presents an opportunity to revisit the data having in mind the characteris-
   8
      Duverger’s law says that “the simple-majority single-ballot system [the plurality electoral system]
favors the two-party systems” (Duverger 1963, p. 217).
    9
      We also analyze French-style runoﬀ elections, in which candidates obtaining a number of ﬁrst-round
votes larger than a threshold number of votes are allowed to participate in the second round. Perhaps
surprisingly, in such runoﬀ elections, the incentives to vote sincerely are stronger than under plurality but
weaker than under majority runoﬀ.
   10
      Duverger’s hypothesis says that “the simple-majority system with second ballot [the runoﬀ electoral
system] favors multi-partyism” (Duverger 1963, p.239).


                                                     5
tics of the electoral environment for which the incentives to vote sincerely are diﬀerent in
plurality and runoﬀ elections.11
    There are several dimensions along which the group-based voting model fares well.
First, it produces relatively crisp predictions: the equilibrium is unique for a broad set
of parameter values. Moreover, even when there are multiple equilibria, there remains no
ambiguity about the number of “serious” candidates, i.e. those receiving a positive vote
share, as long as the number of voting groups with diﬀerent preference orderings is limited.
In the remaining cases, it is not possible that supporters of more than one candidate have
misaligned votes. This greatly limits the scope of non-sincere behavior when Duverger’s
law does not hold fully. By contrast, even when the number of preference orderings is
limited, the pivotal voter model always produces multiple Duverger’s law equilibria,12 as
well as a non-Duverger’s law equilibrium, in which more than two candidates are serious.13
In a companion paper (Bouton and Ogden 2018), we exploit these properties of the group-
based model to analyze the behavior of candidates in multicandidate elections when voters
are strategic. We revisit classic models of candidates behavior (entry and positioning along
the real line) and ﬁnd that the presence of strategic voters dramatically aﬀects the behavior
of candidates.
    Second, the group-based voting model produces sound predictions. There are multiple
Duverger’s law equilibria only in elections in which the coordination of majority voters
is absolutely necessary (i.e. the minority candidate is a serious threat), and there is no
majority candidate clearly stronger than the other (i.e. the majority is evenly divided).
By contrast, the pivotal voter model predicts that essentially any candidate can be a
   11
      Such an analysis should take into account the ﬁndings of models with expressive voters and strategic
candidates that also identify situations in which Duverger’s law and hypothesis both hold (e.g., Osborne
and Slivinski 1996, Callander 2005).
   12
      This is so because the pivotal voting logic gives full power to self-fulﬁlling prophecies: in order not to
waste their votes, voters have an incentive to abandon their most-preferred candidate if they expect her
not to have a serious shot at winning.
   13
      A cursory read of Myatt (2007) may suggest that the presence of aggregate uncertainty about the
distribution of preferences in the electorate is suﬃcient to eliminate Duverger’s law equilibria and guarantee
equilibrium uniqueness in the pivotal voter model. This is not the case: Myatt (2007) indeed acknowledges
the existence of Duverger’s law equilibria in his setup but then discards them to instead focus on the
properties of non-Duverger’s law equilibria. He does not study how the presence of aggregate uncertainty
aﬀect Duverger’s law forces and equilibria. As shown by Bouton et al. (2017), Duverger’s law forces remain
strong as long as the amount of aggregate uncertainty is such that a candidate abandoned by almost all
her supporters cannot be perceived as the main contender to defeat the minority candidate. Arguably, this
is an unreasonable amount of aggregate uncertainty. Duverger’s law equilibria should thus exist in most
situations (which does not mean that they are always being played). A similar result appears in Fisher
and Myatt (2017).


                                                       6
serious contender for victory in equilibrium, even one that is ranked behind another given
candidate by all voters. Additionally, non-Duverger’s law equilibria (i.e., sincere voting
equilibrium and the partial Duverger’s law equilibria in the extended model) exist only
when the minority candidate is not too much of a threat and both majority candidates are
strong. Moreover, they involve straightforward voting behavior: voters either all vote for
their most-preferred candidate, or some of them rally behind a stronger alternative. By
contrast, in the pivotal voter model (with aggregate uncertainty), the non-Duverger’s law
equilibrium exists as long as each majority candidate may be perceived as having more
support in the electorate than the minority candidate.14 Majority voters then vote in such
a way that balances the risk of a victory of the minority candidate across states of nature.
This may require that some supporters of the stronger majority candidate give their vote
to the weaker majority candidate. Finally, even when the electorate is large, the intensity
of voter preferences inﬂuences equilibrium behavior in the group-based model. Empirical
evidence, and common sense, suggests that preference intensities play an important role in
shaping voters’ behavior in real-life elections (e.g., Blais and Nadeau 1996). By contrast,
in the pivotal voter model, preference intensities do not shape equilibrium behavior in
large elections.


2        The Baseline Model

In this section, we introduce the baseline model. This model is suﬃcient to discuss key
features of the strategic behavior of voters and highlight important characteristics of the set
of equilibria. In section 5, we extend the model in several directions in order to reﬁne our
results and/or show their robustness. In particular: (i) we allow for a more sophisticated
structure of preferences, (ii) we include more voting groups, and (iii) we allow for the
presence of expressive voters, who always vote for their most-preferred candidate.
     We model an election with 3 candidates, A, B, and C, and a continuum of voters.15
The electoral rule is plurality (we consider majority runoﬀ in section 4). There is an unique
    14
      Without aggregate uncertainty, a non-Duverger’s law equilibrium always exists but is often considered
as unreasonable and unstable (Fey 1997).
   15
      Our group-based voting model accommodates easily more than three candidates. When there are
N > 3 candidates, we can still identify situations where the sincere voting equilibrium exists (in this case,
N candidates receive a positive vote share when voters vote sincerely). As in the baseline model, the
sincere voting equilibrium never coexist with the Duverger’s law equilibria (where two candidates receive
a positive vote share).


                                                     7
round of voting in which all voters are called to cast a vote for one of the candidates in
the running. The action set is denoted by Ψ = {A, B, C}. The candidate with the largest
number of votes wins.
    Each voter has preferences over the set of candidates. The distribution of preferences
in the population follows the so-called divided majority case. There are majority voters
who prefer A and B over C and minority voters who prefer C over A and B (and, for the
sake of simplicity, are indiﬀerent between A and B).16 The majority is divided into two
groups: a-voters who prefer A over B, and b-voters who prefer B over A. There are thus
three types of voters: Θ = {a, b, c}.17
    Formally, voters’ preferences can be represented by the utility function u : Θ × Ψ → R.
For majority voters, we assume:


                                   u(A, a) = W = u(B, b),

                                   u(B, a) = 0 = u(A, b), and

                                   u(C, a) = −Y = u(C, b),


with W, Y > 0.    18   For minority voters, we assume:


                                      u(C, c) = Z > 0,

                                      u(A, c) = 0 = u(B, c).


This directly implies that voting for C is a weakly dominant strategy for c-voters.19
   The size of the minority (i.e., the proportion of c-voters in the population) is ﬁxed at
          
k ∈ 13 , 12 .20 Obviously, this means that the size of the majority (i.e., the proportion of
a-voters and b-voters in the population) is 1−k. The relative size of the two groups forming
the majority is given by α: the share of a-voters in the population is thus α (1 − k) , and

  16
       In section 5.1, we relax that assumption and prove that, in the real-line setting, voting for C is a
dominant strategy for c-voters as soon as the group size is larger than 1/3.
    17
       We can extend the type space to accommodate for any preference ordering over the set of candidates
(see Section 5.2).
    18
       In Section 5.3, we show that the assumption that the symmetry in the preferences of majority voters
is innocuous.
    19
       Our results are also robust to diﬀerences in cardinal preferences among voters of a same group (who
have the same ordinal preferences). When there is heterogeneity in preferences among voters of a same
group, what drives that group’s behavior is the average preferences of the voters composing it.
    20
       This assumption’s purpose is to exclude uninteresting cases where C is not a threat.


                                                    8
the share of b-voters is (1 − α) (1 − k) . Without loss of generality, we assume that α ≤ 12 .
    Voters of type θ ∈ Θ turn out with an (exogenously given) probability qθ , drawn from
a Uniform distribution with support [0, 1].21 The distributions of these random variables
are common knowledge but, at the time of the vote, their realizations are not. This
assumption implies that there is aggregate uncertainty about the distribution of actual
voters in the electorate. As in the pivotal voter model (see Myatt 2007 and Bouton et al.
2016), the presence of such aggregate uncertainty is a key feature of our model: without
it, the strategic behavior of voters would be dramatically diﬀerent.22 The particular way
we obtain aggregate uncertainty is unimportant. For instance, we could assume that
all individuals in the population turn out with a known probability, but that there is
uncertainty about the proportion of voters of the diﬀerent type (i.e., k and/or α are
random variables).
    Following the group-based approach, we assume that voting decisions are made at the
group level.23 Group members vote in order to maximize welfare of the group.24 Given
the dominant strategy of c-voters and that members of a group have the same preferences,
the game essentially simpliﬁes to a two-player game (one player choosing group-a action
and one player choosing group-b action). Denoting by λi ∈ [0, 1] the probability that a
member of group i votes for A,25 a Bayesian Nash Equilibrium is a tuple {λ∗i }i=a,b such

   21
      One way to think about the exogenous turnout is as the product of a (simple) costly voting model in
the vein of Feddersen and Sandroni 2006a: each voter faces a (ﬁxed) cost c if they vote. A proportion qθ
are ethical voters who receive a beneﬁt from doing one’s duty to the group D > c, while the remainder
do not, and therefore abstain (since they have inﬁnitesimal impact upon the election). Therefore, the
exogenous turnout is the same as exogenous duty with ﬁxed cost.
   22
      Without such uncertainty, majority voters would always coordinate behind one of the majority can-
didates. This candidate would then win the election with probability one.
   23
      In Section 5.3, we allow for the presence of expressive voters, who always vote for their most-preferred
candidate.
   24
      There are diﬀerent justiﬁcations for the group-based approach (see Shachar and Nalebuﬀ 1999, Fed-
dersen and Sandroni 2006a, 2006b, Coate and Conlin 2004, and Levine and Mattozzi 2016). In a previous
version of the paper, we were following the ethical voting approach (Feddersen and Sandroni 2006a, 2006b,
and Coate and Conlin 2004), by assuming that voters are “rule-utilitarian”. This means they understand
that there is a (group-level) rule (to be determined endogenously) that they need to follow in order for the
utility of the group to be maximized, and they get a payoﬀ if they act according to this rule (if they are
“doing their part”). That payoﬀ is assumed larger than any cost of doing ones part. As a consequence,
and since the probability that one vote inﬂuences the outcome of the election is zero, voting decisions are
as if made at the group level.
   25
      Our focus on equilibria in which all members of a given group adopt the same strategy is not totally
innocuous. When members of a group are allowed to adopt diﬀerent strategies, e.g. 40% of a-voters
vote for A and 60% vote for B, then the existence of a pure strategy equilibrium is not guaranteed (but
the existence of a mixed-strategy equilibrium is). However, we believe that the coordination required for
asymmetric strategies within groups is quite demanding. Typically, in large groups, asymmetric strategies
are implemented through mixed strategies (which is what our assumption allows for). Moreover, we can


                                                      9
that


           λ∗a maximizes pA (λa , λ∗b ) W − (1 − pA (λa , λ∗b ) − pB (λa , λ∗b ))Y, and                 (1)

           λ∗b maximizes pB (λ∗a , λb ) W − (1 − pA (λ∗a , λb ) − pB (λ∗a , λb ))Y,                     (2)


where pψ (λa , λb ) is the probability that candidate ψ wins when the strategy proﬁle is
(λa , λb ) . See Lemma 4 (in Appendix A1) for detail about these probabilities.


3      Equilibrium Analysis

In this section, we fully characterize the set of (pure strategy) equilibria, i.e. equilibria in
which voters of a given group all votes for the same candidate with probability 1, under
plurality.26 Doing so, we prove that a (pure strategy) equilibrium always exists, and that,
for a broad set of parameter values, there is an unique (pure strategy) equilibrium. In the
remainder of the paper, we drop the qualiﬁer “pure strategy” and refer to “pure strategy
equilibria” as “equilibria”.
    There are two type of equilibria in the baseline model: (i) the sincere voting equilib-
rium, and (ii) Duverger’s Law equilibria.27

Deﬁnition 1 In the sincere voting equilibrium, majority voters vote for their most
preferred candidate (strategy proﬁle (1, 0)).


Deﬁnition 2 In a Duverger’s Law equilibrium, all majority voters vote for the same
candidate: either candidate A (strategy proﬁle (1, 1)), or candidate B (strategy proﬁle
(0, 0)).

    When there are more groups of voters with diﬀerent preference orderings, a third type
of equilibria may exist: partial Duverger’s law equilibria, in which some, but not all,
supporters of a candidate abandon their most-preferred candidate in order to rally behind
a more serious contender. We study those equilibria in Section 5.2.
easily capture situations in which members of a group adopt diﬀerent strategies by splitting that particular
group into two groups. These two groups are then free to adopt diﬀerent strategies. As we show in section
5.2, our results are robust to an increase in the number of groups.
   26
      In Appendix A2, we show that a mixed strategy equilibrium may exist. This equilibrium involves
mixing by both group-a and group-b voters.
   27
      It is easy to see that (0, 1) cannot be an equilibrium: both group-a and group-b prefer to vote for
their most-preferred candidate when the other majority group vote for that candidate.


                                                    10
3.1   Existence

Our proof of existence is constructive. First, we identify the necessary and suﬃcient
condition under which the sincere voting equilibrium exists:

Proposition 1 Under plurality, the sincere voting equilibrium exists if and only if

                              W   pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)
                                ≥                                   .
                              Y               pA (1, 0)


   The condition in Proposition 1 guarantees that, when they expect the other majority
group to vote sincerely, neither group prefers voting for their second choice candidate
instead of voting for their ﬁrst choice. This depends both on the utility function of a- and
b-voters (W and Y ), and the probabilities of winning of candidates A and B when voters
are sincere or when they all vote for the same majority candidate (pA (1, 0), pB (1, 0), and
pA (1, 1)). Voters are more inclined to vote for their most-preferred candidate when they
care a lot about electing their preferred majority candidate (large W ) and when they do
not dislike the minority candidate too intensely (small Y ). Sincere voting is also more
appealing when candidate A is a serious contender when all voters vote sincerely (large
pA (1, 0)) and coordinating behind one majority candidate does not increase much the
likelihood of defeating the minority candidate (small pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)).
   Using Lemma 4 (in Appendix A1), we can rewrite the condition in Proposition 1 as a
function of only primitives of the model: W, Y, α and k. We can then prove the following
Lemma:

            pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Lemma 1              pA (1,0)            is increasing in k and decreasing in α.



   This Lemma shows that the sincere voting equilibrium is more likely when (i) the
minority group is small (small k), then majority voters have weak incentives to coordinate
behind one majority candidate to defeat the minority candidate; (ii) the majority is evenly
divided (α large), then both types of majority voters realize that their champion has a
signiﬁcant chance to win, and they do not want to relinquish that chance.
   Moving to the second part of the proof of existence, we identify the necessary and
suﬃcient condition under which a Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0) exists:

                                                   11
Proposition 2 Under plurality, there exists a Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0) if and
only if


                           W   pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)
                             ≤
                           Y               pA (1, 0)


   The condition in Proposition 2 guarantees that a-voters prefers to vote for B (and thus
that b-voters also want to do so). This is the ﬂip side of the condition in Proposition 1.
This has two consequences. First, Lemma 1 applies and informs us that the Duverger’s
Law equilibrium (0, 0) is more likely when (i) the minority group is large (large k), then
majority voters have strong incentives to coordinate behind one majority candidate since
it is the only way to defeat the minority candidate; (ii) the majority is unevenly divided (α
small), then a-voters realize that their champion is unlikely to win, and they thus prefer
to increase the probability of defeating the minority candidate by coordinating behind
candidate b. Second, the sincere voting equilibrium and the Duverger’s Law equilibrium
(0, 0) never coexist (except in the knife-edge case in which both conditions are satisﬁed
with equality).
   Existence of an equilibrium follows as a corollary of Propositions 1 and 2:

Corollary 1 Under plurality, an equilibrium always exists.




3.2       Uniqueness

From Propositions 1 and 2, we have that the sincere voting equilibrium and the Duverger’s
Law equilibrium (0, 0) never coexist under plurality. To show uniqueness, it is thus suf-
ﬁcient to identify conditions under which the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (1, 1) does not
exist. This is the role of the following Proposition:

Proposition 3 Under plurality, there exists a Duverger’s Law equilibrium (1, 1) if and
only if


                           W   pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)
                             ≤
                           Y               pB (1, 0)



                                             12
   The condition that guarantees the existence the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (1, 1) is
more demanding than the condition for the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0) . This is
so because, if all groups vote sincerely, candidate B is more likely to win than candidate
A (i.e. pB (1, 0) > pA (1, 0)). Hence, b-voters have weaker incentives than a-voters to
coordinate behind their second-preferred candidate.
   As for the condition in Proposition 1, we can use Lemma 4 (in Appendix A1), to
rewrite the condition in Proposition 3 as a function of the primitives of the model. We
can then prove the following Lemma:

            pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Lemma 2              pB (1,0)            is increasing both in k and in α.


   This Lemma shows that the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (1, 1) is more likely to exist
when (i) the minority group is large (large k), then majority voters have strong incentives
to coordinate behind one majority candidate since it is the only way to defeat the minority
candidate; (ii) the majority is evenly divided (α large). At ﬁrst sight, this second part
might seem counterintuitive. Indeed, when the majority is evenly divided, it is possible
that both majority candidates should have a chance to win, and voters should thus not
want to abandon their champion. Yet, when the majority is evenly divided, it also might
well be that both majority candidates are unlikely to win. In such a case, coordinating
behind any of the majority candidate is appealing because it is the only way to defeat the
minority candidate.
   As a corollary of Propositions 1, 2, and 3, we have a necessary and suﬃcient condition
for equilibrium uniqueness:

                                                                             W       pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Corollary 2 Under plurality, the equilibrium is unique if and only if        Y   >            pB (1,0)          .


   To better understand when the equilibrium is unique, it is useful to consider suﬃcient
conditions on the primitives of the model. First, we can identify a suﬃcient condition on
the utility function of majority voters:

Proposition 4 If W ≥ Y , then ∀k, α there exists a unique equilibrium under plurality.
Moreover, ∃α (increasing in k) such that, if α > α, the unique equilibrium is the sincere
voting equilibrium.

                                                   13
Figure 1: Equilibria with W
                          Y
                             = 2. The light colored area represents parameter values for which the unique equilibrium
is the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0), such that both types of voter vote for B. The remaining areas represent
parameter values for which the unique equilibrium is sincere voting, such that each voter type votes for their ﬁrst
choice, with the black area representing those values for which the Condorcet loser is the likely winner.



    Proposition 4 ﬁrst shows that as soon as majority voters care relatively more about
the choice between the two majority candidates than about preventing a victory of the
minority (W larger than Y ), the equilibrium is unique. This is because coordinating
behind one majority candidate leads to limited gains in terms of decreasing the likelihood
that C wins. Therefore, b-voters are willing to abandon their champion only if they care
relatively more about defeating the minority candidate than about choosing their preferred
majority candidate.
    The second part of Proposition 4 shows that, if the majority is evenly divided, the
unique equilibrium is the sincere voting equilibrium. Otherwise, the unique equilibrium
is the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0). We can illustrate that result with a numerical
                               W
example. Suppose that          Y   = 2. Figure 1 plots the equilibrium type for all possible com-
binations of α (x−axis) and k (y−axis). It also distinguishes between two types of cases
when the sincere voting is the unique equilibrium: values of the parameters for which can-
didate B is the likely winner (i.e., the candidate who wins with the highest probability),
and those for which candidate C is the likely winner. Figure 1 clearly illustrates that
Duverger’s Law fails when the majority is suﬃciently evenly divided.
    It is also useful to consider suﬃcient conditions for the two Duverger’s Law equilibria
to coexist:



                                                         14
Figure 2: Equilibria with W  Y
                                 = 34 . The light colored area represents parameter values for which the unique
equilibrium is the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0), such that both types of voter vote for B. The striped area
represents parameter values for which both Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0) and (1, 1) exist. The remaining areas
represent parameter values for which the unique equilibrium is sincere voting, such that each voter type votes for
their ﬁrst choice, with the black area representing those values for which the Condorcet loser is the likely winner.



Proposition 5 If W < Y , then for α suﬃciently large, ∃k (decreasing in α) such that,
if k > k, both Duverger’s Law equilibria exist under plurality.



    Proposition 5 shows that both Duverger’s Law equilibria exist when majority voters
care relatively more about preventing the victory of the minority candidate than about
electing their most-preferred majority candidate, and when the minority candidate is suf-
ﬁciently strong. In such cases, even b-voters are willing to abandon their champion: this
is the only way to defeat the minority candidate that they dislike a lot. Again, we can
illustrate the result with a numerical example. To do so we produce Figure 2, which is
                                  W
similar to Figure 1 but for       Y   = 34 . Figure 2 clearly shows that the Duverger’s law equilibria
coexist only when k is large enough. It also highlights that α must be large enough.
    Together, Propositions 4 and 5 show a non-monotonicity with respect to α. If k is
suﬃciently large, then there will be equilibrium multiplicity (the two Duverger’s Law
equilibria) once the two groups become suﬃciently evenly divided (α large). However,
if k is suﬃciently small, then a large α will lead to sincere voting. Similarly, there is a
corresponding discontinuity with respect to k. If α is relatively evenly divided, when k
is small an increase in the size of the minority will still retain sincere voting as a unique
equilibrium, while potentially making the Condorcet loser C the likely winner. However,

                                                        15
there exists a point at which it will shift the equilibrium to a Duverger’s Law equilibrium,
meaning there exists a point at which an increase in k actually decreases the probability
of C winning by incentivizing strategic behavior on the part of the majority.




4    Majority Runoﬀ Elections

In this section, we study the behavior of voters in majority runoﬀ elections. Our main
focus is on the comparison with the behavior in plurality elections. We also study a variant
of the majority runoﬀ rule in which more than two candidates are allowed in the second
round if they obtain more than a pre-deﬁned fraction of the registered voters. Due to its
use in parliamentary and local elections in France, we call this variant of the majority
runoﬀ rule the “French-style runoﬀ”.
    Under the majority runoﬀ rule, there is up to two rounds of voting. In the ﬁrst round,
(ρ = 1), all voters are called to cast a ballot in favor of one of the candidates. The action
set is denoted by Ψ 1 = {A, B, C}. If the candidate who ranks ﬁrst obtains more than 50%
of the votes, she wins outright and there is no second round. Otherwise, there is a second
round (ρ = 2) opposing the two candidates who received the most votes in the ﬁrst round
(the top-two candidates). In that round, voters are again called to cast a vote for one of
the participating candidates. The action set is denoted by Ψ 2 = {P, Q}, where P and Q
refer to the candidates who ranked ﬁrst and second in the ﬁrst round, respectively. The
candidate with the largest number of votes in that round wins the election.
    Following Bouton (2013) and Bouton and Gratton (2015), we work under the assump-
tion that the set of voters going to the polls in the ﬁrst and second rounds may diﬀer; in
round ρ, voters of type θ ∈ Θ turn out with an (exogenously given) probability qθρ , drawn
from a Uniform distribution with support [0, 1].
    In the case of majority runoﬀ, it proves useless to change the notation in order to
accommodate for these more complex strategies. This is because majority voters have an
obvious dominant strategy in every possible second round. It is thus not necessary to keep
track of their strategy in that round. Instead, one can lighten notation by focusing on the
behavior of voters in the ﬁrst round. We denote by σi ∈ [0, 1] the probability that group
i votes for A in the ﬁrst round of a runoﬀ election.


                                             16
   There are three possible second rounds in majority runoﬀ elections: A vs. B, A vs. C,
and B vs. C. When the second round pits one majority candidate against the minority
candidate, both a-voters and b-voters strictly prefer to vote for the participating majority
candidate. Otherwise, they increase the probability that their least-preferred candidate
wins. For the same reason, when the second round features the two majority candidates,
a-voters strictly prefer to vote for candidate A, and b-voters strictly prefer to vote for
candidate B. It remains to be determined what c-voters do in that case. Given that they
are indiﬀerent between A and B, we assume that they abstain. This is for the sake of
simplicity: we can relax that assumption without aﬀecting the results qualitatively.
   To deal with potential issues of sequential rationality, we focus on (pure strategy)
Weak Perfect Bayesian Equilibria (WPBE).28 A WPBE under majority runoﬀ is a tuple
{σi }i=a,b such that


             σa∗ maximizes pR        ∗             R        ∗      R        ∗
                            A (σa , σb ) W − (1 − pA (σa , σb ) − pB (σa , σb ))Y, and

             σb∗ maximizes pR   ∗                  R   ∗           R   ∗
                            B (σa , σb ) W − (1 − pA (σa , σb ) − pB (σa , σb ))Y,



where pR
       ψ (σa , σb ) is the probability that candidate ψ wins when the strategy proﬁle is

(σa , σb ) , and taking into account the dominant strategies in the second round. See the
proof of Lemma 6 (in Appendix A5) for details about these probabilities.
   The set of pure strategy WPBE majority under runoﬀ share many features with the
set of equilibria under plurality (see Appendix A5 for details): (i) the same two types
of equilibria exist, (ii) the sincere voting equilibrium never coexists with a Duverger’s
law equilibrium, and (iii) the equilibrium is unique for a broad set of parameter values
(either the sincere voting equilibrium, or the Duverger’s law (0, 0)). Yet, the conditions
under which those diﬀerent situations occur are diﬀerent under plurality and runoﬀ. In
particular, we can prove that sincere voting is more prevalent under runoﬀ than under
plurality:




  28
       Under plurality, the set of pure WPBE corresponds to the set of pure Bayesian equilibria.


                                                    17
Proposition 6 Given a set of parameter values W , Y , k, and α,

  1. The sincere voting equilibrium always exists in the ﬁrst round of a runoﬀ election if
      it exists under plurality;

  2. There exist a set of parameter values W , Y , k, and α, such that the sincere voting
      equilibrium exists in the ﬁrst round of a runoﬀ election even if it does not exist under
      plurality.


   This result is rather intuitive. Voters have weaker incentives to coordinate behind
one of the majority candidates in the ﬁrst round of a majority runoﬀ election because
the second round oﬀers another opportunity for majority voters to defeat the minority
candidate. She is thus less of a threat to majority voters, who then feel freer to vote for
their most-preferred candidate in the ﬁrst round. As discussed in the introduction, this
result is in line with the ﬁndings of the empirical literature


4.1   French-Style Runoﬀ

The French runoﬀ system for parliamentary and local elections diﬀers from the “standard”
majority runoﬀ system analyzed above. The diﬀerence is that, on top of the 50%-threshold
for ﬁrst-round victory, it features another threshold at 12.5% of the registered voters: if a
candidate ﬁnishes third (or lower), but receives more than that threshold number of votes,
then she will also advance to the second round. In our setup, this opens the door for a
second round with three candidates.
   We consider any French-style runoﬀ rule with a second-round qualiﬁcation threshold
τ ∈ (0, 0.5). Under such a system, there are four possible second rounds: A vs. B or C, B
vs. C, and the opposition of all three candidates. The set of possible second round is thus
{AB, AC, BC, ABC}. Given that a second round featuring three candidates is possible,
it is important that strategies specify the actions played in each subgame. We thus have
to adapt the notation. Yet, since majority voters have a dominant strategies in all second
rounds involving two candidates, we only need to keep track of their strategy in the ABC
second round. We denote by σiABC ∈ [0, 1] the probability that group i votes for A in the
ABC second round. As before, we denote by σi ∈ [0, 1] the probability that group i votes
for A in the ﬁrst round of a runoﬀ election.

                                               18
    As under majority runoﬀ, we focus on (pure strategy) WPBE. A WPBE under French-
style runoﬀ is a tuple {σi , σiABC }i=a,b .
    We start with the analysis of second-round voting behavior. When there are two
candidates participating in the second round, the behavior of voters is the same as the
one in the second round of a majority runoﬀ election. When there are three candidates
participating in the second round, voters behave as in a plurality election (see Propositions
1, 2, and 3).
    We are now in position to analyze the behavior of voters in the ﬁrst round. We focus
on the comparison with plurality and majority runoﬀ. We can prove that sincere voting
is more prevalent under French-style runoﬀ than under plurality, but less prevalent under
French-style runoﬀ than under majority runoﬀ:

Proposition 7 Given a set of parameter values W , Y , k, and α:
     if the sincere voting equilibrium exists under plurality, it also exists in the ﬁrst round
of a French-style runoﬀ election, but the converse is not true;
     if the sincere voting equilibrium exists in the ﬁrst round of a French-style runoﬀ
election, it is also an equilibrium in the ﬁrst round of a majority runoﬀ election, but the
converse is not true



    The intuition of the ﬁrst part of the Proposition is the same as for majority runoﬀ:
voters have weaker incentives to coordinate behind one majority candidate in the ﬁrst
round of a french-style runoﬀ election because the second round oﬀers another opportunity
for majority voters to defeat the minority candidate.
    The second part of the Proposition is perhaps surprising. Even if it is easier for
a candidate to qualify for the second round in a French-style runoﬀ election than in a
majority runoﬀ election, voters are more inclined to abandon their preferred candidate
in the former. This is so because, under French-style runoﬀ, a majority candidate who
qualiﬁed for a second round against the minority candidate is not guaranteed of the support
of all majority voters. By sending one’s preferred candidate to the second round, one may
increase the risk that the minority candidate wins (if majority voters split their votes).
    Proposition 7 is coherent with the empirical ﬁndings of Pons and Tricaud (2018).
They ﬁnd that the vote share of the top two candidates (as a percentage of the number of

                                              19
registered voters) is lower in second rounds with three candidates than with two candidates.
This is due to the presence of so-called “switcher” voters, who vote for their preferred
among the top two candidates when their most preferred candidate, the third one, does
not participate in the second round, but vote for him when he does participate. This is
exactly what our model predicts if one considers equilibria such that voters vote sincerely
both in the ﬁrst round and in the ABC second round.29 In that case, the qualiﬁcation of
the third candidate to the second round leads to a substantial reduction in the vote share
of the top two candidates. This is so because the supporters of the third candidate, say
A, switch away from supporting the other majority candidate, say B, to instead support
A, their preferred candidate. Interestingly, this means that Pons and Tricaud (2018)’s
ﬁndings are coherent with all voters being (group-based) strategic.
    Finally, Proposition 7 leads to the following extension:

Proposition 8 Under French-style runoﬀ, the prevalence of sincere voting is increasing
in the level of the threshold τ.

    This result is initially surprising. The common argument justifying the introduction of
a second-round qualiﬁcation threshold is that the purpose of such a threshold is to balance
two desirable but contradictory characteristics of the electoral systems. On the one hand,
a higher threshold is deemed desirable because, by reducing the number of candidates
in the second round, it increases the likelihood that the victor is supported by a large
plurality of the population. On the other hand, a higher threshold is deemed undesirable
because it reduces the diversity of choices oﬀered to voters in the second round. Therefore,
the common belief is that this legitimacy vs. pluralism trade-oﬀ tilts in favor of legitimacy
for higher thresholds, and in favor of pluralism for lower ones. Our result suggests that
this trade-oﬀ may actually tilt in the exact opposite direction: by increasing the second-
round qualiﬁcation threshold, one may actually increase the probability of a second round
featuring three candidates (because voters have stronger incentives to vote sincerely in
the ﬁrst round). Increasing the threshold then tilts the balance in favor of pluralism, not
legitimacy.
   29
     Proposition 7 implies that, if all voters are strategic, then Pons and Tricaud (2018)’s ﬁndings can be
supported by our model only in that case. Indeed, given that the ABC second round is identical in terms
of strategic incentives to a plurality election, Proposition 7 implies that sincere voting in a second round
opposing the three candidates is not coherent with the existence of a Duverger’s law in the ﬁrst round.


                                                    20
    Obviously, this reversal of the legitimacy vs. pluralism trade-oﬀ is empirically relevant
only if a substantial fraction of the electorate are (group-based) strategic. Ultimately, it
is thus an empirical question: how does an increase of the threshold inﬂuence the number
of candidate participating in the second round? It should be possible to explore this
question by exploiting the changes in the level of this threshold over the past 60 years in
France. Since the beginning of the Fifth Republic in France, the second-round qualiﬁcation
threshold has raised signiﬁcantly: from 5% in 1958, to 10% and then 12.5% since 1988
(with a one-election switch to proportional representation in 1986).


5     Extensions

5.1     Preferences: Real Line

In this section, we discuss the robustness of our results to a more sophisticated structure
of preferences. We focus on the widely studied case of a unidimensional policy space:
the candidates and the groups of voters are positioned along the real line. This is a quite
ﬂexible case that allows us to relax the assumptions that (i) c-voters are indiﬀerent between
A and B, and (ii) majority voters have the exact same cardinal preferences.
    Let us assume that the position of group-a is identical to the position of candidate A,
and similarly for the two other group-candidate pairs. The three positions are denoted
by xa , xb , and xc . These are the bliss points of the diﬀerent types of voters.30 Voters’
utility is decreasing in the absolute value of the distance between their bliss point and the
position of the winning candidate. To ensures comparability with the baseline model where
candidate C is the Condorcet loser, we assume that xa = 0, xb ∈ (0, 1/2), and xc = 1.
This directly implies that Wa = Wb = xb = Yc and Ya = Wc = 1 − xb > 1 − 2xb = Yb .
Therefore, c-voters are not indiﬀerent between A and B anymore (they prefer B over A),
and a-voters have a higher disutility for C than b-voters. Finally, we keep the assumption
that, together, a- and b-voters form a majority, but that c-voters are suﬃciently numerous
(i.e. more than 1/3 of the electorate) so that C is a serious threat.

   30
      We have also considered an extension of the model in which there is preference heterogeneity within
groups. In particular, we considered a distribution of preferences within each group, such that xai ∼ fa [0, 1]
and xbi ∼ fb [0, 1], with 12 > E[xbi ] > E[xai ]. Assuming that candidate A’s ideal point is E[xai ] and similarly
for B’s, we can show that heterogeneity within groups makes a-voters more inclined to vote sincerely. The
eﬀect on group b-voters depends on the speciﬁc shape of the preference distribution.


                                                       21
   First, we can prove that c-voters always prefer to vote for C :

Lemma 3 Under plurality, in equilibrium, c-voters always vote for candidate C.


   The intuition is as follows. For c-voters, the gain of voting for candidate B instead of
candidate C is to avoid the victory of candidate A. The cost of voting for candidate B
is that their favorite candidate loses any chance of winning. Given that candidate B is
not very appealing to c-voters (because xb ∈ (0, 1/2)), and that candidate A is relatively
unlikely to win when c-voters vote sincerely (because k > 1/3), c-voters have no incentive
to vote for B.
   Knowing that c-voters necessarily vote for C, we can fully characterize the set of
equilibria:

Proposition 9 Under plurality:

                     xb
   • If   pB (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)   > max{ p1−x  b
                                                      , 1 }, then sincere voting is the unique
                                               A (1,0) pB (1,0)

      equilibrium,

                     xb
   • If   pB (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)   ∈ [ p1−x  b
                                                   , 1 ], then Duverger’s law (1,1) is the unique
                                            A (1,0) pB (1,0)

      equilibrium,

                     xb
   • If   pB (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)   ∈ [ pB (1,0)
                                              1
                                                    , p1−x  b
                                                       A (1,0)
                                                               ], then Duverger’s law (0,0) is the unique
      equilibrium,

   • Otherwise, both Duverger law equilibria exist.


   This proposition shows that our main results do not rely on c-voters being indiﬀerent
between A and B, nor on majority voters having the exact same disutility of a victory of
C. Even when these assumptions are relaxed, it remains true that (i) the sincere voting
equilibrium never co-exists with a Duverger’s law equilibrium, and (ii) that there exists
a unique equilibrium for a broad set of parameter values. The features of the electoral
environment that push toward sincere voting also remain the same.
   An interesting implication of Proposition 9 is that the supporters of the centrist can-
didate (i.e. candidate B) are more “committed” to their most-preferred candidate than
the other majority voters. In particular, if we were to swap the size of groups a and b,

                                                     22
Figure 3: Equilibria with real line extension when xb = 25 , and group a (the left-wing group) is larger than group b
(the moderate group which supports the Condorcet winner); α represents the size of group b. The light colored area
represents parameter values for which the unique equilibrium is the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (1, 1), such that
both types of voter vote for A. The dark striped area represents parameter values for which the unique equilibrium
is the Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0), such that both types of voters vote for B. The remaining area represents
parameter values for which the unique equilibrium is sincere voting, such that each voter type votes for their ﬁrst
choice.


keeping everything else constant, there would be cases such that all majority voters vote
for candidate B before the swap, but they all vote sincerely after the swap. By contrast,
it is never the case that all majority voters vote for candidate A before the swap, but then
all vote sincerely after the swap. This result leads to the testable prediction that centrist
voters should have a higher propensity to vote for their most-preferred candidate than
other voters. Figure 3 shows how this changes the equilibria in the case where xb = 25 .


5.2     More Groups

In this section, we explore the eﬀect of the number of voting groups on the characteristics
of the set of equilibria. The main message that stems out of this analysis is that the
predictions of the group-based model of voting depend on the structure of group identity,
i.e., the number and the types of groups.


5.2.1     Group Splitting: Identical Subgroups

We study how the size of the groups at which the voting decisions are made inﬂuences
equilibrium behavior. To do so, we consider an extension of the model, such that the
a and b groups are split into n identical subgroups. Each group makes its own voting


                                                        23
decision. The following Proposition shows that, for n suﬃciently large, the group-based
voting model delivers the same set of equilibria as the pivotal voter model (without ag-
gregate uncertainty, see Myerson and Weber 1993, Myerson 2002, Bouton, Castanheira
and Llorente-Saguer 2017). This illustrates how the group-based voting model nests the
pivotal voting model as a special case.31

Proposition 10 Under plurality, for n suﬃciently large:

    • both Duverger’s law equilibria exist for any values of W , Y , k, and α;

    • the sincere voting equilibrium never exists.



    The intuition is exactly the same as under the pivotal voter model. Sincere voting
is not an equilibrium because supporters of the weak majority candidate realize that the
probability they make their favorite candidate win by voting for her is orders of magnitude
smaller than the probability they make their second-preferred candidate win by voting for
her. Thus, voting for their most-preferred candidate would be wasting a useful vote.
Duverger’s law equilibria exist for exactly the same reason.
    As discussed in Grofman, Blais and Bowler (2009), some countries using plurality rule
feature a stable two-party system (e.g., the US), while others do not (e.g. India). Propo-
sition 10 suggests a novel explanation for such mixed empirical evidence about Duverger’s
law. Countries with stable two-party systems are those for which ethical groups are suﬃ-
ciently fragmented. This prediction is not in contradiction with Duverger’s original idea,
which ﬁnds support in the data (Clark and Golder 2006), “[...] that social heterogeneity
should increase the number of parties only once the electoral system is suﬃciently permis-
sive.” (Clark and Golder 2006, p. 704). It actually reﬁnes it by suggesting that the nature
of social heterogeneity is crucial: a fragmentation of groups with similar interests should
have a negative eﬀect on the number of “serious” candidates, whereas the fragmentation
of society into more groups with diﬀerent interests should have a positive eﬀect.




  31
    When n grows large, the aggregate uncertainty in our model, which is at the subgroup level, vanishes.
We would need uncertainty at the group level to maintain aggregate uncertainty when n grows large.


                                                   24
5.2.2     One Group Per Preference Orderings

We now consider a case with a group for each possible strict preference ordering. We
denote the type of a voter by ij, where i is the voter’s ﬁrst choice and j is the voter’s
second choice. Therefore, a voter identiﬁed as type ab features the ordering A B C.
                                                                  
Let αij be the proportion of the population of type ij, such that   αij = 1. We keep the
simplifying assumption that W is utility if ﬁrst-best win, 0 is utility for second-best, and
−Y is utility for third-best.
    We use the following deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 3 Let vij be the vote total for voter type ij if everyone votes sincerely, such
that vij = αij qij .

    A voter of type ij will vote sincerely, given all other voters are voting sincerely, if and
only if



W   P r[vki + vkj > max{vij + vik , vji + vjk }] − P r[vki + vkj > max{vji + vjk + vij , vik }]
  ≥
Y   P r[vij + vik > max{vji + vjk , vki + vkj }] − P r[vik > max{vji + vjk + vij , vki + vkj }]
                                                                                          (3)
Equation (3) tells us that a group will vote sincerely if and only if the ratio between their
gain from their ﬁrst and second choice winning is greater than the ratio in the diﬀerence
between their marginal impact on defeating their third-choice from voting strategically
and their marginal impact on helping their ﬁrst choice win by voting sincerely. This is a
generalization of the equations in Proposition 1 and Proposition 3. Hence, a group still
prefer to voter sincerely when there is a larger mass of other voters supporting their ﬁrst
choice than their second choice; otherwise, whether they vote sincerely depends upon their
marginal utilities over the diﬀerent candidates.32




   32
     By the deﬁnition of vote totals, one can use a mathematical package such as Mathematica to show that
the right hand side of equation (3) is decreasing in αij and αik , increasing in αji and αjk , and increasing
in αki and αkj . See the online appendix for the Mathematica code.


                                                     25
Proposition 11 Under plurality, with a full type set,the sincere voting equilibrium exists
if and only if



W           P r[vki + vkj > max{vij + vik , vji + vjk }] − P r[vki + vkj > max{vji + vjk + vij , vik }]
  ≥ maxij {                                                                                             }
Y           P r[vij + vik > max{vji + vjk , vki + vkj }] − P r[vik > max{vji + vjk + vij , vki + vkj }]

   As in the standard framework, a sincere voting equilibrium will be most likely when
all six types are relatively equal in size.
   The addition of new groups with diﬀerent preference orderings allow for a third type
of equilibria, partial Duverger’s law equilibria:

Deﬁnition 4 An equilibrium is a partial Duverger’s law equilibrium if there exists
some candidate i such that voters in group ij vote sincerely (i.e., they vote for i), but voters
in group ik do not vote sincerely (i.e., they vote for k); all other voters vote sincerely.

   A partial Duverger’s law equilibrium involves one candidate losing some, but not all, of
her supporters to another candidate. Such an equilibrium is consistent with the ﬁndings of
the empirical literature on strategic voting that partial coordination behind strong candi-
dates occur in real-life and in the laboratory (e.g., Kawai and Watanabe 2015, Spenkuch
2018, Bouton et al. (2017), and references therein). The usual interpretation of that
ﬁnding is that the electorate is composed of both strategic and non-strategic voters (a
possibility we explore in Section 5.3). The following result suggests that such patterns in
the data are consistent with all voters being (group-based) strategic:

Proposition 12 A partial Duverger’s law equilibrium exists if and only if there exist some
candidates i, j, k such that



  W   P r[vki + vkj + νik > max{vij , vji + vjk }] − P r[vki + vkj + νik > vji + vjk + vij ]
    ≥
  Y                       P r[vij > max{vji + vjk , vki + vkj + vik }]

   and



W   P r[vji + vjk > max{vij + vik , vki + vkj }] − P r[vji + vjk > max{vki + vkj + vik , vij }]
  <
Y   P r[vij + vik > max{vji + vjk , vki + vkj }] − P r[vij > max{vji + vjk , vki + vkj + vik }]

                                              26
     The ﬁrst condition in the proposition states that one of the groups (ij) is large enough
(and their third choice is weak enough) that even when other supporters of candidate i
(group ik) vote for k (the least preferred option of ij-voters), they still prefer to hold onto
the hope of getting their ﬁrst choice over the line rather than voting for their second best.
By contrast, the second condition implies that groupik is too small (and their third choice
j is strong enough), hence voters in that group do not want to vote sincerely, and instead
prefer buttressing their ﬁrst choice. Hence, we should see a mix of strategic and sincere
voting among supporters of candidate i when (i) most of candidate i’s supporters agree on
the second choice, (ii) the three candidates have relatively similar numbers of supporters,
and (iii) candidate k (the third-choice of most of i’s supporters) is more popular than
candidate i. Under these conditions, the small number of i supporters who have k as their
second choice choose to vote strategically for k, as that increases the chance of defeating
j without aﬀecting the probability of i winning by much.
     We can also show that a partial Duverger’s law equilibrium never co-exists with some
other types of equilibria:

Proposition 13 A partial Duverger’s law equilibrium where i’s supporters split their votes
never co-exists with either a sincere voting equilibrium nor a Duverger’s law equilibrium
where candidate i receives no votes.

     Proposition 13 does not guarantee that equilibria with three serious candidates never
co-exist with equilibria with two serious equilibria. Actually, that result proves fragile to
an increase in the number of groups (with diﬀerent preference orderings): there are cases
in which the sincere voting equilibrium can coexist with Duverger’s law equilibria. We
illustrate this with an example. Suppose there are 4 groups with positive mass and the
                                                                       W
following preference orderings: ab, ba, bc, cb. We also let            Y   = 1, αab = αcb =      1
                                                                                                 3   and
αba = αbc =           1
                      6.   In this example, each candidate has identical ﬁrst-choice support, but
candidate B has divided support between two groups. In this case, it is easy to see that
neither “extreme” (a and c) group will want to deviate to supporting b: voting sincerely
defeats their respective third choices        2
                                              3   of the time, while coordination behind candidate b
                                                                             5
increases the likelihood of defeating their respective third choice to       6   , but also removes the
1
3   chance of their respective ﬁrst choice winning. The ratio of the gain from coordination
          1
then is   6
          1   =   1
                  2   < 1.
          3



                                                      27
   Now consider the “moderates” (groups ba and bc): if they expect the other moderate
group to vote sincerely, they also do so, as they have even less gain from coordination
                                                                       1
behind their second choice (as each subgroup represents only           6    of the electorate) while
still virtually guaranteeing a loss to their ﬁrst choice by doing so. Hence, the sincere
voting equilibrium exists. However, if they expect the other moderate group to coordinate
behind their second choice, e.g., groups ab and ba voting for a, they have virtually no
                                                      1                                   1         1
chance of electing their ﬁrst choice (as they are     6   of the population against       3   and   2)
                                                                   1
but can increase the chance of their second choice winning to      2       by balancing the playing
ﬁeld. Hence, a Duverger’s law equilibrium AC also exists. Group-based voting models
cannot guarantee a unique prediction about the number of serious candidates when each
candidate has relatively similar support, but at least one has support that is relatively
equally divided among second choices.
   As we discuss in the Introduction, the results in this section highlights the impor-
tance of the assumptions concerning the number of groups and their composition for the
predictions of the group-based model of voting.


5.3   Expressive Voters

As mentioned above, the empirical literature on strategic voting (e.g., Kawai and Watan-
abe 2015, Spenkuch 2018, Bouton et al. (2017), and references therein) ﬁnds results
coherent with the electorate being composed of both strategic and non-strategic voters.
In this section, we explore the eﬀect of the presence of expressive voters, who always vote
sincerely for their most-preferred candidate, on the strategic behavior of other voters.
   Let a share τ ∈ (0, 1) of voters within the majority be expressive. The presence of
expressive voters aﬀects the necessary and suﬃcient condition for a sincere voting equi-
librium to exist (as in the case without expressive voters, the sincere voting equilibrium
never coexists with a Duverger’s law equilibrium). In particular, under plurality, the
sincere voting equilibrium exists if and only if :


                       W  pτ (0, 0) + pτA (0, 0) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)
                         ≥ B                                                                        (4)
                       Y              pA (1, 0) − pτA (0, 0)

where pτj (λa , λb ) is the probability candidate j wins if their is a fraction τ of expressive
voters, and the other voters vote according to the strategy (λa , λb ). Obviously, when all


                                              28
strategic voters vote sincerely, i.e., (λa , λb ) = (1, 0), the probabilities of victories of the
diﬀerent candidates are not aﬀected by the fraction of expressive voters in the electorate,
i.e., pτj (1, 0) = pj (0, 0) ∀j, τ.
    Condition (4) shows that the presence of expressive voters has two impacts on the in-
centives of strategic voters. First, it reduces the value of coordinating behind one majority
candidate: coordination among majority voters cannot be complete, hence candidate C
is less likely to be defeated (pτB (0, 0) + pτA (0, 0) < pτB (0, 0)). Second, it reduces the cost
of coordination: even when all strategic voters abandon one of the majority candidates,
there is still a chance that she wins due to the remaining expressive voters. Which eﬀect
dominates depends on the share of expressive voters in the electorate:

Proposition 14 There exists a τ̂ > 0 such that when τ < τ̂ , an increase in τ will increase
the set of k and α such that the sincere voting equilibrium exists. When τ > τ̂ , an increase
in τ decreases the set of k and α such that the sincere voting equilibrium exists. There is
always a τ suﬃciently large such that the sincere voting equilibrium does not exist.

    This proposition shows that, perhaps surprisingly, (i) the presence of expressive voters
has a non-monotonic eﬀect on the existence of the sincere voting equilibrium, and (ii) when
the share of expressive voters is suﬃciently large, the sincere voting equilibrium does not
exist.
    We can also show that the presence of expressive voters reduces the incentives of b-
voters to coordinate behind candidate A, the weak majority candidate:

Proposition 15 An increase in τ necessarily decreases the set of k and α such that the
Duverger’s law equilibrium (1, 1) exists. There is always a τ suﬃciently large such that
the Duverger’s law equilibrium (1, 1) does not exist.

    Why is the eﬀect of the presence of expressive voters monotonic for the Duverger’s law
equilibrium (1, 1), and not the other types of equilibria? This is so because, when the vote
share of expressive voters is suﬃciently large, b-voters voting for A means dividing votes
more evenly between majority candidates, and thus increasing the chance that candidate
C wins. By contrast, a-voters voting for B always reinforces the most serious contender
of candidate C.


                                               29
     Together, Propositions 14 and 15 imply that, there is always a suﬃciently large fraction
of expressive voters such that the Duverger’s law equilibrium (0, 0) is the unique equilib-
rium. Therefore, the inclusion of expressive voters in the group-based model of voting has
the potential to make predictions crisper.


6        Conclusions

Our results display the strengths of the group-based model of voting: it is tractable, the
predictions appear empirically sound and, due to equilibrium uniqueness for a broad set
of parameter values, quite crisp. On the other hand, some results appear sensitive to the
number and types of groups in the electorate. Hence, the way these groups form (which, in
the real world, is endogenous to a number of the relevant parameters) are key to determine
the behavior of voters in group-based models. Due to the crispness and soundness of the
predictions that come from these models, understanding such group formation has great
potential, but is unfortunately understudied (with one notable exception: Herrera and
Martinelli 2006).
     The existence of a unique equilibrium for a broad range of parameter values is an
appealing feature of the group-based model of voting with multiple candidates. As we
show in a companion paper (Bouton and Ogden 2018), this uniqueness opens the door
for a tractable model including both strategic voters and strategic candidates. Such a
model is valuable because understanding political institutions and their inﬂuence on poli-
cies requires a good understanding of the strategic behavior of politicians and voters, and
how they interact.33 Yet most of the political economy literature focuses either on strate-
gic candidates or strategic voters. For situations with more than two candidates, joint
analyses are almost nonexistent.34 Indeed, the tractability and predictive power of extant
models is aﬀected by the existence of multiple equilibria at the voting stage. In Bouton
and Ogden (2018), we revisit classic models of candidates behavior (entry and position-
ing along the real line) in a model with (group-based) strategic voters. We ﬁnd that the
presence of strategic voters dramatically aﬀects the behavior of candidates.


    33
    See the discussion in Myerson (1993).
    34
    We are only aware of a handful of exceptions: Austen-Smith and Banks 1988, Myerson and Weber
1993, Besley and Coate 1997, Castanheira 2003, Dellis and Oak 2006, and Dellis 2009.


                                              30
Appendices

Appendix A1: Preliminaries

The following Lemma computes the probabilities of winning of the diﬀerent candidates for
all the possible pure strategy proﬁles.

Lemma 4 If k > (1 − α) (1 − k) (i.e., group c is the largest), we have:

                               (1 − k)α2
                   pA (1, 0) =            ;
                               3k(1 − α)
                               1−k                  1
                   pB (1, 0) =       [1 − α −            α2 ];
                                2k              3(1 − a)
                                             1                 (1 − 2k)3
                   pA (1, 1) = pB (0, 0) =     [1 − k −                    ];
                                            2k           3(1 − α)α(1 − k)2

    If k < (1 − α) (1 − k) (i.e., group b is the largest), we have:

                             (1 − k)α2
                 pA (1, 0) =            ;
                             3k(1 − α)
                             3(2 − 3k)k − α2 (1 − k)2 − 6α(1 − k)k
                 pB (1, 0) =                                       ;
                                         6k(1 − α)(1 − k)
                                              1     2 − 3k      α2 (1 − k)
                 pA (1, 1) = pB (0, 0) =          [        −α−             ].
                                          2(1 − α) (1 − k)           3k




Proof. For a given strategy proﬁle, the only uncertainty comes from the turnout of the diﬀerent
groups. The Lemma focuses on three strategy proﬁles: (1, 0) –i.e. group-a votes for A and group-b
votes for B, and (1, 1) or (0, 0) –i.e. group-a and group-b vote for the same majority candidate
(either A (1, 1) or B (0, 0)).
    First, let us consider the strategy proﬁle (1, 0) . Candidate A wins if she obtains more votes
than candidate B (i.e. qa and qb are such that αqa > (1 − α) qb ) and more votes than candidate C
(i.e. qa and qc are such that (1 − k) αqa > kqc ). Therefore, the probability that candidate A wins
for the strategy proﬁle (1, 0) is:

                                            ˆ    1   ˆ    α
                                                         1−α qa
                                                                  ˆ   1−k
                                                                       k αqa
                            pA (1, 0)   =                                      ∂qc ∂qb ∂qa
                                             0       0            0
                                            (1 − k)α2
                                        =             .
                                            3k(1 − α)


                                                          31
The probability that candidate B wins for the strategy proﬁle (1, 0) depends on which of groups b
and c is largest. If group-c is the largest (k > (1 − α) (1 − k)), then this probability is:

                                             ˆ       1   ˆ   1        ˆ       1−k
                                                                               k (1−α)qb
                          pB (1, 0)    =                                                   ∂qc ∂qb ∂qa
                                                              α
                                                 0           1−α qa   0

                                             1−k              1
                                       =         [1 − α −          α2 ].
                                              2k          3(1 − a)

If group-b is the largest (k < (1 − α) (1 − k)), this probability is more easily computed as 1 −
pA (1, 0) − pC (1, 0) . Therefore, we need pC (1, 0) , which is:

                                             ˆ    1   ˆ      1        ˆ           k
                                                                                        q
                                                                              (1−k)(1−α) c
                         pC (1, 0)    =                                                      ∂qb ∂qc ∂qa
                                                          1−k
                                              0            k αqa          0

                                                 1       k      α2 (1 − k)
                                      =              [        −            ].
                                             2(1 − α) (1 − k)       3k

Thus, we have

                                         (1 − k)α2        1       k      α2 (1 − k)
                   pB (1, 0)   =     1−            −           [       −            ]
                                         3k(1 − α) 2(1 − α) (1 − k)          3k
                                     3(2 − 3k)k − α2 (1 − k)2 − 6α(1 − k)k
                               =                                           .
                                               6k(1 − α)(1 − k)

    Second, let us consider the strategy proﬁle (1, 1) (the (0, 0) case is identical). We are inter-
ested in the probability that the candidate supported by all majority voters, A in the case under
consideration), wins. This probability depends on which of groups b and c is largest. If group-c is
the largest, we can show that:

                                              1              (1 − 2k)3
                               pA (1, 1) =      [1 − k −                   ].
                                             2k          3(1 − α)α(1 − k)2

If group-b is the largest, then:

                                               1     2 − 3k     α2 (1 − k)
                           pA (1, 1) =             [        −α−            ].
                                           2(1 − α) (1 − k)         3k




    The following Lemma proves that, when all voters vote sincerely, candidate B is more
likely to win than candidate A.

Lemma 5 pB (1, 0) > pA (1, 0) .

Proof. Straightforward from Lemma 4.

                                                                 32
Appendix A2: Proofs

Proposition 1 Under plurality, the sincere voting equilibrium exists if and only if

                                   W   pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)
                                     ≥                                   .
                                   Y               pA (1, 0)

Proof. The strategy (1, 0) is an equilibrium under plurality if and only if neither group prefers
voting for their second choice candidate. Formally, this requires


                        pA (1, 0) W ≥ (pB (0, 0) − 1)Y + (1 − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0))Y,                            (5)


for group a, and


                        pB (1, 0) W ≥ (pA (1, 1) − 1)Y + (1 − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0))Y,                            (6)


for group b. Given that pA (1, 1) = pB (0, 0) , the RHS of these two conditions are identical. From
Lemma 5, we have pB (1, 0) > pA (1, 0) . Therefore, condition (6) is necessarily satisﬁed when
condition (5) is. The result follows from rearranging condition (5) .


               pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Lemma 1                 pA (1,0)             is increasing in k and decreasing in α.
                                                                     pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Proof. Using Lemma 4 (in Appendix A1), we have that                           pA (1,0)            boils down to

                                                3   (1 − 2k)3
                                                  − 3         − 2,
                                               2α 2α (1 − k)3

if k > (1 − α) (1 − k) , and to
                                                       3k
                                                             − 1,
                                                   2(1 − k)α

if k < (1 − α) (1 − k) .
                  3k
    Clearly,   2(1−k)α   − 1 is increasing in k and decreasing in α. It thus remains to prove that the
                    3        (1−2k)3
same is true for   2α   −   2α3 (1−k)3   − 2. Taking the derivative with respect to k, we obtain

                                                             2
                                                  3 (2k − 1)
                                                              > 0.
                                                 2α3 (k − 1)4

Taking the derivative with respect to α, we obtain the following condition:

                                              3 (1 − 2k)3
                                                [            − 1] < 0.
                                             2α2 α2 (1 − k)3




                                                        33
This simpliﬁes to


                                            (1 − 2k)3 < α2 (1 − k)3 .

            1−2k
Since α >    1−k   in the relevant area, this is necessarily satisﬁed.

Proposition 2 Under plurality, there exists a Duverger’s Law equilibrium (0, 0) if and
only if


                                  W   pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)
                                    ≤
                                  Y               pA (1, 0)
Proof. Following a similar argument as the one in the proof of Proposition 1, we have that the
strategy proﬁle (0, 0) is an equilibrium if and only if


                      pA (1, 0) W ≤ (pB (0, 0) − 1)Y + (1 − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0))Y,


It is obvious that group b does not want to deviate. The result follows from rearranging the
condition and using the equality pB (0, 0) = pA (1, 1).



Proposition 3 Under plurality, there exists a Duverger’s Law equilibrium (1, 1) if and
only if


                                  W   pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0)
                                    ≤
                                  Y               pB (1, 0)
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 2. The only diﬀerence is that we need
to determine the condition for b-voters to prefer voting for A (it is obvious that group a does not
want to deviate). Doing so, we have that the strategy proﬁle (1, 1) is an equilibrium if and only if


                      pB (1, 0) W ≤ (pA (1, 1) − 1)Y + (1 − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0))Y,


The result follows from rearranging the condition.
              pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Lemma 2                pB (1,0)            is increasing both in k and in α.
          pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)                      pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)
Proof.             pB (1,0)            can be re-written as    pB (1,0)     − 1.
                                       3(1−k)3 (1−α)α−2(1−k)3 α3 −(1−2k)3
    The LHS can      be re-written as [3(1−k)(1−α)2 −(1−k)α2 ]α(1−k)2 if k >       (1 − α)(1 − k).
                                                 2
                                                   (1−k)2
    Alternatively,   it is 3(2−3k)k−3α(1−k)k−3α
                            6(1−k)k(1−α)−(1−k)2 α2 −3k2 if k < (1 − α)(1 − k),

    In both cases, the LHS is increasing in both k and α:
    In the ﬁrst case,


                                                       34
            (2(−(1−2k)3 +3(1−a)a(1−k)3 −2a3 (1−k)3 ))               2
                                                                      −9(1−a)a(1−k)2 +6a3 (1−k)2 )
      ∂
     ∂k =        (a(3(1−a)2 (1−k)−a2 (1−k))(1−k)3 )       + (6(1−2k)
                                                              (a(3(1−a)2 (1−k)−a2 (1−k))(1−k)2 )
                   2
                     +a2 )(−(1−2k)3 +3(1−a)a(1−k)3 −2a3 (1−k)3 ))
    − ((−3(1−a) (a(3(1−a)     2 (1−k)−a2 (1−k))2 (1−k)2 )          and
      ∂     (3(1−a)(1−k) −3a(1−k) −6a (1−k) ) ((−6(1−a)(1−k)−2a(1−k))(−(1−2k)3 +3(1−a)a(1−k)3 −2a3 (1−k)3 ))
                            3         3     2      3

     ∂α = (a(3(1−a)2 (1−k)−a2 (1−k))(1−k)2 ) −                        (a(3(1−a)2 (1−k)−a2 (1−k))2 (1−k)2 )   −
(−(1−2k)3 +3(1−a)a(1−k)3 −2a3 (1−k)3 )
  (a2 (3(1−a)2 (1−k)−a2 (1−k))(1−k)2 ) .

      In the second case,
      ∂        −(((6(1−a)(1−k)+2a2 (1−k)−6k−6(1−a)k)(−3a2 (1−k)2 +3(2−3k)k−3a(1−k)k)) (3(2−3k)−3a(1−k)+6a2 (1−k)−9k+3ak)
      ∂k   =                      (−a2 (1−k)2 +6(1−a)(1−k)k−3k2 )2 )                 + (−a2 (1−k)2 +6(1−a)(1−k)k−3k2 )
and
       ∂       ((−2a(1−k)2 −6(1−k)k)(−3a2 (1−k)2 +3(2−3k)k−3a(1−k)k))                  (−6a(1−k)2 −3(1−k)k)
      ∂α   =               (−a2 (1−k)2 +6(1−a)(1−k)k−3k2 )2                  +   (−a2 (1−k)2 +6(1−a)(1−k)k−3k2 ) .

      One can check that these derivatives are all positive in the relevant ranges.

Proposition 4 If W ≥ Y , then ∀k, α there exists a unique equilibrium under plurality.
Moreover, ∃α (increasing in k) such that, if α > α, the unique equilibrium is the sincere
voting equilibrium.
                                                                                       pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Proof. The ﬁrst part of the proposition comes from the fact that                                 pB (1,0)           is max-
                                                                                            1   1  1
                    1              1                                                        2−6−6
imized at k =       2   and α =    2   (from Lemma 2), where it takes the value                1     = 1. Therefore, if
                                                                                               6
W
Y   > 1, it is a dominant strategy for group b to vote for B for all k and α. The equilibrium is then
uniquely pinned down by the behavior of group a.

      The second part of the proposition is straightforward from Lemma 1. Recall that the condition
                          W       pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
for sincere voting is     Y   ≥            pA (1,0)          ,   the RHS of which is increasing in k and decreasing

in α. Therefore, the necessary threshold α is in turn increasing in k.

Lemma 5 If W < Y , then for α suﬃciently large, ∃k (decreasing in α) such that, if k > k,
both Duverger’s Law equilibria exist under plurality.
Proof. This is direct from Lemma 2.
Proposition 6 Given a set of parameter values W , Y , k, and α:
       the sincere voting equilibrium always exists in the ﬁrst round of a runoﬀ election if
it exists under plurality;
       the sincere voting equilibrium may exist in the ﬁrst round of a runoﬀ election even if
it does not exist under plurality.
Proof. As shown in Proposition 17 (in Appendix A5), the necessary and suﬃcient condition for
the existence of the sincere voting equilibrium under runoﬀ is

                                               W  pR (1, 0) − pR C (1, 1)
                                                 ≥ C                      .                                             (7)
                                               Y        pRA (1, 0)




                                                                 35
    To prove the ﬁrst part of the proposition, we need to show that

                              pC (1, 0) − pC (1, 1)  pR (1, 0) − pRC (1, 1)
                                                    ≥ C      R
                                                                                                     (8)
                                    pA (1, 0)              pA (1, 0)

    First, note that pR           R
                      C (1, 1) = pC (0, 0) = pC (1, 1). Indeed, when all majority voters vote for

the same majority candidate, only two candidates receive a positive fraction of the votes. As
a consequence, one of those two candidates must receive more than 50% of the votes, and win
outright in the ﬁrst round. As under plurality, the candidate receiving the largest number of votes
in the ﬁrst round wins the elections.
    Second, we have from Lemma 6 (in Appendix A5) that, if pR                           R
                                                            A (1, 0) > pA (1, 0), then pC (1, 0) <

pC (1, 0). Therefore, to show that condition (8) holds, it is suﬃcient to show that pR
                                                                                     A (1, 0) > pA (1, 0)

holds. Using Mathematica, we can see that this is true for k > 13 . Therefore, if parameter values
are such that the sincere voting equilibrium exists (and it thus unique) under plurality, then it is
also the unique equilibrium under runoﬀ.
    We know from Proposition 17 (in Appendix A5) that the necessary and suﬃcient condition
for the existence of the Duverger’s law equilibrium (0, 0) is the complement of condition (7), we
also have that if the Duverger’s law equilibrium (0,0) exists under runoﬀ, then it also exists under
plurality.

    Given that condition (8) is satisﬁed with strict inequality, there exist a range of parameter

values for which the sincere voting equilibrium is the unique equilibrium under runoﬀ but it does

not exist under plurality.

Proposition 7 Given a set of parameter values W , Y , k, and α:
     if the sincere voting equilibrium exists under plurality, it also exists in the ﬁrst round
of a French-style runoﬀ election, but the converse is not true;
     if the sincere voting equilibrium exists in the ﬁrst round of a French-style runoﬀ
election, it is also an equilibrium in the ﬁrst round of a majority runoﬀ election, but the
converse is not true.
Proof. The proof of the ﬁrst part is a straightforward extension of the proof of Proposition 6.
    The proof of the second part is in several steps. First, from the ﬁrst part of the Proposition
and from Proposition 6, we know that if a sincere voting equilibrium exists under plurality, it also
exists under both majority runoﬀ and French-style runoﬀ; hence, if σaABC = σbABC , then sincere
voting equilibrium exists under plurality, majority runoﬀ, and French-style runoﬀ.
    Similarly, we know that Duverger’s law equilibrium (1, 1) exists only if Duverger’s law equilib-
rium (0, 0) exists, and b-voters have a stronger incentive to vote sincerely. Therefore, we only need
to check the cases for which the Duverger’s law equilibrium (0, 0) exists in the ABC second round,


                                                   36
i.e. σaABC = 0 = σbABC and b-voters vote sincerely in the ﬁrst round.
    In addition, for ease, deﬁne the following term:

Deﬁnition 5 Let vi be the (realized) vote total for group i if everyone votes sincerely, such that
va = α(1 − k)qa and vb = (1 − α)(1 − k)qb .


    When σaABC = 0 = σbABC , the sincere voting equilibrium exists under majority runoﬀ if and
only if

 W                            P r(vc ∈ (min{va , vb }, va + vb ))(1 − p(0, 0)
   >                                                                                            α   .
 Y   P r(va > vb + vc ) + P r(vb + vc > va > vb < vc )p(0, 0) + P r(vb + vc > va > vc < vb ) 2(1−α)
                                                                                                  (9)
The sincere voting equilibrium exists under French-style runoﬀ if and only if

W                                    P r(vc ∈ (min{va , vb , τ }, va + vb ))(1 − p(0, 0))
  >                                                                                                              α   .
Y   P r(va > vb + vc ) + P r(vb + vc > va > vb < min{vc , τ })p(0, 0) + P r(vb + vc > va > vc < min{vb , τ }) 2(1−α)
                                                                                               (10)
Note that P r(vc ∈ (min{va , vb , τ }, va + vb )) > P r(vc ∈ (min{va , vb }, va + vb )), and hence the
numerator (the change in probability of C winning between strategic and sincere in the ﬁrst round)
is greater under French-style runoﬀ, since C now only needs to beat the threshold to get a 2nd
chance in the 2nd round.
    In addition, note that P r(vb + vc > va > vb < min{vc , τ }) < P r(vb + vc > va > vb < vc ) and
P r(vb + vc > va > vc < min{vb , τ }) < P r(vb + vc > va > vc < vb ), meaning the denominator (the
probability of A winning if sincere in the ﬁrst round) is smaller under French-style runoﬀ, since
candidate A only receives votes in the second round if it is a two-candidate outcome, and that is
now less likely due to the threshold.
    Therefore, there exists a range of parameter values for which the sincere voting equilibriun
exists under majority runoﬀ, but the Duverger’s law equilibria are the only potential equilibria
under French-style runoﬀ.



Proposition 8 Under French-style runoﬀ, the prevalence of sincere voting is increasing
in the level of the threshold τ.
Proof.
    P r(vc ∈ (min{va , vb , τ }, va + vb )) is decreasing in the threshold τ , meaning the numerator of
equation 10 is decreasing.
    P r(vb + vc > va > vb < min{vc , τ }) and P r(vb + vc > va > vc < min{vb , τ }) are increasing in
τ , meaning the denominator in equation 10 is increasing.




                                                  37
    Therefore, by equation 10, the prevalence of sincere voting is increasing in the level of the
threshold τ .



Proposition 3 Under plurality, in equilibrium, c-voters always vote for candidate C.
           WC       1−xb
Proof.     YC   =    xb    > 1.
    For a c-voter to vote for B, we need:

                             WC   P rob[va > max{vb , vc }] − P rob[va > vb + vc ]
                                <                                                                    (11)
                             YC              P rob[vc > max{va , vb }]

    By assumption of a credible threat, k ≥ (1 − k)α.Therefore, P rob[va > max{vb , vc }] ≤
P rob[vc > max{va , vb }].The RHS of equation 11 is less than one, and hence the condition can
never hold.



Proposition 9 Under plurality:

                      xb
    • If   pB (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)   > max{ p1−x  b
                                                       , 1 }, then sincere voting is the unique
                                                A (1,0) pB (1,0)

      equilibrium,

                      xb
    • If   pB (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)   ∈ [ p1−x  b
                                                    , 1 ], then Duverger’s law (1,1) is the unique
                                             A (1,0) pB (1,0)

      equilibrium,

                      xb
    • If   pB (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)   ∈ [ pB (1,0)
                                               1
                                                     , p1−x  b
                                                        A (1,0)
                                                                ], then Duverger’s law (0,0) is the unique
      equilibrium,

    • Otherwise, both Duverger law equilibria exist.

Proof. Straightforward extension of the baseline case.
Proposition 10 Under plurality, for n suﬃciently large:

    • both Duverger’s law equilibria exist for any values of W , Y , k, and α;

    • the sincere voting equilibrium never exists.

Proof. The existence of the Duverger’s law equilibrium in which all voters voter for the same
majority candidate, say A, is trivial to prove. If all n − 1 other b−groups are voting for candidate
A (hence all a-groups must also be voting for A), candidate B wins if and only if the following
condition is satisﬁed.

                           1                    n−1
                             (1 − k)(1 − α)qb >     (1 − k)(1 − α)qb + (1 − k)αqa .
                           n                     n

                                                       38
But, for n suﬃciently large, this condition cannot be satisﬁed. Hence, there is no incentive to vote
for B.
     Sincere voting is an equilibrium only if the following condition is satisﬁed (it guarantees that
a−voters prefer to vote for a when they expect other voters to vote sincerely):

W   P (vc > max{(1 − k)(1 − α)qb , (1 − k)αqa }) − P (vc > max{(1 − k)((1 − α)qb + n1 αqa ), n−1
                                                                                              n (1 − k)αqa })
  >                                                                                                            .
Y    P ( n (1 − k)αqa ∈ [max{(1 − k)((1 − α)qb − n αqa , vc − n αqa }, max{(1 − k)((1 − α)qb + n1 αqa , vc }])
        n−1                                         1         1



It is easy to see that the right hand side tends to inﬁnity when n grows large due to the convexity

of the probabilities. Therefore, for n suﬃciently large, this condition cannot be satisﬁed.

     Proposition 13: A partial Duverger’s law equilibrium where candidate i s groups split
never co-exists with either a sincere voting equilibrium nor a Duverger’s law equilibrium
where candidate i receives no votes.
Proof. Let a partial Duverger’s law equilibrium away from i exists. By proposition 12’s ﬁrst
equation, we know that ij voters prefer to vote for candidate i even when ik voters are voting for
candidate k. This directly rules out a Duverger’s law equilibrium in which voters all vote for j or
k.

     Proposition 12’s second equation is just the ﬂip of equation (3), ruling out a sincere voting

equilibrium.


Appendix A3: Mixed Strategy Equilibrium

Concerning the mixed strategy, recall that such a mix would need to involve both groups
being indiﬀerent between voting sincerely or strategically. This is because if one group is
playing a pure strategy, there generically exists a pure strategy best response (see sections
3.1 and 3.2).
                                                                        pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
     In addition, the mixed strategy will only occur when W
                                                          Y ≤                    pB (1,0)            (i.e.,
when both Duverger’s law equilibria exist); otherwise, b-voters have a dominant strategy
to vote for sincerely regardless of a’s behavior.
     Formally, a mixed strategy for a-voters this involves σb (W pA (1, 0) − Y (1 − pA (1, 0) −
pB (1, 0)))+(1−σb )(W pA (1, 1)−Y (1−pA (1, 1))) = σb (−Y (1−pA (1, 1)))+(1−σB )(W pB (1, 0)−
Y (1 − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0))), where σi is the probability that group i votes sincerely.
     Note that this simpliﬁes to σB (W (pA (1, 1)−pA (1, 0)−pB (1, 0))+2Y (pA (1, 1)−pA (1, 0)−
pB (1, 0))) = W (pA (1, 1) − pB (1, 0)) + Y (pA (1, 1) − pA (1, 0) − pB (1, 0).
                                                                W (pA (1,1)−pB (1,0))+Y (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))
     Therefore, a mixed strategy equilibrium involves σb =              (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))(W +2Y )


                                                 39
                        (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))Y −pA (1,0)W
and 1 − σb =              (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))(W +2Y ) .

    Similarly,          σa = W (pA (1,1)−p   A (1,0))+Y (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))
                                       (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))(W +2Y )          ,   1−σa =   (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))Y −pB (1,0)W
                                                                                                    (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))(W +2Y )

    Hence, we have the following proposition:

                                                          WpA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
Proposition 16                 Under plurality, if        Y   ≤      pB (1,0)         , there exists a mixed-
strategy equilibrium            with a voters voting sincerely with probability W (pA (1,1)−p     A (1,0))+Y (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))
                                                                                            (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))(W +2Y )

and b voters voting             sincerely with probability W (pA (1,1)−p B (1,0))+Y (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))
                                                                   (pA (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0))(W +2Y )          .

    Therefore, a mixed strategy equilibrium must involve the larger group (in this case,
b) voting strategically at a higher rate than the smaller group. This result is a less stark
form of what is found in a standard pivotal voting model (see, e.g., Myerson and Weber
1993). In the pivotal voting model, the larger majority group is the only one mixing,
while the smaller group votes sincerely. In the group-based voting model, by comparison,
the larger group must vote sincerely at a lesser rate than the smaller group, but still
will vote sincerely more than half of the time. The requirement that the larger group
vote strategically at a greater rate comes directly from the fact that the smaller group
needs more support to be willing to consider voting sincerely, and hence exists in both
models; however, this type of coordination breakdown in the ethical voting model can only
occur when both groups are still more likely to vote sincerely. Note that this means it is
possible for the Condorcet loser to be more likely to win than in the world with a unique
equilibrium if this mixed strategy equilibrium occurs.


Appendix A4: Majority Runoﬀ

Note that in general terms, the decision of whether to vote sincerely is the same under
both plurality and runoﬀ. Therefore,

                                                                                                                     W
Proposition 17 Under runoﬀ, the sincere voting equilibrium exists if and only if                                     Y   ≥
pR        R        R
 A (1,1)−pA (1,0)−pB (1,0)
          R
         pA (1,0)
                                 . Otherwise, the Duverger’s law equilibrium (0,0) exists.

                    ∗      ∗
Proof. Direct from σA and σB , and the fact that pR           R
                                                  A (1, 0) < pB (1, 0).

    The condition in Proposition 17 can be re-written in terms of probabilities in the two
rounds:
        (P rob[    k q >αq +(1−α)q ]+P rob[ k q ∈(min{αq ,(1−α)q },αq +(1−α)q ]P rob[ k q >αq +(1−α)q ])−P rob[ k q >αq +(1−α)q ]
W                 1−k c     a        b       1−k c            a      b    a         b      1−k c     a          b       1−k c     a b
    ≥                                                                                                                                 ,
Y                       P rob[αqa > k qc +(1−α)qb ]+P rob[αqa ∈(min{ k qc ,(1−α)qb }, k qc +(1−α)qb )]P rob[αqa > k qc +(1−α)qb ]
                                   1−k                              1−k               1−k                         1−k




                                                               40
    and thus
                                  k q ∈ (min{αq , (1 − α)q }, αq + (1 − α)q ]
                          P rob[ 1−k                                                    k q > αq + (1 − α)q ]
                                                                                P rob[ 1−k
               W                     c         a          b     a          b               c    a          b
                   ≥                          k q , (1 − α)q }, k q + (1 − α)q )] P rob[αq >  k q + (1 − α)q ]
               Y       1 + P rob[αqa ∈ (min{ 1−k c          b  1−k c          b           a  1−k c          b



    There are two comments about this simpliﬁcation. First, these probabilities can be
written in terms of the fundamentals α and k in the same way as under plurality. For
expositional clarity, we will not do so here. Second, this formulation leads to the following
lemma:

Lemma 6 If pR                           R
            A (1, 0) > pA (1, 0), then pB (1, 0) > pB (1, 0).


Proof.
                                                       k                   k
    First, note that pR
                      A (1, 0) = (1+P rob[αqa ∈ (min{ 1−k qc , (1−α)qb }, 1−k qc +(1−α)qb )])P rob[αqa >
 k
1−k qc   + (1 − α)qb ].
                                                     k                                       k                   k
    Meanwhile, pA (1, 0) = P rob[αqa >              1−k qc +(1−α)qb ]+P rob[αqa      ∈ max{ 1−k qc , (1−α)qb }, 1−k qc +
(1 − α)qb ].
                                                                                k                   k
    Therefore, the relevant inequality can be re-written as: P rob[αqa ∈ (min{ 1−k qc , (1−α)qb }, 1−k qc +
                                 k                                         k                     k
(1 − α)qb )]P rob[αqa >         1−k qc   + (1 − α)qb ] > P rob[αqa ∈ max{ 1−k qc , (1 − α)qb }, 1−k qc + (1 − α)qb ].
                                                               k               k
    Now consider the following for B: P rob[(1 − α)qb ∈ (min{ 1−k qc , αqa }, 1−k qc + αqa )]P rob[(1 −
           k                                         k               k
α)qb >    1−k qc   + αqa ] > P rob[(1 − α)qb ∈ max{ 1−k qc , αqa }, 1−k qc + αqa ].
    As 1 − α > α, the left-hand side of this equation is larger than B, while the right-hand side is
smaller.
    Therefore, if the condition holds for A, it also holds for B.



    A corollary of this lemma is that, if pR                           R
                                           A (1, 0) > pA (1, 0), then pC (1, 0) < pC (1, 0).




References

 [1] Ali, N. and C. Lin (2013), Why People Vote: Ethical Motives and Social Incentives,
     5(2): 73-98.

 [2] Alvarez, M. and J. Nagler (2000). A New Approach for Modelling Strategic Voting
     in Multiparty Elections, British Journal of Political Science, 30(1): 57-75.

 [3] Battaglini, M., R. Morton and T. Palfrey (2008), Information Aggregation and Strate-
     gic Abstention in Large Laboratory Elections, American Economic Review, Papers
     & Proceedings, 98(2): 194-200.

                                                              41
 [4] Battaglini, M., Morton, R. and T. Palfrey (2010), The Swing Voter’s Curse in the
    Laboratory, Review of Economic Studies, 77: 61-89.

 [5] Bhattacharya, S., J. Duﬀy and S. T. Kim (2014). Compulsory versus Voluntary Vot-
    ing: An Experimental Study, Games and Economic Behavior, 84, 111--131.

 [6] Blais, A., R. Nadeau, E. Gidengil, and N. Nevitte (2001). Measuring Strategic Voting
    in Multiparty Plurality Elections, Electoral Studies, 20(3): 343-352.

 [7] Bordignon, M., T. Nannicini, and G. Tabellini (2016). Moderating Political Extrem-
    ism: Single Round vs. Runoﬀ Elections under Plurality Rule, American Economic
    Review, 106: 2348-2370.

 [8] Bormann, N.-C., and M. Golder (2013). Democratic Electoral Systems around the
    world, 1946--2011, Electoral Studies, 32(2), 360--369.

 [9] Bouton, L. (2013), A Theory of Strategic Voting in Runoﬀ Elections, American Eco-
    nomic Review, 103(4): 1248-1288.

[10] Bouton, L., and M. Castanheira (2012), One Person, Many Votes: Divided Majority
    and Information Aggregation, Econometrica, 80(1): 43--87.

[11] Bouton, L., M. Castanheira, and A. Llorente-Saguer (2016), Divided Majority and
    Information Aggregation: Theory and Experiment, Journal of Public Economics, 134:
    114-128.

[12] Bouton, L., M. Castanheira, and A. Llorente-Saguer (2017), Multicandidate Elections:
    Aggregate Uncertainty in the Laboratory, Games and Economic Behavior, 101: 132-
    150.

[13] Bouton, L., and G. Gratton (2015), Majority Runoﬀ Elections: Strategic Voting and
    Duverger’s Hypothesis. Theoretical Economics, 10(2), 283-314.

[14] Bouton, L., A. Llorente-Saguer, and F. Malherbe (2017), Unanimous Rules in the
    Laboratory, Games and Economic Behavior, 102: 179-198.

[15] Bouton, L. and B. Ogden (2018). Strategic Candidates with Group-based Voting,
    Mimeo.

                                           42
[16] Callander, S. (2005). Duverger’s Hypothesis, the Run-Oﬀ Rule, and Electoral Com-
    petition, Political Analysis, 13, pp. 209-232.

[17] Clark, W. and M. Golder (2006). Rehabilitating Duverger’s Theory: Testing the
    Mechanical and Strategic Modifying Eﬀects of Electoral Laws, Comparative Political
    Studies, 39: 679-708.

[18] Coate, S. and M. Conlin (2004). A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to Voter
    Turnout: Theory and Evidence, American Economic Review, 94(5): 1476-1504.

[19] Coate, S., M. Conlin, and A. Moro (2008). The Performance of Pivotal-Voter Models
    in Small-Scale Elections: Evidence from Texas Liquor Referenda, Journal of Public
    Economics, 92(3-4): 582-596.

[20] Cox, G. (1997), Making Votes Count, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

[21] Dewan, T. and D. Myatt (2007), Leading the Party: Coordination, Direction, and
    Communication, American Political Science Review, 101(4): 825-843.

[22] Duverger, M. (1954). Political Parties. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

[23] Feddersen, T. (2004), Rational Choice Theory and the Paradox of Not Voting, Journal
    of Economic Perspectives, 18: 99-112.

[24] Feddersen, T., S. Gailmard, and A. Sandroni (2009). Moral Bias in Large Elections:
    Theory and Experimental Evidence, American Political Science Review, 103(2): 175-
    192.

[25] Feddersen, T. and A. Sandroni (2006a), A Theory of Participation in Elections, Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 96(4): 1271-1282.

[26] Feddersen, T. and A. Sandroni (2006b), The Calculus of Ethical Voting, International
    Journal of Game Theory, 35: 1-25.

[27] Fey, M. (1997), Stability and Coordination in Duverger’s Law: A Formal Model of
    Pre-election Polls and Strategic Voting, American Political Science Review, 91(1):
    135-147.



                                            43
[28] Fiorina, M. (1989), Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. Yale Uni-
    versity Press, New Haven.

[29] Fisher, S. and D. Myatt (2001), Strategic Voting Experiments, mimeo, University of
    Oxford.

[30] Fisher, S. and D. Myatt (2014), Strategic Voting in Plurality Rule Elections, mimeo,
    London Business School.

[31] Forsythe, R., R. Myerson, T. Rietz and R. Weber (1993), An Experiment on Coordi-
    nation in Multi-Candidate Elections: The Importance of Polls and Election Histories,
    Social Choice and Welfare, 10: 223-247.

[32] Forsythe, R., R. Myerson, T. Rietz and R. Weber (1996), An Experimental Study
    of Voting Rules and Polls in Three-Way Elections, International Journal of Game
    Theory, 25: 355-383.

[33] Fujiwara, T. (2011), A Regression Discontinuity Test of Strategic Voting and Du-
    verger’s Law, Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 6: 197-233.

[34] Goeree, J. and L. Yariv (2011). An Experimental Study of Collective Deliberation,
    Econometrica, 79(3): 893-921.

[35] Green, D. and I. Shapiro (1994), Pathologies of Rational Choice Theory: A Critique
    of Applications in Political Science, Yale University Press, New Haven.

[36] Grofman, B. (1993), Is Turnout the Paradox that Ate Rational Choice Theory?,
    in Information, Participation, and Choice: An Economic Theory of Democracy in
    Perspective, ed. by B. Grofman, chap. 6, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

[37] Grofman, B., A. Blais, and S. Bowler (2009). Duverger’s Law of Plurality Voting: The
    Logic of Party Competition in Canada, India, the United Kingdom and the United
    States.

[38] Guarnaschelli, S., R. McKelvey and T. Palfrey (2000), An Experimental Study of
    Jury Decision Rules, American Political Science Review, 94(2): 407-423.




                                           44
[39] Harsanyi, J. (1977), Morality and the Theory of Rational Behavior, Social Research,
    44(4): 623-656.

[40] Harsanyi, J. (1992), Game and Decision Theoretic Models in Ethics, in The Handbook
    of Game Theory, Volume 1, eds. R. Aumann and S. Hart, chap. 19, Amsterdam:
    Elsevier North-Holland.

[41] Herrera, H. and C. Martinelli (2006), Group Formation and Voter Participation,
    Theoretical Economics, 1: 461-487.

[42] Jones, M. (2001). Electoral Laws and the Eﬀective Number of Candidates in Presi-
    dential Elections, Journal of Politics, 61(1), 171-184.

[43] Kawai, K. and Y. Watanabe (2013). Inferring Strategic Voting, American Economic
    Review, 103(2): 624-662.

[44] Ledyard, J. (1981), The Paradox of Voting and Candidate Competition: A Gen-
    eral Equilibrium Analysis, in Essays in Contemporary Fields o Economics, eds. G.
    Hoorwich ad J. Quick, Lafayette: Purdue University Press.

[45] Levine, D. and A. Mattozzi (2016). Voter Turnout with Peer Punishment, mimeo,
    European University Institute.

[46] Li, C. and R. Pique (2016). Ethical Motives for Strategic Voting, mimeo, Princeton
    University.

[47] Morton, R. (1987), A Group Majority Model of Voting, Social Choice and Welfare,
    4(2): 117–31.

[48] Morton, R. (1991), Groups in Rational Turnout Models, American Journal of Political
    Science, 35: 758–76.

[49] Morton, R. and T. Rietz (2006). Majority Requirements and Voter Coordination.
    New York University Annual Survey of American Law, 63(4): 691-726.

[50] Morton, R. and J.-R. Tyran (2012), Ethical vs Selﬁsh Motivations and Turnout in
    Small and Large Elections, mimeo, New York University.



                                            45
[51] Myatt, D. (2007), On the Theory of Strategic Voting, Review of Economic Studies,
    74: 255-281.

[52] Myerson, R. (1998), Population Uncertainty and Poisson Games, International Jour-
    nal of Game Theory, 27(3): 375-392.

[53] Myerson, R. (2002), Comparison of Scoring Rules in Poisson Voting Games, Journal
    of Economic Theory, 103: 219-251.

[54] Myerson, R. and R. Weber (1993), A Theory of Voting Equilibria, American Political
    Science Review, 77: 102--114.

[55] Osborne, M. and A. Slivinski (1996). A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
    Candidates. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 65-96.

[56] Palfrey, T. and H. Rosenthal (1983), A Strategic Calculus of Voting, Public Choice,
    41(1): 7–53.

[57] Palfrey, T. and H. Rosenthal (1985), Voter Participation and Strategic Uncertainty,
    American Political Science Review, 79(1): 62–78.

[58] Palfrey, T. (1989), A Mathematical Proof of Duverger’s Law, In Models of Strategic
    Choice in Politics, ed. P. C. Ordeshook, Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan
    Press.

[59] Palfrey, T. and D. Levine (2007). The Paradox of Voter Participation? A Laboratory
    Study, American Political Science Review, 101(1): 143-158.

[60] Piketty, T. (2000), Voting as Communicating, Review of Economic Studies, 67: 169-
    191.

[61] Pons, V. and C. Tricaud (2017). Expressive Voting and Its Cost: Evidence from
    Runoﬀs with Two or Three Candidates, Econometrica, forthcoming.

[62] Riker, W. and P. Ordeshook (1968), A Theory of the Calculus of Voting, American
    Political Science Review, 62: 25–42.

[63] Shachar, R. and B. Nalebuﬀ (1999). Follow the Leader: Theory and Evidence on
    Political Participation, American Economic Review, 89(3): 525-547.

                                           46
[64] Spenkuch, J. (2017). Expressive vs. Pivotal Voters: An Empirical Assessment, mimeo,
    Northwestern University.

[65] Uhlaner, C. (1989), Rational Turnout: The Neglected Role of Groups, American
    Journal of Political Science, 33(2): 390–422.




                                           47
