NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NO KIN IN THE GAME:
MORAL HAZARD AND WAR IN THE U.S. CONGRESS
Eoin McGuirk
Nathaniel Hilger
Nicholas Miller
Working Paper 23904
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23904

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

We thank Motaz Al-Chanati, Jenna Anders, Victor Brechenmacher, Kian Ivey, Vanessa Labrador,
Andrew Li, and 36 students from the Fall 2016 Econ 115 class at Yale for their excellent research
assistance. We are also grateful to Jesse Shapiro, Mushfiq Mobarak, Fabrizio Zilibotti, Cormac O'Dea,
Daniel Posner, Nico Voigtlaender, Kelsey Jack, Ray Fisman, Michael Kremer, Nicholas Ryan, Daniel
Keniston, Ebonya Washington, Greg Huber, Ceren Baysan, James Thomas, Nathan Nunn and Claudia
Goldin; conference participants at BIARI (Brown University), NEUDC (Tufts University), and HiCN
(PSE); and seminar participants at Yale University (Leitner Political Economy and Development Economics),
Williams College, Tufts University, University College Dublin, Trinity College Dublin, Nova University
Lisbon, Queens University Belfast, University of Southern California, Loyola Marymount University
and Harvard University for helpful comments and conversations. All errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Eoin McGuirk, Nathaniel Hilger, and Nicholas Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

No Kin In The Game: Moral Hazard and War in the U.S. Congress
Eoin McGuirk, Nathaniel Hilger, and Nicholas Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 23904
October 2017, Revised April 2020
JEL No. N42
ABSTRACT
Why do wars occur? We exploit a natural experiment to test the longstanding hypothesis that leaders
declare war because they fail to internalize the associated costs. We test this moral hazard theory of
conflict by compiling data on 9,210 children of 3,693 U.S. legislators who served in Congress during
the four conscription-era wars of the 20th century: World War I, World War II, the Korean War, and
the Vietnam War. We test for agency problems by comparing the voting behavior of legislators with
draft-age sons versus draft-age daughters. We estimate that (i) having a draft-age son reduces legislator
support for pro-conscription bills by 10-17%; (ii) support for conscription increases by a quarter as
a legislator's son crosses the upper age threshold; and (iii) legislators with draft-age sons are more
likely to win reelection when the draft is less popular. These results are consistent with a political agency
model in which voters update their beliefs about politicians' motives when they make unpopular legislative
decisions. Our findings provide new evidence that agency problems contribute to political violence,
and that elected officials can be influenced by changing private incentives.

Eoin McGuirk
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
eoin.mcguirk@tufts.edu
Nathaniel Hilger
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative
nathaniel_hilger@brown.edu

Nicholas Miller
Dartmouth College
225 Silsby Hall
HB 6108
Hanover, NH 03755
nicholas.l.miller@dartmouth.edu

1

Introduction

Violent conflict undermines state capacity, economic growth, public health and human capital formation (Besley and Persson, 2010; Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003; Collier et al.,
2003; Ghobarah et al., 2003). The severity of these costs raises a fundamental question:
why do destructive wars occur at all? Credible theories must allow for the failure of bargained settlements to ensure peace (Fearon, 1995). One such explanation reflects a classic
political agency problem: if the leaders who order war stand to gain from the benefits
without internalizing the costs, then war will be oversupplied (Jackson and Morelli, 2007).
We test this theory using data on roll call votes in the United States Congress during
the four conscription-era wars of the 20th Century: World War I, World War II, the
Korean War, and the Vietnam War. By observing an exogenous change in the exposure
of some legislators to the costs of conflict but not of others, we can detect moral hazard
in the decision to wage war. If leaders fully internalize the social cost of conflict in their
polity, then both groups should vote identically after the change; if not, then those with
higher private costs will reflect this in their voting.
We exploit a natural experiment that is permitted by the nature of conscription-era
warfare in the United States. Legislators who had sons within the age boundaries of
the draft were more likely to be exposed to the direct costs of conflict than legislators
who had only daughters of the same age. Our main identifying assumption is that these
two groups would otherwise vote identically—in other words, the gender of a given draftage child is as good as random. Our identification strategy is also bolstered by the fact
that the proposed draft age boundaries often shift from vote to vote. This allows us to
include legislator fixed effects in our main specification, meaning that all time-invariant
characteristics of legislators are flexibly controlled for.
We find that legislators with sons of draft age are between 10% and 17% less likely to
vote in favor of conscription than comparable legislators with only daughters of draft age.
To place this magnitude into perspective, it is equivalent to around 50-65% of the “party
line” effect of having a sitting president from the opposing party. We also find suggestive
evidence that, during the Cold War era when conscription was relatively unpopular, (i)

1

legislators are less likely to vote in favor of conscription during election years; and (ii)
legislators with draft age sons are more likely to win reelection to the following Congress.
These findings are consistent with a model of political agency in which voters reward
politicians who vote against conscription and punish politicians who do not internalize its
social costs.
Our results imply that legislators can be influenced by private motives that are external
to political or ideological concerns. One challenge to this interpretation is the possibility
that legislators with draft-eligible sons develop empathy for others in the same predicament, and that the change in behavior that we observe is due to concerns for the electorate
rather than selfish motives. To explore this, we examine the behavior of politicians with
sons around the upper age eligibility cutoff. We interpret this cutoff as a discontinuous
determinant of draft exposure, as politicians are “treated” when their son is beneath the
cutoff, and not treated when they are above it.1 Using a regression discontinuity design
with legislator fixed effects, we find that a given politician raises her support for conscription by 26% when her son crosses the upper age cutoff. We argue that this is unlikely
to be caused by a sudden change in empathy. Instead, we interpret it as evidence that
policy choices are manipulable by private motives orthogonal to both career concerns and
individual ideology.
To arrive at these results, we undertake two main data collection exercises. In the first,
we gather information on the number and gender of children of 3,693 U.S. senators and
representatives from a combination of census records and and a variety of biographical
sources. In the second, we identify 248 roll-call votes relating to conscription from 1917
to 1974, and code the direction of pro- or anti-conscription policy preferences based on
contemporaneous newspaper reports, where applicable. This process produces a main estimation sample of more than 26,000 observations at the level of a legislator-vote, combining
information on 140 unambiguous roll-call votes, 2,287 legislators, and 5,421 children.
In order to validate our vote-coding procedure, we eschew the task of assigning pro- or
anti-conscription codes to roll call votes ourselves and develop instead a method that relies
1

This is not true of the lower cutoff, as a politician with a son who is, say, two years younger than the
lower boundary is plausibly exposed to the treatment.

2

on the behavior of well-known foreign policy “hawks” (pro-war legislators) and “doves”
(anti-war legislators) during each era. If a legislator votes in line with the hawks and
against the doves on a given measure, it is determined as a hawkish vote. Applying this
approach, we find that legislators with draft-eligible sons are again around 10% less likely
to vote with hawks on draft-related measures, but are not less likely to vote with hawks
on measures unrelated to the draft.
To rationalize these main findings, we turn to a model of political agency that combines
elements of moral hazard and adverse selection (Besley, 2006). ‘Good’ politicians pursue
measures that are in the voters’ interest, and voters respond by reelecting them. ‘Bad’
politicians decide either to mimic good types in order to win reelection, or to vote against
citizens’ interests and lose reelection. This decision is determined in part by the value
of private rents that accrue to the politician if she votes against the electorate’s wishes.
Typically, researchers do not observe exogenous variation in private rents that politicians
can capture through legislative voting. This presents a barrier to empirically testing this
type of model. However, in our setting we do observe an exogenous ‘wedge’ between the
private benefits of conscription for legislators with draft-eligible sons versus those with
daughters of comparable age. This gives us testable implications of the theory that we
bring to the data. We find suggestive evidence that those with draft-eligible sons are
more likely to win reelection when the draft is unpopular. We also provide evidence that
pressure to toe the national party line is likely to be one motive that impels politicians to
vote in favor of conscription despite its lack of broad support among voters.
The paper contributes principally to two distinct bodies of research. The first is an
emergent empirical literature that connects credible identification strategies to theoretical
work on the origins of violent conflict. These foundations are based on contest models in
which two sides fight to control total resources. Each side allocates their own resources
between production and appropriation, and the probability of victory is determined by the
relative effectiveness of fighting technology (Haavelmo, 1954; Hirshleifer, 1988; Garfinkel,
1990; Skaperdas, 1992). One limitation of contest models is that they fail to account for
bargained settlements. Wars are risky and destructive, and so it is necessary to understand

3

why they are avoided in some cases but not in others.2
Two sets of explanations in particular endure for why lengthy wars can occur between
rational actors. The first broadly relates to incomplete contracting whereby the inability
of each group to credibly commit to a negotiated settlement inhibits peace (Garfinkel
and Skaperdas, 2000; Powell, 2006, 2012). For example, Chassang and Padro i Miquel
(2009) develop a model in which transient economic shocks reduce the opportunity cost
of fighting without altering the present discounted value of victory. In a perfect information environment with an offensive advantage and no third party contract enforcement,
groups may not be able to commit credibly to peace, and war can ensue in equilibrium.
Empirical papers that exploit plausibly exogenous variation to identify the link from economic conditions to conflict include Miguel et al. (2004), Dube and Vargas (2013), Bazzi
and Blattman (2014), Berman and Couttenier (2015), Berman et al. (2017), Harari and
Ferrara (2018) and McGuirk and Burke (2020). The second explanation has received less
attention in the empirical literature: that wars can occur because the leaders who order
violence do not fully internalize the costs (Jackson and Morelli, 2007). This moral hazard
theory of conflict relaxes the assumption that groups are unitary actors.3 To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to corroborate it empirically using plausibly exogenous
variation.4
The second literature broadly relates to the political economy of legislative decisionmaking. The prevailing view is that a legislator’s vote is motivated by reelection concerns,
promotion to higher office, and the politician’s own ideological beliefs (de Figueiredo and
Richter, 2014; Ansolabehere et al., 2003; Levitt, 1996; Washington, 2008). However, this
model of policy formation leaves no room for the possibility that legislators are additionally influenced by other private payoffs. While this may be difficult to reconcile with the
growing share of campaign contributions emanating from the extreme top of the wealth
2
For example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2005) describe how elites expand the franchise to the poor in
order to preclude violent revolt.
3
‘Moral hazard’ in the political economy literature broadly describes legislators (agents) pursuing private
ends in office at the expense of voters (as principals) who do not observe their motives.
4
Other papers that relax the assumption of unitary actors by modeling the behavior of political leaders
in conflict include De Mesquita and Siverson (1995), Tarar (2006), and Smith (1996). Information asymmetries are also posited as a rational explanation for conflict, although this is limited in particular as a
driver of lengthy wars given that the true strength of each armed actor ought to reveal itself quickly in
battle (Fearon, 1995; Blattman and Miguel, 2010).

4

distribution in the United States (Bonica et al., 2013), there exists nonetheless an argument that politicians are largely immune from such influences (Ansolabehere et al., 2003;
Levitt, 1994; Tullock, 1972). An alternative explanation for this absence of evidence is
the empirical challenge inherent in its detection. An ideal identification strategy would
require estimating the effect on legislative voting of a change in private motives that is
independent of both political and ideological concerns. By exploiting plausibly exogenous
variation in the gender of draft-age children, our study overcomes this problem and finds
evidence that legislators respond to private incentives.
We proceed with a brief discussion on the political economy of legislative voting in
Section 2. In Section 3 we introduce our data. In Sections 4 and 5 we present our
estimation strategy and main results. In Section 6 we examine the empathy versus selfinterest interpretation of the main results, and in Section 7 we endogenize the behavior of
voters in response to legislators’ decisions in a political agency model and empirically test
its implications. In Section 8 we conclude.

2

Political Economy of Legislative Voting in a Democracy

There is a broad consensus in the empirical literature that a politician’s legislative vote is
determined by reelection concerns, promotion to higher office, and their own ideological
beliefs (de Figueiredo and Richter, 2014; Ansolabehere et al., 2003; Levitt, 1996). This
implies that the politician takes into account four sets of preferences in determining her
optimal legislative vote (Higgs, 1989; Levitt, 1996). Reelection concerns are represented
both by the preferences of voters in her electorate, and by the preferences of her supporters
within that group; promotional concerns are represented by the national party line; and
ideological beliefs are exogenously determined fixed preferences.
Assuming that preferences are single peaked, the politician’s objective is to select a
vote that minimizes the weighted average of the squared distances from the four ‘ideal

5

points’ that correspond to each preference as follows:
max Uit = − [α1 (Vit − Mit )2 + α2 (Vit − Cit )2 + α3 (Vit − Pit )2

Vit ={0,1}

(1)
2

+ α4 (Vit − Fi ) ],
where Vit ∈ {0, 1} is the legislator i’s vote at time t; Mit ∈ [0, 1] is the ideal point in a given
issue space of the voters in the legislator’s electorate; Cit ∈ [0, 1] is the equivalent ideal
point among the legislator’s supporters; Pit ∈ [0, 1] is the ideal point of the legislator’s
national party; and Fi ∈ [0, 1] is the legislator’s ideological bliss point, which is assumed
to be fixed over time. The α parameters represent weights, and all weights sum to 1.
There exists at least some empirical evidence in support of each element in (1). The
first, general voter preferences, is derived from the canonical model of Downsian competition in which politicians converge on the preferences of the median voter. Empirical
support for this model can be shown by detecting an impact of exogenous changes to the
composition of an electorate on subsequent policy outcomes.5 However, there also exists
evidence that is not compatible with the purest interpretation of the model. For example,
US senators from the same constituency vote differently, and an exogenous change in local
representation (but not in the electorate) led to important policy changes in India.6
The second element, supporter group preferences, is derived from the “duel constituency” hypothesis (Fiorina, 1974), which states that legislators apply additional weight
to the preferences of their own supporters within their electorate. This might be due to
the existence of primary elections, or because supporters are inclined to volunteer or contribute in other ways to a candidate’s campaign.7
5

For example, Cascio and Washington (2014) show that a plausibly exogenous expansion of black voting
rights across southern U.S. states led to greater increases in voter turnout and state transfers in counties
with higher black population. Similarly, Miller (2008) shows that the introduction of suffrage rights for
American women immediately shifted legislative behavior toward women’s policy preferences.
6
Poole and Rosenthal (1984) show that Democratic and Republican U.S. senators representing the same
state, and therefore the same electorate, exhibit significantly different legislative voting patterns. In India,
Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) exploit a randomized policy experiment in which certain village council
head positions were reserved for women. Despite the electorate remaining unchanged, the reservation policy
significantly altered the provision of public goods in a manner consistent with gender-specific preferences.
Both of these results violate the median voter theorem, implying that while it has some predictive power,
there must exist additional determinants of policy.
7
Levitt (1996) finds that U.S. senators assign three times more weight to the preferences of their own
supporters relative to other voters in their electorate. Brunner et al. (2013) and Mian et al. (2010) also
find evidence that is consistent with this effect.

6

The third element, national party preferences, reflects the fact that politicians have an
incentive to vote in line with the national party, who in return can provide promotions to
various committee positions.8
The final element, a legislator’s fixed ideology, is estimated by Levitt (1996) to carry
a weight of around 0.60, more than α1 , α2 , and α3 combined. Causal evidence for the
existence of this idiosyncratic ideological influence is provided by Washington (2008),
who finds that U.S. legislators with more daughters have a higher propensity to vote in
favor of liberal measures, particularly ones connected to expanding reproductive rights.
Her findings are consistent with sociological theories that parenting daughters increases
feminist sympathies.9

Incorporating private influences
A notable feature of this model is the absence of a private motive that is distinct from a
legislator’s fixed ideology and political career concerns. To wit, the model either assumes
that there are no other private costs and benefits associated with legislative voting, or
that, if there are, legislators are immune to their influence. This appears to be at odds
with the apparently large sums of private money that are spent on lobbying and campaign
contributions. However, Ansolabehere et al. (2003), echoing Tullock (1972), argue that if
campaign contributions were indeed worthwhile investments, they ought to be of substantially higher value in each election cycle given the trillions of dollars of government outlays
potentially at stake. They note that campaign spending limits are not binding; that the
majority value of contributions come from individual donors rather than special interest
Political Action Committees (PACs); and that these individuals give the marginal dollar.
They also run fixed effects regressions that uncover no relationship between pro-corporate
legislative voting and corporate donations. They conclude that campaign contributions
8

Evidence from, inter-alia, Bonica (2013), Snyder and Groseclose (2000), and McCarty et al. (2001)
supports this view in the context of U.S. congressional voting.
9
One line of argument is that voters’ preferences are represented in government not through α1 or α2 ,
but rather through this channel. This is the “citizen candidate” notion of representation, which states that
candidates are unable to make binding commitments to voters, and so voters support candidates whose
(known) fixed ideology is most closely aligned to their own (Besley and Coate, 1997; Osborne and Slivinski,
1996). In contrast to median voter theorem, voters elect rather than affect policies.

7

are largely made for their consumption value, rather than returns on investment.10
In this paper, we address an alternative potential explanation for the absence of evidence on the role of private influences in legislative voting: the significant empirical challenge inherent in detecting such an effect (as noted by de Figueiredo and Richter, 2014). A
causal identification strategy would involve estimating the effect of an exogenous change
in the private net benefits of voting on the legislative choices of a politician, conditioning
on politician fixed effects to hold ideology constant. While there exists persuasive evidence
that, for example, campaign contributions can “buy” time with a legislator (Kalla and
Broockman, 2016), that the market value of firms can be affected by exogenous changes
in the political power of connected politicians (Jayachandran, 2006; Fisman, 2001), and
that exogenous differences in ideology between politicians can affect voting (Washington,
2008), to our knowledge there is no evidence that individual legislators respond to changes
to their private net benefits of voting on a given issue. Yet, such a view would be consistent with more recent evidence that the richest individuals in the U.S. are contributing a
higher share of contributions to politicians than before (Bonica et al., 2013), and that the
pattern of contributions by firm CEOs and economic PACs suggest that they are investing
rather than consuming (Gordon et al., 2007).
To incorporate this viewpoint, we propose a modification of equation (1) above in
which self-interested legislators are additionally concerned with their own private returns
to voting, as follows:
max Uit = − [α1 (Vit − Mit )2 + α2 (Vit − Cit )2 + α3 (Vit − Pit )2

Vit ={0,1}

(2)
2

2

+ α4 (Vit − Fi ) + θ(Vit − Rit ) ],
where Rit ∈ [0, 1] is the ideal point that optimizes legislator i0 s time-varying private
10
While the model above is consistent with this view, it can also accommodate a form of effective
campaign spending whereby contributions can help to elect a certain politician with sympathetic ideological
preferences, as distinct from affecting a politician’s policy preferences in a quid pro quo arrangement.
However, even this possibility has been challenged empirically, most notably by Levitt (1994). Similarly,
the fact that three times more is spent on lobbying in the U.S. than campaign contributions does not imply
that legislators are susceptible to private concerns beyond those laid out above. Lobbying is the transfer
of information in private meetings from organized groups to politicians or their staffs (de Figueiredo and
Richter, 2014). If these activities were shown to have an impact on policy, the possibility would still remain
that their impact operates through any of the elements in the model rather than through a private quid
pro quo channel.

8

net benefit, θ is the weight that the politician assigns to this motive, and

P4

j=1 αj + θ

= 1.

The solution to the legislator’s problem becomes:

Vit∗ = α1 Sit + α2 Cit + α3 Pit + α4 Fi + θRit .
|
{z
} |
{z
}
political motives

(3)

private motives

We define political motives as those derived from the preferences of voters and political
parties, and private motives as those derived from ideological preferences and other timevarying costs and benefits.

Implications for Conflict
Much of the theoretical literature on violent conflict treats actors as unitary decisionmakers.11 Implicit in this approach is the assumption that the costs and benefits of
conflict are shared among members of each group. The politician’s solution in (3) relaxes
this assumption. If, on a given vote, a shock to Rit is sufficiently large, then it is possible
a leader may vote to enter conflicts in which the expected social costs exceed the benefits,
or to avoid conflicts in which the expected social benefits exceed the costs. The critical
condition in either case is that the private payoff through θ offsets the influences that
operate through the other channels, or Vit∗ (. | θ > 0) = (1 − Vit∗ (. | θ = 0)).12 This is
raised by Fearon (1995) as one explanation for violent conflict between rational groups
that cannot be solved necessarily through a negotiated settlement. Jackson and Morelli
(2007) develop the concept formally, showing that “political bias”—or the extent to which
the pivotal policy maker benefits from conflict relative to the rest of the population—can
cause war even in the presence of enforceable transfers between potential belligerents.
Other papers that relax the assumption of unitary actors do so by modeling the politics
of conflict from the perspective of leaders (De Mesquita and Siverson, 1995; Smith, 1996;
Goemans, 2000; Tarar, 2006), or by addressing a different type of agency issue, whereby
11

See Blattman and Miguel (2010) and Garfinkel and Skaperdas (2007) for in-depth reviews of this
literature.
12
The same could be said about changes to Cit , Pit and Fi , assuming that Mit approximates the social
optimum. An interesting difference is that those motives are plausibly known to the electorate, whereas
Rit is plausibly not. We examine this condition in more detail when we endogenize voter behavior in
Section 7.

9

politicians must provide sufficient incentives to solve the collective action problem of raising an army (Grossman, 1999; Beber and Blattman, 2013; Gates, 2002). In our setting,
this is achieved by the threat of penalties for draft evasion.
The specific role of moral hazard in conflict has been applied to the case of rebel
activity in the presence of external humanitarian interventions—for example, Kuperman
(2008) and Crawford (2005) argue that the insurance provided by external groups protects
rebel groups from the risks of rebellion, which ultimately leads to more violence—and to
the case of states acting more aggressively when they have powerful allies (Christensen
and Snyder, 1990; Benson et al., 2014; Narang and Mehta, 2019). In the present paper,
we make the related argument that politicians who are protected from the risks of conflict
are more likely to support it.

Testing Implications
The central challenge for the researcher in determining whether or not private payoffs
influence policy decisions (i.e., θ > 0) is to identify exogenous variation in Rit . Otherwise,
any estimate of θ could be biased due to positive covariance between Rit and any of the
other elements in the model. For example, a senator who receives contributions from
a weapons producer and favors voting for war in Congress may appear to be malleable
through this channel. However, the possibility exists that (i) a large share of her electorate
is employed by the firm, in which case Mit or Cit is measured incorrectly as Rit ; or (ii)
that she is ideologically predisposed to war and the firm optimally contributed to her
campaign, in which case Fi is measured incorrectly as Rit .
We overcome this problem by exploiting variation in the age and gender of politicians’
children to determine whether or not having a draft-eligible son affects legislative voting
on conscription, holding Fi constant. Legislators with draft-eligible sons stand to lose
more from the passage of conscription than do legislators with daughters of comparable
age, all else equal. This implies that, on a vote to determine whether or not to impel
citizens to go to war, legislators exhibited measurable, exogenous variation in Rit .

10

3

Data and Background

Structure

Data in our main analysis is at the level of a legislator-vote. Each observation

contains information on how the legislator voted and on a range of legislator characteristics,
including the number and gender of their children at the time of voting. In our full
dataset, which includes votes analyzed for robustness and auxiliary exercises, there are
3,693 legislators, 9,210 children, and around 700,000 legislator-votes spread between the
House of Representatives and the Senate from the 64th Congress in 1916 to the 93rd
Congress in 1974.13 In our core analysis of conscription voting there are 2,287 legislators,
5,420 children, and 26,373 legislator-votes. We describe below our principal data sources
and the construction of our main variables.

Vote data Our dependent variable of interest is whether or not a given legislator voted
in favor of conscription. Our main sample of interest is the universe of draft-related roll
call votes cast in the United States Congress during the 20th Century. We create this
sample by first gathering voting records from the Voteview project.14 We then retain the
union of votes that are assigned the “Selective Service” issue code by Voteview (the main
conscription legislation in the United States is named the Selective Service Act) and votes
that we determine to be relevant. This is aided by short descriptions of each roll-call vote
provided by the Gov Track project.15 This gives a total of 248 votes; 195 determined by
Voteview and a further 53 determined by the authors. An example of a measure that is
assigned the issue code is: “S.1 Act to provide for the common defense and security of the
US and to permit the more effective utilization of man-power resources of the the US by
authorizing universal military training and service,” which was passed in the House and
Senate in 1951. An example of a vote that was not assigned an issue code by Voteview
but was assigned a code by the authors is: “To amend S.1871, by raising the minimum
age limit to be selected into the military from 21 to 28 years. (P. 1463, Col. 2),” which
was rejected in the Senate in 1917. It was not assigned the “Selective Service Act” issue
code most likely because the act itself had not yet passed.
13

This includes only Congresses that contain roll call votes of interest regarding conscription and warfare.
See https://voteview.com/.
15
See www.govtrack.org, a project of Civil Impulse, LLC.
14

11

Next, in order to examine legislators’ motives for voting, it is necessary for us to assign
a ‘direction’ to each roll call vote. For example, in the first example above, it is clear that
an “aye” vote implied support for the draft, whereas in the second example it seems
less likely to be the case. Raising the lower cutoff could plausibly reflect an anti-draft
preference. At the same time, however, it is possible that the passage of that amendment
could have raised the likelihood that the main draft bill to which it was attached ultimately
passed too. In such a case, there is a danger of misclassifying a pro-draft measure as an
anti-draft one.
For each of the 248 votes, therefore, we turned to archival records to determine the
implications of an aye versus a nae. This mostly took the form of newspaper articles from
the week in which a bill was debated in the New York Times and the Chicago (Daily)
Tribune. In some cases, this research reversed our priors on the direction of a certain vote.
For example, an amendment to authorize “the president to conscript 500,000 men if the
number is not secured by voluntary enlistment within 90 days” (Senate Vote 51 in the 65th
Congress, 1917), might initially appear to be a pro-draft amendment. However, articles
in both papers make it clear that this was viewed as a success by the isolationists at the
time, as the original Army bill provided for selective draft without a call to volunteers.
Several votes were too ambiguous to be coded in either direction. For example, it is
not clear a priori whether or not a vote to allow exemptions for certain groups is welcomed
by a congressperson with a draft-eligible son; on the one hand, the son may be eligible,
but on the other, exemptions for other eligible men may increase the probability of being
drafted into combat conditional on being eligible.
The results of this data collection exercise can be seen in Table 1, where we document
draft-related votes only in Congresses in which we found relevant votes that we could
determine as pro- or anti-draft. In total, we code the direction of 140 votes—106 in the
Senate and 34 in the House (Column 1). In the second column we present our main
dependent variable: Pro Draft is equal to 1 if a legislator voted in favor of conscription
(aye if it was a pro-draft vote, or emphnae if it was an anti-draft vote), and 0 otherwise.
This exhibits a large amount of variation; the sample average is 0.58. In the third column
we present the average absolute margin between aye and other votes (nae or abstentions).
12

For example, there is one vote in the 89th Senate; Pro Draft is 0.93, which means the
margin is 0.93 − (1 − 0.93) = 0.86, the gap between the winning vote and the losing vote.
Column (4) contains the number of draft-related votes in total—i.e., successfully coded
or otherwise. The overall number is 232, as the remaining 16 were in other Congresses in
which we did not successfully code any votes. We cannot present the same information
for the outcome variable, but we do present the average margin to facilitate a comparison
between Columns (2) and (3). The respective mean margins are 0.18 and 0.17, suggesting
that there is no obvious difference between votes that we could and could not code.
Legislator data The main independent variables are constructed from data on legislators’ family compositions. We first take basic data on legislators themselves from the
Biographical Directory of the United States Congress 1774 - 2005 (Dodge et al., 2005). We
then use this information to locate richer household data from alternative sources. Most of
this data is acquired from decennial U.S. Census records dating from 1840 to 1940, which
we access through Ancestry, a company that provides digitized and searchable Census
records up to 1940.16 These records contain information on the name, gender and age of
each household member. We cross-check household data across multiple Census records
and ensure that the full set of children are accounted for. For those congresspeople too
young to have household information contained in the 1940 Census, we rely instead on
a broad range of sources that include obituaries in national newspapers; biographies on
official federal and local government websites; local media profiles; university archives;
and other online repositories.17
In Table 2, we present this information only for the 2,287 legislators who voted on
our main sample of conscription measures in Column (1) of Table 1. Of these, 85% had
children at the time of voting, and the average number of children per legislator was
2.37; 68% had at least one son and 65% had at least one daughter. In the second to
last column, we present the percentage of legislator-votes in which a legislator’s son was
within the draft-eligibility window pertaining to the given roll call vote. For example, on
a vote that proposes to enact the draft for all men between 20-25, a legislator with a 26
16
17

See www.ancestry.com.
These include Notable Names Database, Legacy.com, Biography.com, Newspapers.com, and Legacy.com.

13

year old son is coded as a 0. However, if the following roll call vote proposed to raise
the upper cutoff so that the window runs from 20-30, the same legislator is coded as a
1. This is our main ‘treatment’ variable in the analysis. The House and Senate sample
means are 0.23 and 0.21; meaning that over one fifth of legislator-votes on draft bills are
cast by legislators with sons in the draft window. Reassuringly, the equivalent figures for
daughters are the same.
Data on the age cutoffs are presented in Figure 1 and Table 3. There is more variation
in the upper age cutoff than in the lower one. There is also considerably more variation
in the proposed cutoffs during the two World Wars than in the two Cold War conflicts.

Taken together, the data show that draft-related measures in Congress were relatively
contentious, and that around one-fifth of legislators had sons of draft-eligible age during
the relevant votes. Less clear are (i) the perceived costs and benefits of conscription that
were postulated during debates on the floor (or in committee) at the time; and (ii) the
potential additional costs to a treated legislator of a draft measure passing.
On the first issue, we can learn much from archived newspaper reports about the
nature of the debate surrounding conscription. For example, on the first day of the
World War I draft bill debate on April 23, 1917, Representative Julius Kahn, who led
the Administration’s fight for conscription, invited Captain Percy Benson of the Somerset
Yeomanry, a regiment of the British Army, to speak to the House Committee on Military
Affairs about “England’s mistakes.” Benson listed five main reasons why the US should
pursue conscription. First, he believed that the obligation to defend a democracy ought
to be equal; second, he argued that the draft secured “infinitely greater efficiency”, insofar
as the government, through the selective process, could ensure that a sufficient number of
men could remain in essential industries such as coal mining, shipbuilding, and farming
during the war; third was the “economy” of conscription, which allowed the government
to call up single men rather than married ones with dependents and potentially expensive
allowances and pensions; the fourth point was “continuity of effort”, or the direct efficiency
of securing a sufficient number of soldiers with maximum certainty in order to win the war;
and the fifth point was to ensure that “slackers” pull their weight and, just as importantly,
14

that those who “were called slackers who were not slackers at all” would be protected from
such terms of opprobrium.18
In one form or another, many of these points were repeated over the course of draft-era
warfare in the US Congress, although, as we discuss in detail in Section 7, the necessity of
the draft as a means of securing a sufficient number of soldiers waned as conflict technology
became more capital intensive over time (Fordham, 2016). Other arguments against the
draft were varied. Unions were consistently opposed to conscription as they viewed it as
a form of class exploitation, most likely because the alternative—raising military pay—
would increase unions members’ bargaining power and wages.19 Relatedly, others viewed
the draft as an opportunity for special interests to profit,20 while isolationists and pacifists
opposed conscription as part of their general opposition to interventionist foreign policy.21
One consistent argument against the draft relates to agency frictions of the type that
we seek to test in our main analysis. Perhaps the most notable example of this concerns an
amendment proposed by Congressman Hubert Stephens of Mississippi to make members
of Congress themselves subject to the draft during World War I. Speaking in favor of the
amendment, Congressman Frank Clark of Florida argued that “[i]t would be a shame,
a cowardly thing [...] for Congress to declare war and then send young boys to do the
fighting, while our precious hides are exempt.” Mr. Stephens insisted that there were a “a
number of vigorous men on this floor who are fit for service at the front.” The amendment
18

“Draft Bill Debate is to Begin Today,” The New York Times, April 23 1917. The New York Times
also ran an opinion piece quoting Abraham Lincoln’s defense of the draft during the Civil War, in which he
argued in favor of distributing the burden of warfare widely (“A Conscriptionist,” The New York Times,
April 26 1917)
19
“Unions Oppose the Draft – Resolution Adopted Unanimously by Central Federation,” The New York
Times, April 1 1917
20
During the World War I draft debate, The New York Times reported that “Mrs. W.I. Thomas of
Chicago, Executive Secretary of the Woman’s International Peace Party, characterized the war as an
alliance between Lombard and Wall Streets. Grant Hamilton of the American Federation said labor stood
solidly against conscription.” (“Senate Takes Up Draft for Debate,” The New York Times, April 22 1917.)
This line of argument continued into the World War II era (“Draft Bill Action is Demanded Now,” The
New York Times, August 22, 1940):
“Senators Holt, Wheeler and Walsh again bitterly attacked the principle of peace-time conscription. Senator Holt asserted that “international bankers” and “wealthy attorneys” were
promoting the selective service measure. He said he saw something sinister in what he said
was the fact that most of them were “Harvard men.”
21

Speaking during the debate to enact conscription prior to U.S. involvement in World War II, Senator
Ernest Lundeen, a Minnesota Farmer-Labor isolationist, told the Senate that he “did not care whether
Germany or England won the war.” (“Draft Bill Upheld in First Test Vote in Senate,” The New York
Times, April 28 1940.)

15

was defeated, 130 to 86.22
On the second issue, we compile in Table 4 data on U.S. draft registrants, draft deployments, total service-members, and total fatalities for each war in our dataset. In total,
just over 109 million men were registered for the draft over the four conflicts. Of those,
16.3 million (or 15%) were inducted. This is just under one half of the 35.3 million total
service members. Total U.S. fatalities are estimated at 426,132, implying a 1.2% probability of death conditional on serving. Assuming that draftees were killed at the same
rate as regular service members, a draft registrant had a 0.2% probability of being killed
in battle.23 Note also that this does not take into account other long-run mental, physical
and labor-market costs of conflict such as those identified in Angrist (1990) and many
others. One fifth of legislators, therefore, had a non-trivial role in determining the risks
faced by their own sons in battle.

4

Estimation

Our main specification is as follows:

Visvcj = αi + vvcj + kiv + β1 soniv + β2 draf t childiv + β3 draf t soniv + ζXiv + isvcj , (4)

where Visvcj is an indictor equal to one if the legislator i from state s votes to enact
or expand conscription in vote v during Congress c in congressional chamber j; αi are
legislator fixed effects; vvcj are vote fixed effects; kiv are fixed effects for number of children
at the time of vote v; soniv is an indictor equal to one if a legislator has a son at the
time of vote v; draf t childiv is an indicator variable equal to one if a legislator has any
child of draft-eligible age as determined by the cutoffs in vote v; draf t soniv indicates
that a legislator has a son of draft-eligible age in vote v; Xiv is a vector of time varying
controls, comprising the legislator’s age, age squared, and terms in office. In regressions
without legislator and vote fixed effects, we include controls for party, state and chamber
fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered by legislator and vote. We estimate
22

“Amendments Flood House,” The New York Times, April 29 1917.
This is around 17 times greater than the probability of dying in a traffic accident in the United States
in 2019 (see: www.nsc.org/road-safety/safety-topics/fatality-estimates, accessed 3/12/2020.)
23

16

the specification with a linear probability model (LPM) and show that the results are
qualitatively unchanged when estimated in a conditional (fixed effects) logit model (CL).
Our main identifying assumption is that draf t soniv is independent of the error term.
This is violated if having a draft age son is related to any of the other determinants of
optimal voting in equation (3)—voter preferences, party preferences, and ideology. The
inclusion of legislator fixed effects, vote fixed effects (the most granular time fixed effects
possible), draf t childiv , and fixed effects for total number of children are particularly
reassuring in that regard. Conditional on these covariates, we argue that variation in
draf t soniv is as good as random.
Finally, it is necessary to determine the appropriate number of lead years for the lower
cutoff in the treatment variable. If, say, the lower cutoff is at 20, then it is likely that
a member of congress with a 19 year old son is effectively treated. Failing to account
for this will bias the estimated treatment effect βˆ3 toward zero, as treated legislators
will contaminate the comparison group. While the decision is somewhat arbitrary, what
should be clear is that βˆ3 initially rises as we reduce the lower cutoff and add more treated
legislators to the treatment group, before smoothly decreasing again as more untreated
legislators with younger children are added.

5

Main Results

Table 5 presents the main results with the lower bound set at 4 years below the proposed
cutoff. This means that a legislator with a 16 year old son is treated if the proposed
lower cutoff is 20 years of age. In Column (1), we show that having a draft-eligible
son reduces the probability of voting for conscription by 6.7 percentage points, from a
mean of 0.605. Adding state fixed effects reduces the magnitude of the coefficient and
removes its statistical significance (although the coefficient on draf t childiv is marginally
significant). In Column (3) we add legislator fixed effects, finding a treatment effect of
−0.102 (p< 0.01), or 17% of the mean. Finally, we add vote fixed effects and estimate the
full model from equation (4) in Column (4), finding again a large and significant negative
treatment effect in the region of 10% of the mean.

17

In Figure 1, we plot the sensitivity of each empirical model in Table 5 to different lower
cutoff ages. In all four models, point estimates smoothly rise from the one-year lead to
the four-year lead, before falling off slightly at five years. This pattern aligns well with
theory: with few leads there are treated legislators in the control group, which biases β3
downward. The treatment effect is maximized with a four-year lead, as the inclusion of
legislators with a five year lead reduces the point estimate. Up until the Vietnam War,
the mean duration of the draft per war was 3.3 years. Returning to the example above, it
is reasonable that legislators with a 16 year old son are more concerned about conscription
on average than those with a 15 year old son.
In Table 6, we examine whether or not the treatment variable is larger in a sample of
close votes. Legislators’ decisions are more likely to be pivotal in closer votes. We would
therefore expect those with draft-eligible sons to be more likely to oppose the draft in
narrow votes relative to landslide votes. Defining close votes as those in which the margin
was less than 60-40, we find that the draft-age son × close vote interaction effect in the
first three columns ranges from −20 to −15 percentage points (p< 0.01), easily enough to
convert the average legislator from pro- to anti-draft. Adding vote fixed effects reduces
the interaction effect to −1.8 percentage points (p> 0.10).

Hawks and Doves

In Section 3 we described the process by which we coded 140 votes

as either pro- or anti- draft. This is a subset of the 248 draft-related votes in total. The
remaining 109 were too ambiguous for us to code with confidence.24
Two drawbacks of this approach are (i) the loss of coverage owing to the ambiguity of
certain votes; and (ii) the level of discretion that we were required to exercise in determining the direction of each vote. In order to test the robustness of the main results to sample
selection and the authors’ discretion, we develop an alternative method of measuring proor anti-draft preferences among legislators. Drawing on a variety of sources, including
historical accounts and archival newspaper articles, we identify at least two well-known
24

These include bills that add exemptions which could potentially help or hinder a legislator depending on
the exemption; and bills that were too ambiguous to interpret for other reasons, e.g., a House amendment
in 1951 that proposed to prevent draftees from being sent to Europe, which some viewed as limiting the
scale of the draft while others viewed it as increasing the likelihood that draftees would be sent to Korea,
which was potentially more dangerous.

18

foreign policy “hawks” and two well-known foreign policy “doves” during each Congress
in both the House and the Senate.25 We use this information to create a new variable,
Hawk Vote, which is equal to 1 if the modal vote among the hawks in a given legislator’s
congress-chamber is in favor of a measure and the modal vote among doves is against it.
Similarly, it is equal to 0 if the model dove vote is in favor of a measure and the model
hawk vote is against it. The variable is only defined in cases where there is a unique mode
among hawks and a unique mode among doves that is not the same. The correlation
coefficient between Hawk Vote and our main Pro Draft outcome variable is 0.92.
In Table 7, we repeat the same four specifications as in Table 5 using Hawk Vote as the
dependent variable. The sample is drawn from all 248 draft-related votes in our dataset,
rather than the 140 that we were able to code. On the other hand, votes for which the
variable is not defined are omitted. In assigning legislators to treatment or control groups,
we use the draft age thresholds assigned to individual votes where possible. Otherwise,
we use the thresholds that were most recently passed in a given chamber. The results are
almost identical; interpreting Column (4), we see that legislators with sons of draft-eligible
age are around 5.5 percentage points (or 9% of the mean) less like to vote for conscription
than those with daughters of comparable age.
In Table 8, we restrict the hawks and doves sample to draft-related votes that are not
included in our main estimation in Table 5, and again find similar results.
In Table 9, we repeat the exercise on the universe of votes in draft-era Congresses
that are unrelated to the draft. This gives a sample of almost 176,000 legislator-votes. In
Column (2) where we control for state fixed effects there is a marginally significant positive
effect. In our preferred specifications with legislator fixed effects and added vote fixed
effects (Columns 3 and 4 respectively), the treatment effect is not significantly different
to zero.
This exercise suggests that our main results are not an artifact of the authors’ votecoding procedure, and that legislators with sons of draft age do not vote differently to
those with daughters of draft age on issues unrelated to the draft.
25

The exception is the 82nd House during the Korean War, in which we were only able to find one dove
(Robert Crosser, D-Ohio).

19

Additional robustness

In Appendix Table A1, we repeat the exercise with added

controls for second order polynomials in the age of every child of each legislator. If a
legislator does not have a kth order child, we enter a zero for the corresponding age.
These zeros are then flexibly captured by kiv in the regression. These age controls ensure
that the treatment effect is not picking up nonlinear effects of a child’s age on legislators’
voting preferences. The main results are robust to their inclusion.
In Appendix Table A2, we show that the main results are qualitatively robust to
estimating an equivalent Conditional Logit model.
In Appendix Table A3, we run the same four empirical models as in Table 5 with
an alternative set of draft-related votes. While our main votes concern the enactment,
extension, or reduction of universal military service (e.g., passage of the Selective Service
Act, its extension over time, increasing or decreasing the number of draftees, etc.), the
votes that we study in Table A3 instead include what we call “window votes,” which are
votes to change the existing upper or lower cutoffs only. We treat these separately because
they require an alternative coding procedure. To understand why, say that legislators vote
on a measure to change the draft window from 20-30 to 20-35, i.e. raising the upper cutoff
from 30 to 35. A legislator with a 32 year old son is clearly negatively impacted, and
would be assigned to the treatment group. We denote these legislators as “marginal.”
However, it is not obvious to see how a legislator with a 22 year old son is affected by
this. On the one hand, their son faces a longer duration of eligibility. On the other, the
probability that their son is drafted could be reduced. This was an issue much debated in
Congress at the time. Reporting on one such debate in 1940, the New York Times writes:
“The difference in age brackets between the two bills could have a profound
effect on the selection results, it was asserted during the debate in the two
houses. To raise the 800,000 men it is planned to train during the first year
of the program would involve the selection of only one in every twenty-three
registrants in the age group of 21 to 45 and one out of every thirteen under
the Senate bill’s age range of 21 to 31.”26
26

“House Votes Conscription,” The New York Times, September 8th, 1940.

20

To sidestep this problem, we drop these infra-marginal legislators from the sample, leaving
only the marginal group as treated and the extra-marginal legislators as the control along
the age dimension. This leaves a sample of around 7,000 legislator-votes. The results
can be seen in Figure A1, where we allow the lead years to vary. The treatment effect
is maximized with either a one-year or a two-year lead rather than a four year lead as in
the main model, perhaps reflecting the fact that window votes tended to occur closer to
the ends of wars than the main votes. We present these models with a two year lead in
Table A3. Another point to note is that the treatment effect is significant with vote fixed
effects but not with legislator fixed effects, which is consistent with the sharply reduced
sample size.
Finally, in Table A4, we present results in which the treatment variable is not coded
with respect to the proposed cutoffs as determined by vote in question, but rather to the
existing cutoffs determined by the most recently approved measure in a given chamber.
This introduces measurement error in the treatment variable. The results, although still
significant in our preferred specification, highlight the importance of examining the implications of each specific roll call vote rather than basing the treatment status on the
prevailing cutoffs.

6

Empathy vs. Self-Interest: Regression Discontinuity

While the main results are consistent with the hypothesis that leaders have selfish motives
beyond politics or ideology (i.e., that θ > 0, from Section 2), it is nevertheless possible
that the estimated βˆ3 is consistent with the classic model of legislative voting presented in
equation (1). For example, it could be the case that legislators receive information from
their draft-eligible sons that makes the social cost of conscription more salient to them for
a certain period of time. In that case, we might be observing a change in the legislator’s
perception of voter preferences, or even a change in the legislator’s own ideology, rather
than a change in her private returns to voting.
One way to test this empathy vs self-interest interpretation is to examine the behavior
of legislators who have sons around the upper age cutoff. Under the self-interest interpre-

21

tation, those who have sons immediately below the cutoff will behave as if they are treated,
whereas those who have sons immediately above the upper cutoff will not. Under the empathy interpretation, one would assume that the legislator’s concern for draft-eligible sons
and their families would remain intact—or at least decline more gradually—as their own
son crosses the upper threshold.
This test lends itself to a regression discontinuity design around the upper boundary
of the draft age eligibility cutoff. We create a running variable defined as the legislator’s
son’s age minus the upper cutoff. It is negative when a legislator’s son is below the upper
cutoff age on a given vote, and positive when he is above it. If a legislator has more than
one son, we select the age of the son closest to the cutoff. We discard all observations
for legislators who have sons beneath the lower age cutoff to aid our interpretation. If a
legislator has one or more sons within the draft age window and another above it, we use
the age of the draft-eligible (i.e., within-window) son closest to the cutoff, as it is more
relevant to the legislator’s behavior.
Formally, we estimate the following model, for RViv ∈ (−h, h):

Viv = α + φ1{RViv > 0} + δ1 RViv + δ2 RViv × 1{RViv > 0} + εiv ,

(5)

where RViv is the running variable (son’s age minus upper cutoff); 1{RViv > 0} is an
indicator equal to 1 if RViv is positive (i.e., if the son’s age is above the upper cutoff);
and h is a bandwidth determined by the procedure developed in Calonico et al. (2014).
The parameter φ measures the effect of having a son exit the draft eligibility window on a
legislator’s vote for conscription. A significant and positive φ indicates some support for
the self-interest motive; a null effect indicates support for the empathy motive alone.

Results

Estimates of φ are presented in Table 10. In the first column, we see that a

legislator with a son slightly above the upper cutoff is 15 percentage points (or about 25%
of the mean) more likely to vote for the draft than one with a son slightly below the upper
cutoff. In the second column, we add controls for legislator fixed effects. The results imply
that a given legislator is 15.7 percentage points more likely to support the draft after his

22

or her son crosses the upper cutoff relative to before. In columns (3) and (4) we repeat
the exercise focusing only on close votes, or those in which the margin of victory was a
maximum of 20% of the votes cast. This reduces the sample size by around 70%, and
gives equivalent estimates of φ at 36 and 38 percentage points respectively—over half of
the overall mean.
In Table 11, we test for similar discontinuities with two placebo outcomes: whether
the legislator is in the Senate or the House, and whether the legislator is a Democrat or
not. Whether in the close vote sample or in the full sample, there is no discontinuous
association with the running variable at the upper cutoff.
In Table 12, we repeat the exercise from Table 10 only with the daughter’s age replacing
the son’s age in the running variable.27 In the full sample of votes there is a negative jump
at the cutoff, and in the sample of close votes there is no significant effect. One possible
explanation for this negative effect is that there is no underlying relationship between
the running variable and the outcome, and so the discontinuity that we observe is one of
many along the distribution. We can interrogate this by examining RD estimates at a
variety of placebo cutoff points to either side of the true cutoff. In Table A5 we present
10 placebo tests for the son’s age effect. These begin at -15 and increase in intervals of
three years. The true estimate is the only one that is positive and significant. There is
one negative and significant estimate at the cutoff + 12 years. In Table A6, we replace
the son’s age with the daughter’s age. Six of these RD estimates are significant, and of
those two are positive and four are negative. These coefficients suggest the there is no
clear relationship between a legislator’s daughter’s age and the probability that they vote
in favor of conscription.
Figures

Figure A2 in the Appendix presents the visual analogue of these RD results. As

the data-driven bandwidths are rarely above 5 years, we additionally present in Figure 3
a local linear regression discontinuity (RD) plot that mimics the first result in Table 10
without any bandwidth restrictions. On the right hand side is the equivalent plot where
the running variable is the legislator’s daughter’s age minus the upper cutoff rather than
27

The running variable is generated according to the same procedure outlined above, only substituting
daughters for sons in each step.

23

the son’s age. The discontinuity is clear with respect to the son’s age, but not with respect
to the daughter’s. Figure 4 repeats the exercise using a second order polynomial on each
side of the cutoffs. Again, there is a positive discontinuity on the left hand side, but not
on the right. In Figure 5, we show RD plots with both placebo outcomes—Senator and
Democrat—and the son’s age running variable. Neither exhibit a significant jump. Finally,
in Figure 6, we plot the density of the son’s age running variable, finding no significant
evidence of bunching on either side of the cutoff.
Taken together, evidence from legislators’ voting behavior around the upper cutoff
strongly suggests that self-interest is at least part of the motive behind the main results
rather than a sense of empathy for the electorate or an enlightened form of ideology.
On average, a legislator is around 15 percentage points more likely to vote in favor of
conscription when her son crosses the upper age eligibility threshold.

7

Political Agency and Voter Behavior

We postulate in Section 2 that a sufficiently large shock to Rit could cause political leaders
to vote to enter conflicts in which the expected social costs exceed the benefits, or to avoid
conflicts in which the expected social benefits exceed the costs, provided that θ > 0. So
far, we have shown that an exogenous increase in the private costs of conscription for
some legislators reduces the likelihood that they vote in favor of enacting it. What is
still unclear is whether, on average, these treated legislators with draft-eligible sons better
represent their constituents’ preferences over conscription than similar control legislators
with daughters of comparable age. If the treated group better reflects voters’ concerns,
then it is the control group politicians that deviate from the social optimum by failing to
internalize the costs of their decision. If the control group better reflects voters’ concerns,
then it is the treatment group politicians that deviate from the social optimum by failing
to internalize the benefits of their decision.28
In this section, we endogenize the behavior of the electorate in order to better un28

We interpret the term ‘social optimum’ loosely as a reflection of the median voter’s preference; this is
violated if the average preference is different to the median preference, or if voters do not have sufficient
information to determine the socially optimal position.

24

derstand the dynamics of politicians’ decisions. It is useful to anchor our analysis of
voter behavior within the framework of established political agency models in which the
electorate is the principal and elected officials are agents who enact legislation on their
behalf.29 Informational problems can arise if politicians can hide effort or motives. We
consider two general types of models that align with our main results: (i) ‘pure’ moral
hazard in which all politicians maximize private rents; and (ii) moral hazard with adverse selection, in which bad politicians maximize private rents and good politicians enact
voters’ preferred policies. We propose an empirical test of theoretical implications to
determine which model more closely fits the data.

7.1

Pure moral hazard

The ‘first generation’ political agency models focus on moral hazard as the defining agency
problem (Barro, 1973; Ferejohn, 1986). In these, self-serving politicians seek to maximize
rents. Voters know that all politicians are self-serving, but they do not perfectly observe
the rents that accrue to politicians in office nor the actions that they take. In equilibrium,
elections partially constrain rent-seeking in the period before an election as politicians
value future rent-seeking opportunities.30
The implications of this approach in our setting are straightforward. First, it is consistent with our main result that politicians vote in their self-interest. Second, as voters
are aware that all politicians are self-serving, they are therefore indifferent between incumbents and challengers. This implies that a politician’s equilibrium legislative record
will not affect her reelection probability.

7.2

Moral hazard with politician types

The modern workhorse political agency model presented in Besley (2006) combines elements of moral hazard from first generation political agency models with elements of
models that allow for different politician types. In these, elections serve the twin purposes
of restraining politician behavior, as above, and selecting ‘good’ politicians who care more
29

See Besley (2006) for an in-depth account of these models.
Elections only partially constrain politicians as voters must permit a level of rent-seeking that prevents
politicians from plundering all public resources immediately.
30

25

about voter welfare. In chasing private rents, ‘bad’ politicians can also mimic good ones in
order to disguise their type to the electorate.31 Below, we briefly describe a basic version
of the model in order to consider its implications in our setting.

Environment
Consider two time periods t ∈ {1, 2} in which N politicians of type i ∈ {g, b} either vote
against or in favor of conscription. This decision is represented by Vjt ∈ {0, 1}, where
j ∈ {1, 2, . . . N } denotes an individual politician. We define type g as ‘good’ politicians
for whom the weight placed on private (non-ideological) returns to legislative voting is
zero, and type b as ‘bad’ politicians for whom this weight is strictly positive. Voters do
not observe these types.
The state of the world St ∈ {0, 1} determines which policy is preferred by voters. If
PN Ajt
j=1 N > 0.5, where



1 if Vjt = St
Ajt =


0 otherwise,
then voters receive a payoff ∆; otherwise their payoff is zero. All politicians get a payoff
E from being in office—this could reflect ‘ego rents’ (Rogoff, 1990) or other material gains
P
Ajt
from office. Good politicians receive a payoff of E + (∆ | N
j=1 N > 0.5), and always
choose Vjt = St . Bad politicians receive a private benefit of rt ∈ (0, R̄) from choosing
a policy Vjt = (1 − St ), where rt is drawn independently from a distribution with a
conditional density function G(r). The mean value of rt is µ, and we have shown in our
main results above that R̄ > β(µ + E), where β is a discount factor. In other words, rt
can be sufficiently large that bad politicians choose policies that do not align with voter
preferences.
The timing of the game is as follows. Nature determines the type of politician and the
state of the world at the beginning. Once in office, politicians observe the draw r1 and
select Vjt (St , i). Voters observe only Vjt and their own payoff, and then decide whether
or not to reelect the incumbent. Following the election, politicians receive a new draw r2 ,
31

This is not possible in pure adverse selection models.

26

and Period 2 decisions are made. The game ends once Period 2 payoffs are realized.

Equilibrium
We solve for a perfect Bayesian equilibrium in which politicians behave optimally in each
period given the reelection rule that voters put in place. Voters update their beliefs using
Bayes rule.
In Period 2, every type of politician chooses her short term optimal decision without
considering the electoral implications, i.e., Vj2 (S2 , g) = S2 and Vj2 (S2 , b) = (1 − S2 ). In
Period 1, good politicians choose Vj1 (S1 , g) = S1 . The more interesting problem concerns
the bad politician, who must weight the value of her private benefit against the present
value of mimicking a good politician in order to receive rents in the second period. Let
λ represent the probability that a bad politician mimics a good one in Period 1. Voters’
belief that a politician is good conditional on observing Vj1 (S1 , i) = S1 is:

Π=

π
≥ π.
π + (1 − π)λ

This implies that a politician can always improve their reputation Π by voting as would a
good type. If voters are retrospective—that is, if they observe and learn from legislative
voting—then politicians who choose Vjt = S1 are reelected, and those who choose Vjt =
(1 − S1 ) are not reelected as they are bad types for certain and will yield voters a zero
payoff in Period 2.
The optimal Period 1 decision for a bad politician is determined by the relative value of
the private rent r1 against the value of disguising her type and winning reelection, which
is β(µ + E). Thus, the probability that a bad politician takes the action preferred by
voters is
λ = G(β(µ + E)).
Proposition 1.
(i) Good politicians always choose Vjt (S, g) = St .
(ii) Bad politicians always choose Vj2 (S2 , b) = (1 − S2 ) in Period 2.

27

(iii) Bad politicians will choose Vj1 (S1 , b) = S1 in Period 1 if they earn sufficiently small
private rents r1 < r∗ ≡ β(µ + E) from voting against the electorate’s preferred policy.
(iv) All politicians who choose Vj1 (S1 , i) = S1 in Period 1 are reelected.
Bad politicians will therefore select Vjt = (1 − St ) in Period 1 if they earn sufficiently
large private rents r1 > r∗ ; otherwise they will mimic good politicians in order to survive
to the second period. Elections can therefore discipline politicians to an extent, but they
are still an imperfect mechanism as bad politicians can take actions to disguise their type.

Conscription and heterogeneous rent shocks

Allow the private rent shock to be

characterized as follows: one subgroup of politicians receive r1h and another receives r1l ,
where r1h > r1l . This implies that there is an exogenous difference in r1 between politicians
that cuts across both good and bad types. Good types select Vj1 (S1 , g) = S1 irrespective of
r1 , and are reelected. If r1h > r1l > β(µ+E), then all bad types choose Vj1 (S1 , b) = (1−S1 )
and are not reelected. Similarly, if β(µ + E) > r1h > r1l , then all bad types choose
Vj1 (S1 , b) = S1 and are reelected. However, if r1h > β(µ + E) > r1l , then bad types with
r1h select Vj1 (S1 , b | r1h ) = (1 − S1 ) and are not reelected, while bad types with r1l select
Vj1 (S1 , b | r1l ) = S1 and are reelected. With heterogeneous rent shocks, therefore, there
exists an equilibrium in which some bad types pursue private rents and are voted out of
office, while other bad types mimic good types and survive to Period 2 because their rent
shock r1l is worth less than than the present value of the second period returns.
Applying this logic to the case of conscription votes, we can interpret having a drafteligible son as a source of heterogeneity in the private rent shock. For example, consider
the case in which conscription is broadly unpopular with voters, i.e., S1 = 0. Bad types
without draft-eligible sons observe r1h > β(µ + E), meaning that their private benefit of
voting in favor of conscription exceeds the present value of survival to Period 2.32 However,
bad types with draft-eligible sons observe r1l < β(µ + E), and instead mimic good types by
choosing Vj1 (0, b | r1l ) = 0 and winning reelection. The draft eligibility ‘shock’ introduces
an exogenous wedge between r1l and r1h . Provided that r1h > β(µ+E) > r1l , bad politicians
32

Private benefits in this case could stem from an ideological disposition, from national party pressure, or
from lobby group or special interest pressure. In effect, any motive that is distinct from voters’ preferences.

28

with draft-age sons will oppose the draft, improve their reputation with voters, and survive
to Period 2. Conversely, if conscription is popular with voters, i.e., S1 = 1, then the draft
eligibility shock implies that politicians with draft age sons face r1h and vote against
constituents’ wishes, thereby revealing their true type and losing reelection.
Corollary 1. If S1 = 0 and r1h > β(µ + E) > r1l , then politicians with draft-age sons will
vote against conscription and win reelection. If S1 = 1 and r1h > β(µ + E) > r1l , then
politicians with draft-age sons will vote against conscription and lose reelection.

7.3

Testing implications

To determine which of these interpretations aligns better with the data, we examine the
electoral outcomes of legislators following Congresses in which they voted on draft-related
measures. In our main test, this amounts to replacing the outcome variable in equation (4)
with an indicator equal to 1 if the legislator wins their next election. Our main identification assumption is that the observed relationship between having a draft age son and
electoral outcomes operates through the channel of conscription votes. In the nomenclature of instrumental variables, we have observed in the main empirical section that the
first stage is significant. What we cannot declare with as much confidence is that the
exclusion restriction is valid. Politicians with draft-eligible sons may be more (or less)
electable after congresses that contained draft votes for reasons other than their voting
behavior if, for example, draft-eligible sons had a distinct influence in campaigning. We
proceed with this caveat in mind.

Draft popularity

Before conducting this analysis, we must first establish how aggregate

public support for the draft trends over the duration of our sample. Nationally representative data on public support for the draft is available from surveys administered by the
Roper Center’s Public Opinion Archive in 1945, 1952, 1969, 1980, 1981, 1985, and 2003.
These are analyzed by Fordham (2016), who documents a steady, steep decline in support
for the draft from around 70% in 1945 to around 20% at the outset of the Iraq War in

29

2003.33 The author’s principal explanation for the decline in support relates to military
technology: public support for the draft is a function of its necessity to win the war. As
military conflict became more capital intensive over time, the importance of conscription
as means of ensuring victory waned. This suggests that public support for conscription is
also likely to be declining from World War I to World War II, although we can not verify
this in the absence of polling data. A second factor relates to the salience of military casualties. Karol and Miguel (2007) provide evidence that home-state casualties in the Iraq
war reduced the vote share for George W. Bush between the 2000 and 2004 presidential
elections. It is thus plausible that the more fatalities reported during draft-era wars, the
more unpopular is the draft itself. Turning to data presented in Table 4, we can calculate
U.S. fatalities per draftee for each conflict: 0.018 in World War 1, 0.029 in World War
II, and 0.024 in the Cold War theaters. Given the proliferation of mass media over this
period, it is reasonable to assign a higher weight to latter figures, as information on those
fatalities is more likely to proliferate among voters.
Taken together, these facts indicate that voter support for the draft exhibits a downward secular trend from World War I to the Cold War conflicts. We can shed light on this
interpretation by examining how senators vote in election years over time. Senators serve
six-year terms with staggered elections every two years. This feature allows us to control
for vote fixed effects by exploiting the fact that only one third of senators can face an
election year at any moment in time. In Table 13, we present evidence that senators who
are up for election are (weakly) more likely to vote in favor of the draft during World War
I, and less likely to vote for the draft during World War II and the Cold War conflicts.
The evidence is similar whether we use our main outcome of pro-draft votes or the hawks
and doves outcome. The results are significant only in the regression using hawks and
doves votes and including legislator fixed effects (Column 4).
Election Outcomes To test the implications of the model, we examine whether or not
legislators with draft-eligible sons are more likely to be reelected over time in our sample.
33

Clifford and Spencer (1986) note that support for conscription was substantially lower at the beginning
of World War II than in 1945. In March 1940, 20 months prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor, 98.4% of
Americans opposed going to war against Germany, reflecting a “general desire not to repeat the mistakes
of 1917/18” (pp. 8). This suggests that the trend is not strictly declining at all points in time.

30

To do this, we simply run the following specification for each of the main periods (World
War I, World War II and the Cold War) as follows:

Eiscj = αi + vvcj + kivcj + γ1 sonivcj + γ2 draf tivcj + γ3 draf t sonivcj + ψXivcj + isvcj ,
(6)
where Eiscj measures election outcomes for legislator i in state s following congressional
session c in chamber j, and c ∈ {64, 65, 66} denotes World War I; c ∈ {76, 77, 78, 79}
denotes World War II; and c ∈ {82, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93} denotes the Cold War. The
variable draf t sonivcj indicates that the legislator has a draft-eligible son in vote v, which
is contained in congressional session c in chamber j. The vector Xivcj represents controls
for party, house or senate, terms in office, age, and age squared. The election outcome
Eiscj is either a binary variable indicating that legislator i was reelected or a variable
representing their margin of victory in the following election (which ranges from -1 to 1).
Our main specification does not include legislator fixed effects, as the outcome variables
now vary at the level of a legislator-term rather than a legislator-vote.
We test the following implications from the political-agency models described above:
1. Pure moral hazard. In the pure moral hazard model with only bad types, voters
do not learn from legislative behavior. The draf t son variables will have no effect
on a legislator’s subsequent election performance, i.e., γ3 = 0, ∀ c.
2. Moral hazard with politician types. In the moral hazard model with politician
types, voters do learn from legislative behavior. The draf t son variable will have a
positive impact on election performance if St = 0 is state of the world and a negative
impact if St = 1 is the state of the world. If St is declining over time, the empirical
implication becomes (γ̂3 | 1{W orld W ar I}) < (γ̂3 | 1{W orld W ar II}) < (γ̂3 |
1{Cold W ar})
In the second implication, we treat the draf t soniv variable as an exogenous wedge
between r1l and r1h . All bad politicians observe a private rent shock that we do not observe,
but those with draft-eligible sons receive a different net rent shock once they take into
31

account their additional private costs of conscription. This difference between r1l and r1h
is observed as draf t soniv .

7.4

Results

We present the results of this exercise in Figure 7 and in Appendix Tables A7 to A9. The
outcome variable is equal to 1 if the legislator won reelection to the following congressional
session and equal to 0 if the legislator lost reelection to the following congressional session.
It is not defined for legislators who do not contest the following election. Having a draftage son is negatively associated with reelection during World War I and World War II. All
six point estimates (that is, for models that cumulatively include fixed effects for number
of children, state, and roll call vote) are negative. In the first model using the WWI
sample, the point estimate is −0.1676 (p < 0.05). In the other five models, the point
estimate is around −6 to −7 percentage points, and is marginally significant (p < 0.10)
in two cases, and not significant in three. The mean probability of reelection conditional
on contesting the election is 0.79 in WWI and 0.84 in WWII.
By contrast, all three point estimates on the Cold War sample are in the region of
+1.5 percentage points, although none are statistically distinguishable from zero. The
mean probability of reelection conditional on contesting is 0.89.34 We show in Appendix
Tables A13 to A15 that these differences are not driven by differences in the “first stage”
relationship between having a draft-age son and pro-draft voting, which is negative and
significant during both World War I and the Cold War.

7.5

Discussion

These findings suggest that conscription became more unpopular with voters over time;
and that legislators with draft-age sons became increasingly more likely to win reelection.
Taken together, they provide suggestive evidence in support of the model’s implications
that bad politicians pool their legislative votes with good types when the payoff from
34

In Appendix Figure A3 and Tables A10 to A12 we present analogous results where the outcome variable
is the next election margin of victory, ranging from −1 to 1. The results follow a similar pattern, with all
point estimates in the Cold War sample greater than the point estimates in the WWI sample. Model 1 in
the WWII sample is something of an anomaly, where the point estimate is +0.05 (p > 0.10).

32

unpopular votes is (exogenously) lower.
An interesting question to consider is why some politicians still vote in favor of conscription when it is broadly unpopular. Our model and results imply that the control
group of otherwise identical legislators who voted in favor of conscription are deriving
utility from their vote through channels other than voter preferences. Linking back to
Section 2, these could be party career concerns (Pit ), ideology (Fi ), or other unobserved
private benefits (Rit ). In Table 14, we provide some evidence in support of party career
concerns as a partial explanation. We add to our baseline specification an indicator that
is equal to 1 if the president is from the same party as a given legislator. With legislator
fixed effects, this is identified off the switch from Lyndon B. Johnson to Richard Nixon in
1968. With or without fixed effects, this variable has a strong positive association with
pro-draft voting.
This finding is supported by narrative accounts of Nixon’s approach to conscription
before and after his election as president. Fordham (2016, p. 29) notes that while there
were Republicans and Democrats on both sides of the debate over ending the draft, Nixon
“campaigned on a promise to put a stop to it, but repeatedly asked for its extension as
president.”35 Nixon’s turn was particularly evident at the time of the Hatfield-Goldwater
amendment to raise the pay of the military in 1970. The measure was an explicit attempt
to end the draft by attracting a sufficient number of volunteers to render it obsolete within
a year. The New York Times wrote at the time:
President Nixon campaigned in favor of a volunteer army in 1968 and has
supported the concept time and again since he became President. But he
opposed the Hatfield-Goldwater amendment on the grounds that it would be
too expensive and that the draft was essential as long as the United States
maintained a sizable force in Southeast Asia.36
That legislative voting reflects this pattern is reassuring. More evidence on this motive
can be gleaned from newspaper reports at the other end of our sample period. Under
35

Similarly, Fordham notes that “Ronald Reagan criticized Jimmy Carter’s decision to restore draft
registration during his 1980 presidential campaign, but then decided to continue registration after he
became president.”
36
“Senate Bars Plan Designed To Bring Volunteer Army,” The New York Times, Aug. 26, 1970

33

the heading “Ban Two Draft Opponents — Democrats in Cleveland Declare Gordon and
Crosser ‘Done’,” The New York Times reported the following in April 1917:
Indignant at the spectacle of two Congressman from Cleveland openly opposing President Wilson’s war policies, the leaders of the local Democratic
organization today declared William Gordon and Robert Crosser “done.” The
two Congressmen were practically read out of the Democratic Party by the
declaration that the political organization of which Secretary of War Baker is
head will never again support either man for nomination or election.37
These accounts, coupled with our findings above, suggest that pro-draft voting in the U.S.
Congress appears to stem at least in part from national party edicts. This does not rule out
important roles for other motives noted above: other common arguments that repeatedly
appear in archival reports relate to the technological efficiency of conscription relative to
volunteer armies, and also to a distributional motive whereby high-income special interests
favor conscription ahead of a war tax. This latter motive aligns well with the consistent
opposition to conscription demonstrated by organized labor groups throughout the 20th
century.
In summary, we find evidence supporting a model of political agency that combines
aspects of moral hazard and adverse selection. When conscription is relatively popular,
voters punish legislators with draft-eligible sons; when it is relatively unpopular, voters
are more likely to reward them.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we test the hypothesis that political agency problems contribute to violent
conflict: political leaders who do not internalize the costs of war are more likely to vote
in favor of it. We demonstrate this by compiling data on the voting behavior and family
compositions of over 3,300 legislators who served in the U.S. Congress during the four
conscription era wars of the 20th century. We find that, (i) relative to those with daughters
37

“Ban Two Draft Opponents — Democrats in Cleveland Declare Gordon and Crosser ‘Done’,” The
New York Times, Apr. 28, 1917

34

of comparable age, legislators with sons who are eligible to be drafted are around 10-17%
less likely to vote for conscription; (ii) legislators increase their support for the draft by
a quarter when their sons cross the upper age threshold; and (iii) legislators with drafteligible sons are more likely to win reelection when the draft is less popular.
We interpret these results within the framework of a political agency model that combines aspects of moral hazard and adverse selection. Good politicians reflect voters’ concerns and are reelected; bad politicians can choose between pooling with good ones in
order to win reelection, or voting against the electorate’s preference in order to pursue
private rents. In our set up, having a draft-eligible son introduces exogenous variation in
the private benefits of conscription for bad politicians. Consistent with this model, we
show that politicians with draft-eligible sons are more likely to be reelected when the draft
is broadly unpopular. This indicates that some bad politicians pool their votes with good
ones in order to win reelection.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to identify the impact of changing
private incentives on legislative voting with individual fixed effects. This implies that
politicians are malleable, which itself has potentially interesting implications beyond the
issue of conscription. Exploring private incentives of legislators in other policy domains
remains a fruitful avenue for future research. Our results also suggest that representative
democracy may better enhance social welfare when voters are aware of legislators’ private incentives, and when they vote often enough to impose accountability on important
legislative decisions.

References
Abadie, A. and Gardeazabal, J. (2003). The economic costs of conflict: A case study of
the basque country. American Economic Review, 93(1):113–132.
Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. A. (2005). Economic origins of dictatorship and democracy. Cambridge University Press.
Angrist, J. D. (1990). Lifetime earnings and the vietnam era draft lottery: Evidence from

35

social security administrative records. The American Economic Review, 80(3):313–336.
Ansolabehere, S., de Figueiredo, J. M., and Snyder, James M., J. (2003). Why is there so
little money in u.s. politics? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1):105–130.
Barro, R. J. (1973). The control of politicians: an economic model. Public choice, 14(1):19–
42.
Bazzi, S. and Blattman, C. (2014). Economic shocks and conflict: Evidence from commodity prices. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4):1–38.
Beber, B. and Blattman, C. (2013). The logic of child soldiering and coercion. International
Organization, 67(1):65–104.
Benson, B. V., Meirowitz, A., and Ramsay, K. W. (2014). Inducing deterrence through
moral hazard in alliance contracts. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 58(2):307–335.
Berman, N. and Couttenier, M. (2015). External shocks, internal shots: The geography
of civil conflicts. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4):758–776.
Berman, N., Couttenier, M., Rohner, D., and Thoenig, M. (2017). This mine is mine!
how minerals fuel conflicts in africa. American Economic Review, 107(6):1564–1610.
Besley, T. (2006). Principled agents?: The political economy of good government. Oxford
University Press on Demand.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. (1997). An economic model of representative democracy. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1):85–114.
Besley, T. and Persson, T. (2010). State capacity, conflict, and development. Econometrica, 78(1):1–34.
Blattman, C. and Miguel, E. (2010). Civil war. Journal of Economic Literature, 48(1):3–
57.
Bonica, A. (2013). Ideology and interests in the political marketplace. American Journal
of Political Science, 57(2):294–311.
36

Bonica, A., McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., and Rosenthal, H. (2013). Why hasn’t democracy
slowed rising inequality? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3):103–24.
Brunner, E., Ross, S. L., and Washington, E. (2013). Does less income mean less representation? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(2):53–76.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., and Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence
intervals for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6):2295–2326.
Cascio, E. U. and Washington, E. (2014). Valuing the vote: The redistribution of voting
rights and state funds following the voting rights act of 1965 *. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 129(1):379–433.
Chassang, S. and Padro i Miquel, G. (2009). Economic shocks and civil war. Quarterly
Journal of Political Science, 4(3):211–228.
Chattopadhyay, R. and Duflo, E. (2004). Women as policy makers: Evidence from a
randomized policy experiment in india. Econometrica, 72(5):1409–1443.
Christensen, T. J. and Snyder, J. (1990). Chain gangs and passed bucks: Predicting
alliance patterns in multipolarity. International organization, 44(2):137–168.
Clifford, J. G. and Spencer, S. R. (1986). The First Peacetime Draft.
Collier, P., Elliott, V. L., Hegre, H., Hoeffler, A., Reynal-Querol, M., and Sambanis, N.
(2003). Breaking the Conflict Trap : Civil War and Development Policy. Number 13938
in World Bank Publications. The World Bank.
Crawford, T. W. (2005). Moral hazard, intervention and internal war: A conceptual
analysis. Ethnopolitics, 4(2):175–193.
de Figueiredo, J. M. and Richter, B. K. (2014). Advancing the empirical research on
lobbying. Annual Review of Political Science, 17(1):163–185.
De Mesquita, B. B. and Siverson, R. M. (1995). War and the survival of political leaders:
A comparative study of regime types and political accountability. American Political
Science Review, 89(4):841–855.
37

Dodge, A. R., Koed, B. K., et al. (2005). Biographical Directory of the United States
Congress, 1774-2005: The Continental Congress, September 5, 1774, to October 21,
1788, and the Congress of the United States, from the First Through the One Hundred Eighth Congresses, March 4, 1789, to January 3, 2005, Inclusive, volume 108.
Government Printing Office.
Dube, O. and Vargas, J. (2013). Commodity price shocks and civil conflict: Evidence
from colombia*. The Review of Economic Studies.
Fearon, J. D. (1995). Rationalist explanations for war. International Organization, 49:379–
414.
Ferejohn, J. (1986). Incumbent performance and electoral control. Public choice, 50(1):5–
25.
Fiorina, M. P. (1974). Representatives, roll calls, and constituencies. Lexington Books
Lexington, MA.
Fisman, R. (2001). Estimating the value of political connections. American Economic
Review, 91(4):1095–1102.
Flynn, G. Q. (2002). Conscription and democracy: The draft in france, great britain, and
the united states. Armed Forces & Society, 29(1):158–161.
Fordham, B. O. (2016). Historical perspective on public support for the draft: War costs
and military service. Journal of Global Security Studies, 1(4):303–322.
Garfinkel, M. R. (1990). Arming as a strategic investment in a cooperative equilibrium.
The American Economic Review, pages 50–68.
Garfinkel, M. R. and Skaperdas, S. (2000). Conflict without misperceptions or incomplete
information how the future matters. Journal of conflict resolution, 44(6):793–807.
Garfinkel, M. R. and Skaperdas, S. (2007). Economics of Conflict: An Overview, volume 2
of Handbook of Defense Economics, chapter 22, pages 649–709. Elsevier.

38

Gates, S. (2002). Recruitment and allegiance: The microfoundations of rebellion. Journal
of Conflict resolution, 46(1):111–130.
Ghobarah, H. A., Huth, P., and Russett, B. (2003). American Political Science Review,
97(02):189–202.
Goemans, H. E. (2000). Fighting for survival: The fate of leaders and the duration of war.
The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44(5):555–579.
Gordon, S. C., Hafer, C., and Landa, D. (2007). Consumption or investment? on motivations for political giving. Journal of Politics, 69(4):1057–1072.
Grossman, H. I. (1999). Kleptocracy and revolutions. Oxford Economic Papers, 51(2):267–
283.
Haavelmo, T. (1954). A study in the theory of economic evolution. North-Holland Amsterdam.
Harari, M. and Ferrara, E. L. (2018). Conflict, climate, and cells: A disaggregated analysis.
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(4):594–608.
Higgs, R. (1989). Do legislators’ votes reflect constituency preference? a simple way to
evaluate the senate. Public Choice, 63(2):175–181.
Hirshleifer, J. (1988). The analytics of continuing conflict. Synthese, 76(2):201–233.
Jackson, M. O. and Morelli, M. (2007). Political bias and war. American Economic
Review, 97(4):1353–1373.
Jayachandran, S. (2006). The jeffords effect. Journal of Law and Economics, 49(2):397–
425.
Kalla, J. L. and Broockman, D. E. (2016). Campaign contributions facilitate access to
congressional officials: A randomized field experiment. American Journal of Political
Science, 60(3):545–558.
Karol, D. and Miguel, E. (2007). The electoral cost of war: Iraq casualties and the 2004
us presidential election. Journal of Politics, 69(3):633–648.
39

Kuperman, A. J. (2008). The moral hazard of humanitarian intervention: Lessons from
the balkans. International Studies Quarterly, 52(1):49–80.
Levitt, S. D. (1994). Using repeat challengers to estimate the effect of campaign spending
on election outcomes in the us house. Journal of Political Economy, 102(4):777–798.
Levitt, S. D. (1996). How Do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of Voter Preferences,
Party Affiliation, and Senate Ideology. American Economic Review, 86(3):425–41.
McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., and Rosenthal, H. (2001). The hunt for party discipline in
congress. The American Political Science Review, 95(3):673–687.
McGuirk, E. and Burke, M. (2020). The economic origins of conflict in africa. Journal of
Political Economy.
Mian, A., Sufi, A., and Trebbi, F. (2010). The political economy of the us mortgage
default crisis. American Economic Review, 100(5):1967–98.
Miguel, E., Satyanath, S., and Sergenti, E. (2004). Economic shocks and civil conflict: An
instrumental variables approach. Journal of Political Economy, 112(4):725–753.
Miller, G. (2008). Women’s suffrage, political responsiveness, and child survival in american history*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3):1287–1327.
Morris, B. E. (2006). The effects of the draft on us presidential approval ratings during the
vietnam war, 1954-1975. Technical report, AIR FORCE INST OF TECH WRIGHTPATTERSON AFB OH.
Narang, N. and Mehta, R. N. (2019). The unforeseen consequences of extended deterrence:
Moral hazard in a nuclear client state. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 63(1):218–250.
Osborne, M. J. and Slivinski, A. (1996). A model of political competition with citizencandidates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1):65–96.
Poole, K. T. and Rosenthal, H. (1984). The polarization of american politics. The Journal
of Politics, 46(4):1061–1079.

40

Powell, R. (2006). War as a commitment problem. International Organization, 60:169–203.
Powell, R. (2012). Persistent fighting and shifting power. American Journal of Political
Science, 56(3):620–637.
Rogoff, K. (1990). Equilibrium political budget cycles. American Economic Review,
80(1):21–36.
Skaperdas, S. (1992). Cooperation, Conflict, and Power in the Absence of Property Rights.
American Economic Review, 82(4):720–39.
Smith, A. (1996). Diversionary foreign policy in democratic systems. International Studies
Quarterly, 40(1):133–153.
Snyder, J. M. and Groseclose, T. (2000). Estimating party influence in congressional
roll-call voting. American Journal of Political Science, 44(2):193–211.
Tarar, A. (2006). Diversionary incentives and the bargaining approach to war. International Studies Quarterly, 50(1):169–188.
Tullock, G. (1972). The purchase of politicians. Western Economic Journal, 10(3):354–55.
Washington, E. L. (2008). Female socialization: How daughters affect their legislator
fathers. American Economic Review, 98(1):311–32.

41

Figures

Figure 1: Proposed draft age cutoffs by roll call vote in the House and Senate.

42

Figure 2: Impact of having draft-eligible son on pro-draft votes at various lower
thresholds. The models correspond to those shown in Table 5. Leads refer to the number of
years below the lower draft cutoff used to calculate the age boundary for the treatment variable.
Error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals.

Figure 3: Regression Discontinuity at the Upper Cutoff. Son age coefficient: 0.1379 (SE:
0.06); Daughter age coefficient -0.016 (SE 0.02). Bandwidth: 25.

43

Figure 4: Regression Discontinuity at the Upper Cutoff: Quadratic fits. Son age
coefficient: 0.1915 (SE: 0.06); Daughter age coefficient -0.066 (SE 0.03). Bandwidth: 25.

Figure 5: Regression Discontinuity at the Upper Cutoff: Placebo Outcomes. Son age
coefficient in Senator regression: 0.0103 (SE: 0.05); Son age coefficient in Democrat regression
-0.0229 (SE 0.0811). Bandwidth: 25.

44

Figure 6: Running Variable Density

Figure 7: Impact of having draft-eligible son on reelection probability. The models
correspond to those shown in Appendix Tables A7 to A9. Error bars represent 95 percent
confidence intervals.

45

Tables

46

Table 1: Roll-Call Vote Summary Statistics

Congress

Draft Votes (Main Sample)

Draft Votes (All)

Votes

Pro Draft

Margin

Votes

Margin

2
34
2
7
1
8
6
12
13
1
20
106
9.64
10.03

0.61
0.49
0.63
0.79
0.93
0.61
0.55
0.52
0.50
0.11
0.43

0.32
0.35
0.40
0.77
0.86
0.38
0.46
0.30
0.39
0.01
0.53

0.32
0.39
0.35
0.79
0.55
0.46
0.39
0.31
0.35
0.06
0.46

0.56
0.21

0.44
0.23

2
58
3
9
3
12
13
21
22
2
33
178
16.18
17.08

0.60
0.74
0.85
0.88
0.88
0.80
0.42
0.47
0.53
0.70

0.34
0.47
0.70
0.77
0.77
0.60
0.03
0.28
0.15
0.49

0.35
0.47
0.70
0.77
0.77
0.55
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.37

0.69
0.17

0.46
0.26

11
2
2
1
1
3
9
8
5
12
54
5.4
4.25

0.58
0.49

0.18
0.12

232

0.17
0.12

Senate
93
92
91
90
89
82
79
77
76
66
65
Total
Mean
Std. Dev.

0.40
0.18

House
92
91
90
89
88
82
79
77
76
65
Total
Mean
SD

10
2
2
1
1
2
2
5
4
5
34
3.4
2.76

0.45
0.24

Combined
Total
Std. Dev.

140

Note: Data on vote records is from the Voteview project.
Data on pro-draft voting is calculated by the authors
based on contemporaneous newspaper reports. Main
Sample refers to these votes. All refers to these votes plus
other draft-related votes that took place in the same congressional sessions.

47

Table 2: Family Composition Summary Statistics
Children
Congress

Sons

Daughters

Draft Age

Legislators

Any

No.

Any

No.

Any

No.

Any Son

Any Dtr.

102
103
102
101
103
99
109
109
104
101
111
105.30
3.92

0.97
0.95
0.93
0.91
0.89
0.89
0.86
0.87
0.85
0.75
0.74
0.87
0.33

2.94
2.75
2.73
2.61
2.58
2.34
2.49
2.48
2.57
2.14
1.98
2.48
1.69

0.79
0.78
0.76
0.74
0.74
0.66
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.57
0.56
0.71
0.45

1.49
1.44
1.40
1.38
1.37
1.18
1.34
1.30
1.39
1.04
0.96
1.29
1.12

0.80
0.77
0.75
0.72
0.70
0.68
0.61
0.60
0.58
0.55
0.56
0.66
0.47

1.45
1.31
1.32
1.24
1.21
1.16
1.15
1.18
1.17
1.10
1.02
1.20
1.13

0.31
0.23
0.22
0.19
0.17
0.20
0.23
0.24
0.33
0.43
0.15
0.23
0.42

0.32
0.27
0.24
0.18
0.15
0.22
0.22
0.17
0.26
0.42
0.17
0.23
0.42

442
447
438
443
443
447
444
452
457
456
447.91
6.36

0.88
0.88
0.89
0.87
0.89
0.81
0.81
0.79
0.80
0.79
0.84
0.37

2.63
2.58
2.53
2.37
2.34
1.88
1.98
1.92
2.02
2.28
2.29
1.79

0.71
0.71
0.71
0.68
0.69
0.60
0.58
0.61
0.62
0.63
0.66
0.47

1.34
1.29
1.27
1.22
1.20
0.95
0.99
1
1.06
1.21
1.18
1.21

0.71
0.71
0.73
0.68
0.69
0.60
0.61
0.55
0.59
0.61
0.64
0.48

1.29
1.29
1.25
1.15
1.14
0.93
0.99
0.92
0.96
1.07
1.11
1.15

0.26
0.06
0.22
0.20
0.17
0.18
0.24
0.12
0.31
0.21
0.21
0.41

0.28
0.04
0.21
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.22
0.10
0.25
0.19
0.21
0.40

2287

0.85
0.35

2.37
1.75

0.68
0.47

1.23
1.17

0.65
0.48

1.15
1.14

0.22
0.41

0.21
0.41

Senate
93
92
91
90
89
82
79
77
76
66
65
Mean
Std. Dev.
House
92
91
90
89
88
82
79
77
76
65
Mean
Std. Dev.
Combined
Total
Std. Dev.

Note: Data on the family composition of legislators comes from census records (18401940) where possible and a variety of other biographical records where not. See
main text for more details.

48

Table 3: Age Thresholds
Lower cutoff
18
18.5
19
20
21

Freq.
3,555
1,883
11,142
892
8,798

Percent
13.53
7.17
42.41
3.40
33.49

Upper cutoff
25
27
28
30
35
39
40
44
45

Freq.
13,490
888
2,010
2,840
1,013
222
912
3,783
1,112

Percent
51.35
3.38
7.65
10.81
3.86
0.85
3.47
14.40
4.23

Note: These are proposed draft
age thresholds based on rollcall votes. The unit of analysis
is the legislator-vote.

Table 4: Registration, Deployment and Fatalities

World War 1
World War 2
Korea
Vietnam
Total

Total in Service

Draft Inductions

Draft Registered

Battle Deaths

4,734,991
16,112,566
5,720,000
8,744,000
35,311,557

2,810,296
10,110,104
1,529,539
1,857,304
16,307,243

24,000,000
45,000,000
13,200,000
27,000,000
109,200,000

53,402
291,557
33,739
47,434
426,132

Note:
Data on total U.S. Servicemembers and Battle Deaths are from
the “America’s Wars’ fact sheet compiled by the U.S. Department of Veteran’s Affairs, accessed at https://www.va.gov/opa/publications/factsheets/
fs_americas_wars.pdf.
Data on Draft Inductions are from U.S. Selective
Service System, accessed at https://www.sss.gov/About/History-And-Records/
Induction-Statistics. Data on total number of men registered for the draft
come from multiple sources: the WW1 figure is from http://www.history.
com/this-day-in-history/u-s-congress-passes-selective-service-act; the
WW2 figure is from https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/
ftpdocs/83xx/doc8313/07-19-militaryvol.pdf; the Korean War figure is from
Flynn (2002, p. 73).; and the Vietnam War figure are from Morris (2006, p. 15).
All website were accessed on 10/29/2017.

49

Table 5: Impact of Having Draft-Age Son on Pro-Draft Vote (Main
Votes)
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.0669∗∗
(0.0305)

(2)
-0.0297
(0.0267)

(3)
-0.1021∗∗∗
(0.0351)

(4)
-0.0622∗∗
(0.0283)

Draft age child

-0.0211
(0.0271)

-0.0411∗
(0.0231)

0.0125
(0.0307)

0.0132
(0.0277)

Any son

0.0121
(0.0308)

-0.0069
(0.0256)

0.1444
(0.1023)

-0.0298
(0.0853)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Draft age son

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the legislatorvote.

50

Table 6: Impact of Having Draft-Age Son on Pro-Draft Vote (Close Votes)
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.2006∗∗∗
(0.0259)

(2)
-0.1924∗∗∗
(0.0254)

(3)
-0.1497∗∗∗
(0.0264)

(4)
-0.0179
(0.0186)

Draft age son

-0.0033
(0.0327)

0.0310
(0.0296)

-0.0564
(0.0364)

-0.0571∗∗
(0.0284)

Draft age child

-0.0203
(0.0271)

-0.0402∗
(0.0230)

0.0140
(0.0305)

0.0133
(0.0277)

Any son

0.0132
(0.0308)

-0.0057
(0.0257)

0.1325
(0.1001)

-0.0301
(0.0854)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Draft age son × close vote

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote. ∗∗∗ p <
0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the legislator-vote. Close
roll-call votes are those in which the margin of victory is within 20 percentage points.

51

Table 7: Hawks and Doves Method with Draft Category Votes
Hawkish Vote
(1)
-0.0651∗∗
(0.0327)

(2)
-0.0181
(0.0263)

(3)
-0.0746∗∗
(0.0295)

(4)
-0.0552∗∗
(0.0241)

Draft age child

0.0007
(0.0288)

-0.0224
(0.0234)

0.0422
(0.0271)

0.0340
(0.0228)

Any son

0.0428
(0.0313)

0.0245
(0.0245)

0.1070
(0.0936)

0.0261
(0.0825)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.625
20786

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.625
20786

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.627
20578

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.627
20577

Draft age son

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the
legislator-vote. A hawkish vote is one that aligns with the modal
vote cast by hawks, and against the modal vote cast by doves.

52

Table 8: Hawks and Doves Method with Draft Category Votes Excluding Main Votes
Hawkish Vote
(1)
-0.0694
(0.0455)

(2)
-0.0191
(0.0364)

(3)
-0.1219∗∗
(0.0567)

(4)
-0.0827∗
(0.0419)

Draft age child

0.0028
(0.0366)

-0.0293
(0.0311)

0.0253
(0.0537)

0.0392
(0.0370)

Any son

0.0910∗∗
(0.0346)

0.0720∗∗
(0.0286)

0.0756
(0.1680)

0.1040
(0.1200)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.568
6632

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.568
6632

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.565
5946

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.565
5946

Draft age son

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the
legislator-vote. A hawkish vote is one that aligns with the modal
vote cast by hawks, and against the modal vote cast by doves.

53

Table 9: Hawks and Doves Method with Non-Draft Category Votes
Hawkish Vote
(1)
0.0114
(0.0181)

(2)
0.0298∗
(0.0153)

(3)
-0.0097
(0.0143)

(4)
-0.0146
(0.0120)

Draft age child

-0.0209
(0.0167)

-0.0263∗
(0.0142)

0.0129
(0.0144)

0.0114
(0.0118)

Any son

0.0099
(0.0195)

-0.0022
(0.0151)

0.0559
(0.0523)

0.0746
(0.0460)

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.514
175591

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.514
175591

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.514
175591

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.514
175556

Draft age son

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the
legislator-vote. A hawkish vote is one that aligns with the modal
vote cast by hawks, and against the modal vote cast by doves.

54

Table 10: Regression Discontinuity at the Upper Cutoff
Pro Draft Vote
RD estimate at upper cutoff

(1)
0.1520∗∗∗
(0.0426)

(2)
0.1569∗∗∗
(0.0456)

(3)
0.3572∗∗∗
(0.1268)

(4)
0.3792∗∗∗
(0.1307)

Bandwidth
Running variable
Legislator FE
Vote Sample
Observations

CCT
Son age
No
All
5185

CCT
Son age
Yes
All
5098

CCT
Son age
No
Close
1577

CCT
Son age
Yes
Close
1534

Note: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The running variable is the legislator’s son’s age minus the upper draft age threshold. Close votes are those
in which the margin was within 20 percentage points
Table 11: Regression Discontinuity with Placebo Outcomes
Senator

Democrat

RD estimate at upper cutoff

(1)
0.0094
(0.0422)

(2)
0.0963
(0.0935)

(3)
-0.0229
(0.0811)

(4)
-0.1073
(0.0822)

Bandwidth
Running variable
Vote Sample
Observations

CCT
Son age
All
5185

CCT
Son age
Close
1577

CCT
Son age
All
5155

CCT
Son age
Close
1565

Note: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The running variable is the legislator’s son’s age minus the upper draft age threshold.
Table 12: Regression Discontinuity with Daughter Age
Pro Draft Vote
RD estimate at upper cutoff

Bandwidth
Running variable
Legislator FE
Vote Sample
Observations

(1)
-0.1225∗∗∗
(0.0420)

(2)
-0.1241∗∗∗
(0.0422)

(3)
-0.1608
(0.1089)

(4)
-0.1602
(0.1090)

CCT
Dtr age
No
All
5348

CCT
Dtr age
Yes
All
5272

CCT
Dtr age
No
Close
1604

CCT
Dtr age
Yes
Close
1565

Note: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The running variable is the legislator’s daughter’s age minus the upper draft age threshold.
55

Table 13: Election Proximity by War
Pro Draft Vote

Hawkish Vote

(1)
0.0249
(0.0480)

(2)
0.0610
(0.0659)

(3)
0.0334
(0.0674)

(4)
0.1467∗∗
(0.0583)

Election Year × WWII

0.0037
(0.0850)

-0.0241
(0.0970)

-0.0197
(0.0875)

-0.1441∗∗
(0.0720)

Election Year × Cold War

-0.0616
(0.0539)

-0.1207
(0.0859)

-0.0365
(0.0821)

-0.1517∗
(0.0883)

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.622
15426

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.622
15284

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.627
16476

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.629
16241

Election Year

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the legislatorvote. A hawkish vote is one that aligns with the modal vote cast by
hawks, and against the modal vote cast by doves.

56

Table 14: President Party
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.0577∗∗
(0.0286)

(2)
-0.0276
(0.0249)

(3)
-0.0900∗∗∗
(0.0330)

(4)
-0.0544∗∗
(0.0263)

Draft age child

-0.0190
(0.0258)

-0.0393∗
(0.0222)

0.0037
(0.0296)

0.0072
(0.0262)

Any son

0.0168
(0.0293)

-0.0012
(0.0247)

0.1669
(0.1016)

-0.0064
(0.0854)

President party

0.2346∗∗∗
(0.0285)

0.2053∗∗∗
(0.0261)

0.1359∗∗∗
(0.0248)

0.1124∗∗∗
(0.0217)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Draft age son

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the legislatorvote. President party indicates that the sitting president represents
the same party as the given legislator.

57

Appendix
Appendix Figures

Figure A1: Impact of having draft-eligible son on window votes at various lower thresholds.
Error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals.

58

Figure A2: Corresponding RD plots for results presented in Tables 10, 11, and 12. Specifications
with fixed effects are omitted. The top panel presents our main results with a full sample and
with close votes. The second and third panels show RD results with placebo outcomes. The
bottom panel shows RD results using the age of the legislator’s daughter rather than son.

59

Figure A3: Impact of having a draft-eligible son on next election margin, by war.
The models correspond to those shown in Appendix Tables A10 to A12. Error bars represent
95 percent confidence intervals.

Figure A4: Impact of having a draft-eligible son on pro draft voting, by war. The
models correspond to those shown in Appendix Tables A13 to A15. Error bars represent 95
percent confidence intervals.

60

Appendix Tables

61

Table A1: Main Model with Added Controls for 2nd Order Polynomial
in Each Child’s Age
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.0641∗∗
(0.0308)

(2)
-0.0222
(0.0265)

(3)
-0.0826∗∗
(0.0345)

(4)
-0.0471∗
(0.0273)

Draft age child

-0.0310
(0.0298)

-0.0457∗
(0.0255)

0.0056
(0.0307)

0.0156
(0.0281)

Any son

0.0134
(0.0306)

-0.0103
(0.0253)

0.1097
(0.1041)

-0.0537
(0.0912)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
19159

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
18995

Draft age son

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the
legislator-vote.

Table A2: Conditional Logit (Main Votes)
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.2847∗∗
(0.1301)

(2)
-0.1287
(0.1234)

(3)
-0.6764∗∗∗
(0.2481)

Draft age child

-0.0939
(0.1242)

-0.1981∗
(0.1152)

0.0609
(0.2427)

Any son

0.0513
(0.1325)

-0.0309
(0.1176)

0.6144
(0.5110)

No
No
Yes
Yes
0.605
19145

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.605
19145

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.573
14277

Draft age son

Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are clustered by legislator.
0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.

62

∗∗∗ p

<

Table A3: Impact of Having Draft-Age Son on Pro-Draft Vote (Window
Votes)
Pro Draft Expansion Vote
(1)
-0.0478
(0.0334)

(2)
-0.0455
(0.0343)

(3)
-0.0574∗
(0.0306)

(4)
-0.0004
(0.0441)

Draft age child (window)

0.0877
(0.0559)

0.0836
(0.0564)

0.0238
(0.0286)

-0.0006
(0.0348)

Any son

0.0017
(0.0269)

-0.0143
(0.0227)

-0.0196
(0.0235)

0.0625
(0.1683)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.512
7109

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.512
7109

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.512
7109

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.519
6884

Draft age son (window)

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit of analysis is the
legislator-vote.

Table A4: Impact of Having Draft-Age Son on Pro-Draft Vote Using
Existing Rather than Proposed Draft Cutoffs
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.0567∗∗
(0.0281)

(2)
-0.0224
(0.0253)

(3)
-0.0057
(0.0246)

(4)
-0.0396∗
(0.0238)

Draft age child

0.0408
(0.0366)

0.0221
(0.0359)

-0.0249
(0.0225)

0.0138
(0.0222)

Any son

0.0053
(0.0237)

-0.0116
(0.0208)

-0.0188
(0.0203)

0.0301
(0.0886)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.580
26371

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.580
26371

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.580
26371

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.579
26278

Draft age son

Vote FE
Legislator FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are double clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.

63

Table A5: Regression Discontinuity at the Upper Cutoff – Placebo Cutoffs with Son Age
Pro Draft Vote
RD estimate at upper cutoff

Cutoff
Bandwidth
Running variable
Observations
Note:

∗∗∗ p

(1)
-0.0138
(0.1355)

(2)
-0.1331
(0.1114)

(3)
-0.1408
(0.1025)

(4)
0.0981
(0.0650)

(5)
-0.0482
(0.0527)

(6)
0.1520∗∗∗
(0.0426)

(7)
0.0769
(0.0538)

(8)
0.0852
(0.0528)

(9)
0.0845
(0.0684)

(10)
-0.2630∗∗∗
(0.0576)

(11)
0.1030
(0.0904)

-15

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

15

3.80
Son age
5185

4.48
Son age
5185

4.62
Son age
5185

6.59
Son age
5185

4.61
Son age
5185

6.23
Son age
5185

4.43
Son age
5185

4.74
Son age
5185

4.01
Son age
5185

4.82
Son age
5185

4.26
Son age
5185

< 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The running variable is the legislator’s son’s age minus the upper draft age threshold.

64
Table A6: Regression Discontinuity at the Upper Cutoff – Placebo Cutoffs with Daughter Age
Pro Draft Vote
RD estimate at upper cutoff

Cutoff
Bandwidth
Running variable
Observations
Note:

∗∗∗ p

(1)
-0.0062
(0.1454)

(2)
-0.0469
(0.1297)

(3)
0.4113∗∗∗
(0.1154)

(4)
0.0498
(0.0933)

(5)
-0.1632∗∗∗
(0.0556)

(6)
-0.1240∗∗∗
(0.0421)

(7)
-0.0666
(0.0456)

(8)
-0.1499∗∗∗
(0.0525)

(9)
-0.0306
(0.0609)

(10)
0.2393∗∗∗
(0.0602)

(11)
-0.1908∗∗
(0.0891)

-15

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

15

3.73
Dtr age
5348

4.60
Dtr age
5348

4.54
Dtr age
5348

6.25
Dtr age
5348

4.56
Dtr age
5348

5.92
Dtr age
5348

4.42
Dtr age
5348

4.74
Dtr age
5348

4.01
Dtr age
5348

4.82
Dtr age
5348

4.26
Dtr age
5348

< 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The running variable is the legislator’s daughter’s age minus the upper draft age threshold.

Table A7: Next Election Victory: WWI
1(Reelected)
(1)
-0.1676∗∗
(0.0707)

(2)
-0.0643
(0.0577)

(3)
-0.0625
(0.0584)

Draft age child

0.1106
(0.0676)

0.0729
(0.0520)

0.0740
(0.0524)

Any son

0.0292
(0.0717)

-0.0845
(0.0568)

-0.0856
(0.0571)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.790
1335

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.790
1335

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.790
1335

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator
and vote. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit
of analysis is the legislator-vote. The outcome variable
varies at the level of the legislator-term. Next election
victory is equal to 1 if the incumbent wins the next election.

65

Table A8: Next Election Victory: WWII
1(Reelected)
(1)
-0.0665
(0.0496)

(2)
-0.0715∗
(0.0406)

(3)
-0.0720∗
(0.0409)

Draft age child

0.0093
(0.0489)

0.0267
(0.0360)

0.0265
(0.0364)

Any son

0.0568
(0.0395)

0.0478
(0.0373)

0.0463
(0.0375)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.844
4138

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.844
4138

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.844
4138

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator
and vote. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit
of analysis is the legislator-vote. The outcome variable
varies at the level of the legislator-term. Next election
victory is equal to 1 if the incumbent wins the next
election.

66

Table A9: Next Election Victory: Cold War
1(Reelected)
(1)
0.0157
(0.0399)

(2)
0.0148
(0.0334)

(3)
0.0148
(0.0336)

Draft age child

-0.0159
(0.0383)

-0.0092
(0.0324)

-0.0109
(0.0326)

Any son

-0.0048
(0.0430)

0.0425
(0.0315)

0.0419
(0.0316)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.885
9935

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.885
9935

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.885
9935

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator
and vote. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit
of analysis is the legislator-vote. The outcome variable
varies at the level of the legislator-term. Next election
victory is equal to 1 if the incumbent wins the next
election.

67

Table A10: Next Election Margin: WWI
Margin
(1)
-0.1069∗
(0.0636)

(2)
-0.0731∗
(0.0426)

(3)
-0.0728∗
(0.0430)

Draft age child

0.0462
(0.0614)

0.0572
(0.0372)

0.0574
(0.0375)

Any son

0.0693
(0.0599)

-0.0134
(0.0358)

-0.0136
(0.0360)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.307
1335

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.307
1335

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.307
1335

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator
and vote. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit
of analysis is the legislator-vote. The outcome variable
varies at the level of the legislator-term. Next election
victory is equal to 1 if the incumbent wins the next
election.

68

Table A11: Next Election Margin: WWII
Margin
(1)
0.0546
(0.0480)

(2)
-0.0037
(0.0297)

(3)
-0.0027
(0.0299)

Draft age child

-0.0760
(0.0484)

-0.0499∗
(0.0288)

-0.0484
(0.0295)

Any son

-0.0255
(0.0491)

-0.0048
(0.0276)

-0.0045
(0.0283)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.302
4138

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.302
4138

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.302
4138

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator
and vote. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit
of analysis is the legislator-vote. The outcome variable
varies at the level of the legislator-term. Next election
victory is equal to 1 if the incumbent wins the next
election.

69

Table A12: Next Election Margin: Cold War
Margin
(1)
-0.0180
(0.0389)

(2)
0.0060
(0.0295)

(3)
0.0076
(0.0300)

Draft age child

-0.0429
(0.0382)

-0.0376
(0.0284)

-0.0412
(0.0285)

Any son

0.0122
(0.0445)

0.0659∗
(0.0339)

0.0651∗
(0.0341)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.309
9935

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.309
9935

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.309
9935

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are doubled clustered by legislator
and vote. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. The unit
of analysis is the legislator-vote. The outcome variable
varies at the level of the legislator-term. Next election
victory is equal to 1 if the incumbent wins the next
election.

70

Table A13: Impact of Having Draft-Age Son on Pro-Draft Vote: WWI
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.1111∗∗
(0.0497)

(2)
-0.1101∗∗
(0.0476)

(3)
-0.1410∗
(0.0800)

(4)
-0.1178
(0.0825)

Draft age child

0.0158
(0.0456)

0.0129
(0.0403)

0.1234∗
(0.0739)

0.1708∗∗
(0.0721)

Any son

0.0325
(0.0528)

0.0289
(0.0486)

0.0000
(.)

0.0000
(.)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.644
1790

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.644
1790

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.648
1776

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.648
1776

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are double clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.

71

Table A14: Impact of Having Draft-Age Son on Pro-Draft Vote:
WWII
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
0.0348
(0.0546)

(2)
0.0416
(0.0467)

(3)
0.0302
(0.0589)

(4)
0.0094
(0.0598)

Draft age child

0.0395
(0.0494)

0.0307
(0.0423)

-0.0171
(0.0591)

-0.0101
(0.0606)

Any son

-0.0064
(0.0465)

-0.0509
(0.0393)

0.3857
(0.2456)

0.3803
(0.2447)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.510
5187

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.510
5187

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.512
5029

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.512
5029

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are double clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.

72

Table A15: Impact of Having Draft-Age Son on Pro-Draft Vote: Cold
War
Pro Draft Vote
(1)
-0.0686∗
(0.0360)

(2)
-0.0369
(0.0302)

(3)
-0.1095∗∗
(0.0465)

(4)
-0.0939∗∗
(0.0435)

Draft age child

-0.0252
(0.0348)

-0.0404
(0.0287)

-0.0002
(0.0436)

0.0068
(0.0429)

Any son

-0.0018
(0.0377)

-0.0276
(0.0307)

-0.0510
(0.1033)

-0.1070
(0.0983)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.640
12182

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.640
12182

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.638
12100

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.638
12100

Draft age son

Legislator FE
Vote FE
State FE
Number of children FE
Other controls
Mean dep. var.
Observations

Note: Standard errors are double clustered by legislator and vote.
∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.

73

