                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  U.S. AND SWEDISH
                           DIRECT INVESTMENT AND EXPORTS




                                 Magnus Blomstrom

                                 Robert E. Lipsey

                                 Knesia Kulchycky




                              Working Paper No. 2390




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1987




Magnus Blomstrom's part of the research took place while he was a member of the
staff of the Industriens Utredningsinstitut of Stockholm. Robert Lipsey's research
was supported first by an SSRC-Fulbright Fellowship and later by a PSC-CUNY grant
and a grant of computer time from the City University of New York. We are grateful
to the Industriens Utredninginstitut and the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the
U.S. Department of Commerce for the use of their data and to Robert Baldwin, Jeffrey
Zax, and participants in the NBER Conference on Trade Policy Issues and Empirical
Analysis, particularly our discussants, Steven J. Matusz and John Mutti, for useful
comments and suggestions. Linda Molinari assisted us with statistical work and
computer programming and James Hayes and Rosa Schupbach with the preparation of
the manuscript. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2390
                                                    September 1987




                  U.S. and Swedish Direct Investment and Exports




                                     ABSTRACT




    Overseas production in a country by affiliates of Swedish and U.S. firms
rarely appears to displace exports from the two home countries and in most
cases either has no effect or tends to increase home country exports. The
positive effect on Swedish exports is evident not only with respect to levels
of exports to different countries at one time but also with respect to changes
in exports over time. The positive effect on U.S. exports can be observed for
minority—owned as well as majority-owned foreign operations.




Magnus Blomström                Robert E. Lipsey              Ksenia Kulchycky
Stockholm School of Economics   Queens College and            5510 Yorkshire St.
P.O. Box 6501                   Graduate Center, CUNY         Springfield, VA 22151
113 83 Stockholm, Sweden        Flushing, NY 11367               (703) 425—4552
   (08) 736-0120                   (718) 520—7064
        and                              and                          and
National Bureau of Economic     National Bureau of Economic   University of Pennsylvania
   Research                        Research                   Department of Economics
269 Mercer Street               269 Mercer Street             Philadelphia, PA 19104
New York, NY 10003              New York, NY 10003
   (212) 995-3457                  (212) 995—3447
                U.S. and Swedish Direct Investment and Exports


                               Magnus Blomström
                               Robert E. Lipsey
                               Ksenia Kuichycky


Introduction

    The effect of foreign production by a country's firms on the home

country's exports continues to be a puzzle after many years of controversy and

a considerable amount of empirical research. Theoretical models of direct

foreign investment typically treat the size of a market as exogenous and

a company's share of a market as a function of its firm-specific capital. The

decision as to whether to produce abroad is then a matter of choosing among

possible methods of serving the foreign market, including exporting from the

home country, producing abroad, and Ucensing others to produce the firm's

product. That decision will depend on the nature of the firm's intangible

assets, on transport costs, economies or diseconomies of scale, barriers to

trade and other government regulations, on factor prices at home and in other

countries, as well as on the need to adapt the product to differences among

markets in the characteristics demanded. This more or less standard view of

the multinational firm implies that production in a market is a substitute for

production at home for export to that market.

    A more neutral viewpoint would be to regard a firm's share of a market as

being at least partly dependent on whether it produces there, even though

local production does not affect the demand for the firm's products. That

would be the case, for example, if a product were totally non-tradable: that

may be true for some services, such as tourism or medical care. If all the

firm's products were nontradable, there could, of course, be no effect of

overseas production on exports. A more interesting example would be that of a
                                   —2—

firm that can increase its market share in a country by producing there,

because local production reduces the cost of supplying the market. If that

local production requires some input from the parent, such as components, it

might raise or lower parent exports, depending on the size of the gain in

market share and the importance of parent input in the affiliate's output.

    A third possibility is that foreign production increases host-country

demand for the firm's products. In that case, higher foreign production would

be more likely to lead to larger home-country exports. That is most easily

seen if the foreign production is in trade and services ancillary to

exporting, such as sales and service operations. It could also be the case for

foreign production of one part of a parent company's range of products that

familiarizes a market with the parent company's name and reputation. It would

also be possible for foreign production to raise the demand for the product in

general, rather than only the output of the producing firm. That might be

the case, for example, if a company like Coca Cola enters a country and

advertises heavily. The demand for cola drinks might increase enough to

open the market to local or other foreign producers.

     With all these possibilities, the assumption of fixed market shares

for a parent firm, convenient though it is, seems inappropriate to us.

Furthermore, even if a firm's overseas production added to exports by the

parent, for one of the reasons mentioned above, that addition might be at

the expense of exports by rival companies in the home country. For this

reason we examine the effects of foreign production on a home country's

exports rather than on the exports of the parents themselves.

     We analyze the effects of foreign production on home country exports,
                                    —3-

using cross-section data from Sweden and the United States. In addition,

for Swedish exports, we also study the determinants of changes over time in

exports to each destination.


Earlier jjJl Findig
     Despite the implications of theoretical models of direct investment,

empirical studies have rarely observed substitution between overseas produc-

tion and exports. A cross-section study for 1970 covering 14 industries,

based on foreign production data for about 200 of the larger U.S.

investors, found only positive coefficients among those that were signifi-

cant in equations in which U.S. exports to a country in an industry were

related to U.S. companies' production in that country and industry as well

as to other variables (Lipsey and Weiss, 1981). At the same time, coef-

ficients for U.S. companies' production were mostly negative in equations

explaining exports to each country by other industrial countries. There was

weaker evidence, from data on numbers of affiliates, that investment by

countries other than the U.S. was negatively related to US, exports, and

positively related to exports by other countries. The positive

(complementary) relationship between U.S.-owned production and U.S. exports

was also evident in equations for individual U.S. firms' exports, based on

the same data (Lipsey and Weiss, 1984).

     Bergsten, Horst, and Moran (1978), using published IRS and U.S.

Department of Commerce data, concluded that "...   the   relation between foreign

investment and exports or imports is largely haphazard," (p. 97), although

they suggested that there is a noticeable complementarity for investment up to

a certain level, because most of the initial investment goes into marketing
                                    -4-

and assembly.

     The most elaborate examination of trade—investment relationships for

individual firms has been performed by Swedenborg (1979) and (1982) for

Swedish multinationals. OLS equations relating the ratio of exports to home

production to the ratio of foreign to home production across all industries

showed a positive and significant influence of foreign production on firm

exports, and of foreign production in a country on firm exports to the

country. A 2SLS estimate of the relationship found it not to be statist-i--

cally significant, although the coefficients across all firms, and across

all firms and countries, did not change greatly. As compared with those in

the OLS equations, they fell by 25 to 30 per cent. Equations confined to

firms with more than five affiliates produced lower coefficients in OLS

equations, and more of a decline in 2SLS.

    Swedenborg (1982) also combined data from four Swedish surveys, again

using 2SLS and found that each increase of foreign production in a country by

$10 produced an increase of exports to that country by the parent company of

$1. That one dollar increase was the net outcome of $1.20 added to exports to

the affiliate and .20 subtracted from exports to non—affiliates in the

country.


EjJje Effects of Foreign Production
     The fear that foreign production by a country's firms means the export of

jobs to other countries is an old one. Bergsten, Horst, and Moran (1978)

trace the discussion in the U.S. back to the 1920's, despite the fact that

much of the flow of U.S. investment at that time was in public utilities,

not likely to be competitive with U.S. production.
                                      —5-

     While the idea of exporting jobs in the aggregate is a fuzzy one, and

while economists have not generally considered the maximization of commodity

exports to be a sensible objective for economic policy, these fears have

 led to recurrent efforts to measure the effect that U.S. firms overseas

production has on exports and to proposals for government action to hinder

the growth of such production.

     There are several possible ways of defining what is meant by the proposi-

tion that production overseas by a country's firms substitutes for, or is

complementary to, exports by the country or by the parent firms themselves.

Each of them is associated with a different implied model of the behavior

of firms or a different policy question.

     The simplest, if unrealistic, view might be that the factors determining

the location and extent of affiliate production in a country are unrelated to

the factors that determine parent exports to a country. This would be the case

if affiliates were handed out to parents in a lottery. What might amount to

much the same thing would be if the decision to establish an affiliate in a

country were a very long-term one, and virtually permanent once made, while

the export decision was a short-term one, easily adjusted to contemporary cir-

cumstances. Then, even if the existence and size of an affiliate reflected

the same influences, such as exchange rates or price levels, that also played

an important role in determining trade flows, the investment and the exports

would reflect these influences from different periods. In that case, we could

still interpret a coefficient for affiliate production, for example, in an

equation explaining exports from the home country as representing the effect

of affiliate production on exports.
                                   -6-

     The persistent problem in these analyses is the likelihood that the

variables that determine investment in a country and affiliate production are

the same as the ones determining trade flows. Some of the obvious ones, such

as host country income and income per capita, can be included in the equation

for trade flows to avoid attributing their effect to affiliate activity.

However, the risk that always remains is that there are unaccounted-for

variables--such as host country regulation--that influence both investment and

trade, and that we attribute their effects to investment.

     There have been various attempts to escape this problem. The most obvious

way is to include all relevant explanatory variables in the trade equation,

but one can never be sure that there are not important additional variables

omitted. In studies of exports by Swedish multinationals, Swedenborg (1979

and 1982) used 2SLS, with the first stage equation estimating affiliate pro-

duction and the second stage parent exports as a whole and parent exports to

individual countries. The results were not very different quantitatively from

the OLS results, but one difficulty was the fact that the first stage equation

explained little of the variation in affiliate production. Consequently, a

good deal of what may have been relevant variation in affiliate production was

omitted in the second stage.

     Lipsey and Weiss (1981 and 1984) attempted to escape the problem by

including a larger number of variables in the OLS equations, by working within

fairly detailed industries, and by examining the relationships of affiliate

production, not only to home-country exports, but also to exports by others.

The idea behind the last procedure was that it was likely to reveal some

spurious relationships based on omitted characteristics of countries, provided
 that they did not produce opposite effects on U.S. exports and exports by

 others.

     Another method of dealing with the simultaneity issue, which we have tried

 in this paper, is to study changes over time in home-country exports to each

destination, rather than the levels of exports. The assumption involved is

that the effects of the most troublesome unaccounted-for factors that simulta-

neously influence investment and exports do not determine changes in these, or

that their influence is incorporated in the initial levels of affiliate pro-

duction and exports, We do not believe that such a cross-section of changes

over time has been tried before.


Ie_q ions
     The equations explaining U.S. and Swedish exports for each industry

group are related to the trade equations of the type discussed in Learner

and Stern (1970) and used in studies by Chenery (1960), Linnernan (1966),

and others. However, they do differ in a couple of respects. One is that

they all relate to exports from one country and therefore do not involve

any exporting country variables. A second is that we use GOP and GOP per

capita rather than GOP and population (only two of the three, income, popu-

lation, and income per capita can be used, because any two determine the

third). A third difference is that we have dropped the distance variable,

typically used as a measure of trade resistance, since it made little dif-

ference to the results and we needed to economize on independent variables.

The implied trade equation for each industry is then:


    EXP =      f(GDP1 GDPCJ)
                                     -8-

     where


     EXP.j =     Exports from the U.S. or Sweden to country j in products of
                   industry i in 1982



     GDPJ
             =   Real GDP of country j in 1982 in international prices

                   (see Appendix)


     GDPCJ =     Real GOP per capita of country j in 1982 in international

                   prices


     We expect the coefficients for GDP to be positive, although one can

imagine cases in which the expected influence of aggregate income on the

aggregate demand for the product is more than offset by its influence on

supply. That may be the case, for example, in an industry in which econo-

mies of scale are of great importance and large markets are the preferred

locations for production, so that while overall demand in a country is

high, import demand is low. Coefficients for GDPC may be either positive

or negative and can be influenced by both demand-side and supply-side fac-

tors. Among the demand—side influences, a high income elasticity of demand

should mean high demand in countries with high per capita income, given

the aggregate GOP, and therefore a positive coefficient for GDPC. A low

income elasticity should produce a negative coefficient. Among supply-side

influences, if, for example, high income per capita were associated with

high skill levels arid, therefore, comparative advantage in skill-intensive

products, import demand should be low and the coefficient negative.

Obvious missing variables are tariff levels, for which we do not have
                                    -9-

information for a sufficient number of countries, and restrictions on

imports or inducements to exports by affiliates, which are possibilities

for further research. There are no industry characteristics, such as appear

in some other studies of this issue, because each equation includes data

for only one industry group.

     To these trade equations we add several variables representing affi-

liate activity or production. These are:



     NS1J      Net Saie of affiliates -in industry i located in country j

               (Sales minus -:s r'om the home country).


     NLS =     Net Local Sales: Sales of affiliates -in industry I located

               in country j minus the portion of these sales accounted for

               by imports. That amount is estimated assuming that the

               ratio of imports to sales is the same for sales in the

               host country as for sales to other countries.


     NES1j =   Net Export Sales: Sales of affiliates in industry i located

               in country j to buyers outside country j, minus the portion

               of these sales accounted for by imports, estimated as for

               NLS.



    We have no prior expectations for either Net Sales or Net Local Sales.

They include a mixture of influences in opposite directions. To the extent

that affiliate production substitutes for exports from the United States or

Sweden by either the parents or other firms, the effect on exports should

be negative. That would be true if affiliate production of finished pro-
                                   - 10   —



ducts substituted for exports of finished products, but also even if affi-

liate assembly of products substituted for only the final stages of output,

provided that the U.S. or Swedish companies' share in the country's con-

sumption was a fixed amount determined by country size and other country

variables. Even if production in a host country increased exports of com-

ponents or of other finished products by the parent, the effect on home

country exports as a whole could be negative if some production replaced

export sales by other U.S. or Swedish companies.

     On the other side, if production in a host country by a U.S. or

Swedish company increased the size of that country's market for the pro-

ducts of that company's industry, or if it raised the company's share of

the market even without increasing the size of the market, the effect on

home-country exports would be positive, provided that the increase in share

came at the expense of local or other foreign companies rather than of U.S.

or Swedish companies. The positive effects could be on home-country

exports of raw materials or components or on home-country exports of other

finished products as local production familiarized the host country with

the parent's brand name or with U.S. or Swedish goods more generally. The

positive effect on home-country exports may be enhanced by the fact that

some of the affiliate production, even in affiliates classified as manufac-

turing, consists of distribution and service activities.

    As between Net Sales and Net Local Sales, we would expect negative coef-

ficients to be more likely in the latter case. To the extent that affiliate

production is for export rather than for local sale, it should not substitute

for home-country exports to the host country, even if it competes with home-
                                     — 11 —



country   exports to other countries. Thus, we treat the production for export

separately and expect the coefficient on Net Export Sales to be positive.


                    Effects of Swedish Affiliate Production

     Our examination of the consequences of Swedish firms' overseas production

is based on the same set of data on individual multinational firms as was used

by Swedenborg (1982). However, it focuses on aggregate Swedish exports in each

industry, including exports by non-multinational firms, rather than on exports

by the parent firms themselves. The data cover 10 individual industries

(see Appendix for a description of the data). We have used equations for

only the 7 industries in which there are at least 10 countries with

Swedish—owned production.

     The impact on Swedish exports of overseas production by Swedish firms

is described by the set of coefficients for affiliate production in

equations explaining Swedish exports to a country by GDP and GDP per

capita, as in the trade equations described above, but adding a variable

for being a Nordic country (Denmark, Finland, and Norway). We also per-

formed a 2SLS regression on the Swedish data where the first stage

equations included a dummy variable for EEC membership. We expect the coef-

ficients for GOP and GOP per capita as well as that for being a Nordic

country to be positive (see Table 1).
                                      — 12 —


                                     Table   1

                    Coefficientsa f or Swedish Affiliate Net Sales
                    in a Country in Equations Explaining Swedish
                           Exports to the Countryb,1978

Industry Group                            OLS               2SLS

Paper Products                           .229               .435
                                        (4.98)             (4.09)

Chemicals                                .836              3.511
                                        (4.05)             (3.09)

Metal Mfg.                               .379               .500
                                        (4.43)             (4.34)

Non-Electrical Machinery                 .359               .368
                                        (12.9)              (9.05)

Electrical Machinery                     .086               .516
                                        (1.40)             (1.15)

Transport Equipment                      .312               .921
                                        (3.49)             (2.85)

Other Mfg.                              1.137              2.490
                                        (6.64)             (4.58)


at_statistics in parentheses

bEquations include, as independent variables, GDP. GDPCj, a dummy variable
 for being a Nordic country, and Swedish manufacturing aFfiliate net sales.
 The instrument variable in the 2SLS is a variable for EEC membership.

Source: Appendix Tables S-i and S-2

    In the OLS regressions, all the coefficients are positive, implying

that, other things equal, greater production by Swedish affiliates in a

country is associated with larger exports from Sweden. The range of coef-

ficients is wide, from 230 Kroner of exports per thousand Kroner of produc-

tion -in   the host country, to exports greater than the host-country
production. There is no evidence here that host-country production substi-
                                   — 13 —


tutes   for exports from Sweden.

     There is some suggestion in the results of unaccounted for curvilinearity

in the relationship, in the fact that the intercepts, supposedly showing the

exports that would take place without any Swedish-owned production in the

country, are mostly negative and fairly large, although they are not statisti-

cally significant (see Appendix Table S-i).

    The coefficients in the 2SLS regressions are in general much larger than

those in the OLS equations, although the story they tell is similar. All the

coefficients in the 2SLS analysis are positive, and two of them indicate

that a Kronor of Swedish-owned production in a foreign country draws in

more than a Kronor of Swedish exports.

    We were able to distinguish affiliate production for local sale in the

host country (Net Local Sales) for only five industries. The result of

substituting net local sales for net sales in these five industries is

shown in Table 2.
                                       - 14   —




                                    Table     2

             Coefficients8 for Swedish Affiliate Net Sales and Net
               Local Sales in a Country in Equations Explaining
                      Swedish Exports to the Country, 1978

I nd ustyyp                        Net Sales          Net Local    Sales

Paper Products                       .217                  .351
                                    (2.11)                (2.79)

Chemicals                            .809                  .870
                                    (2.29)                (2.32)

Metal Mfg.                           .330                 .268
                                    (1.59)                 (.80)

Non-Elect. Machinery                 .336                 .508
                                    (5.87)               (6.32)

Electrical Machinery                 .083                 .085
                                    (1.11)               (1.12)

at_statistics in parentheses

    Source: Appendix Table S-3

The substitution produces larger coefficients for affiliate sales in most

cases but only two of the differences are substantial.

    On the whole, then, while we would hesitate to place great weight on the

estimated size of the coefficients, we think the evidence for a positive rela-

tionship is reasonably strong. There is certainly no sign of any negative

relationship 'in this cross-section.

    Another way of looking at the relation between foreign production and

exports is to relate changes in exports to a country in each industry group

over a period to the initial levels of exports to and affiliate activity in

that country and to changes in real income and affiliate activity. We esti-

mated the following equations:
                                     — 15 —


              =
    EXP.j3         f(GDP, EXP70. NS70)
                             and

    EXPij          f(GDP, EXP70. NSiJ)
                   where

              =    Changes in exports from Sweden to country j in products of
    EXP.j
                   industry i, 1970—1978 (thousand Kroner)

              =    Changes in real GDP of country j, 1970-1978 (million dollar)
    GDPJ
    EXP7OiJ
              =    Exports from Sweden to country j -in products of industry I
                   in 1970 (thousand Kroner)

              =    Changes in Affiliates' Net Sales, 1970 - 1978 (thousand
                   Kroner)

    NS70J     =    Affiliates   Net Sales in 1970 (thousand Kroner)


    The variable for exports -in the beginning of the period should incorporate

the effects of not only the factors that we controlled for in cross-section

equations above, but also most of the unaccounted-for variables that we

mentioned.

    Initial foreign production and changes in -it   are   included in separate

regressions. The variable for the initial production position should tell

us whether affiliates substitute, in absolute terms, their own production

for imports from the home country as time goes by. In other words, do

Swedish exports increase less, given their initial level, to countries with

higher initial levels of Swedish-owned production. We should note that

this -is a different question from the one studied by Swedenborg (1979,

1982) which is whether the proportion of local sales that a company makes

made from local production changes with the age of the affiliate. The

short- or medium-run effects of foreign production on exports should be
                                      - 16   -



reflected    in the coefficients for changes in affiliate production. In

other words, do Swedish exports increase less, given their initial level,

to countries where Swedish-owned production increases more.

    The results from these regressions are as shown in Table 3.

                                     Table 3


         Coefficientsa for Swedish Affiliate Net Sales in a Country
          in 1970 and Changes in Net Sales, 1970—78, in Equations
        Explaining Changes in Swedish Exports to the Country 1970_78b

                                   NS7O                 ANS

Paper Products                    .201                  .058
                                 (1.36)                 (1.62)

Chemicals                         .448                  .179
                                 (2.34)                 (1.60)

Metal Mfg.                       -.271                —.158
                                 (2.60                  (3.19)

Non—Elect. Machinery              .122                  .062
                                 (2.27)                 (1.81)

Electrical Machinery              .282                — .132
                                 (1.04)                 (1.46)

Transport Equipment              1.899                  .276
                                 (2.71)                 (3.64)

Other Mfg.                        .836                  .444
                                 (2.44)                 (4.65)


at_statistics in parentheses

bBoth types of equations include, as independent variables, also Swedish
 exports to a country in 1970, in thousands of Swedish Kroner, and the percen-
 tage change in real GDP between 1970 and 1978.

      Source: Appendix Table S-4

    These results strengthen our earlier impressions of a predominantly

positive influence of affiliate production on exports. The variable for
                                     — 17   —




the   initial level of affiliate production generally carries a positive and

strongly significant coefficient. Metal manufacturing is the main excep-

t-ion. There is thus not much evidence here that Swedish affiliates tend to

reduce their imports from Sweden over time. The higher the level of

Swedish—owned production -in 1970, the larger the increase in Swedish

exports between 1970 and 1978. The coefficient for changes in affiliate

production is positive in five of the seven industries, and significantly

different from zero at the 5 per cent level in three of these. Only in

metal manufacturing do we again find a negative and significant coef-

ficient. On the whole, the larger the growth in Swedish-owned producton

in the host country, the greater the growth in exports from Sweden. This

suggests a dominance of complementarity rather than of substitution between

overseas production and exports.


                     Effects of_U.S. Affiliate Production

      For the United States we show two sets of equations and results. One

set of equations, using net sales as the measure of affiliate production,

as was done for Swedish affiliates, was available at a much more detailed

industry level than the Swedish data: 34 industries, of which we show

results for the 28 industries in which we had at least 15 countries with

some affiliate net sales. The second set of equations, in which we experi-

ment with other measures of affiliate production, was available only for

seven broad industry groups.

      The coefficients for affiliate net sales in U.S. export equations are

summarized in Table 4.
                                   - 18   -



                                  Table   4

             Coefficients for Affiliate Net Sales in Equations
                       Explaining U.S. Exports, 1982
                               28 Industries



Coefficients with t > 1
  Positive
    t2
    1t<2
                                                          8
                                                           2
  Negative
    t2                                                    4
    1t<2                                                   2
Coefficients with t < 1                                   12



Source: Appendix Table US1

In most of the industries, there is no statistically significant relation

between U.S. exports to a country and U.S. affiliate production there.

Where that association is significant, two thirds of the coefficients are

positive, suggesting complementarity between U.S. exports and U.S.-owned

production in a country, rather than substitution of one for the other.

The four industries in which there were negative coefficients, suggesting

substitution, were

              Other foods

              Drugs

              Primary nonferrous metals

              Lumber, Wood, Furniture, and Fixtures

The negative coefficient for Drugs is surprising because it contradicts the

strong finding of complementarity for this industry in Lipsey and Weiss

(1981).

    For broad groups of manufacturing industries we can make two further
                                      - 19   -




sets   of calculations. One is to separate affiliate net sales into produc-

tion for sale within the affiliates' host country and production for

export, and a second is to introduce some measures, necessarily crude, of

production by minority-owned U.S. affiliates.

    As mentioned earlier, we would expect negative coefficients in U.S.

export equations to be more likely for net local sales than for net sales.

That expectation is confirmed in Table 5 for the four industry groups for

which we can make the calculation.

                                     Table 5

                 Coefficientsa for U.S. Affiliate Net Sales,
             Net Local Sales, and Net Export Sales in a Countryb
            in EquationsC Explaining U.S. Exports to the Country



                               Equations with One            Equations with
                               Activity Variable         Two Activity Variables
                                         Net Local       Net Local   Net Export
 Industry Group                Net Sales   Sales           Sales       Sales


Chemicals                         —61            —202      -255         125
                                 (2.0)           (3.8)     (4.3)       (1.6)

Non-Electrical Machinery          222             334        50        313
                                 (1.8)           (1.1)     (0.1)       (0.9)

Electrical Machinery              156             186      -303          915
                                 (1.6)           (1.1)     (1.3)        (2.7)

Transport Equipment               5.9              19       37           -28
                                 (0.2)           (0.4)     (0.5)        (0.3)



at_statistics in parentheses

bExciuding Canada

Cincluding, as independent variables, GDP. GDPC. and measures of aff i—
hate activity

Source: Appendix Table US-2
                                      - 20   -



The substitution of net local sales for aggregate sales increases the size

of all the coefficients, including the negative coefficient for chemicals.

And the addition of the net export sales variable produces two negative

coefficients, one of which is significant. The net export sales coef-

ficients are predominantly positive, as we would expect. Thus to the

extent that there is any substitution of affiliate production for exports,

it is the production for local sale that is involved. Affiliate production

for export from the host country tends to raise U.S. exports to the host

country.


          j2p_,jjporityQwned_Affiliates
       Most analyses of trade-investment relationships have concentrated on

majority-owned affiliates. The main reason is probably the paucity of data on

affiliates that are 50 per cent or less owned by the parent. The Swedish

data used above include virtually no information on these affiliates, and

the U.S. surveys have exempted them from large parts of the questionnaire,

and particularly from the trade questions. One justification for that

exemption is that the parent firms often would not know the answers and

would not have the same ability to compel cooperation as in the case of

majority-owned affiliates.

       The omission of affiliates 50 per cent or less owned would be relati-

vely harmless if they were randomly scattered over the world and over

industries. We know, however, that    they are not. They are virtually the
only   u.s.               Japan, for example, and are of considerable impor-

tance in that country. Their importance is also associated with industry

and country characteristics, such as the technological level of the
                                      — 21 —


 industry   and the income level of the country, both characteristics often

 used in the examination of trade-investment relationships.

     Aside from its interaction with some of the explanatory variables, pro-

 duction by minority-owned affiliates (for convenience, we will refer to

minority ownership, even though it includes a substantial number of cases of

50 per cent Ownership) might have different effects on trade from those of

production by majority-owned ownership. One possibility would be that the

effects would be simply a diluted version of those associated with majority

ownership, because they are shared among several owners, some of which are

often not U.S. firms. On the other hand, production by minority-owned aff i-

hates might have a stronger effect on parent trade because minority ownership

is resorted to in cases in which the parent would otherwise be barred from a

market, either because the host country has particularly stringent barriers to

imports, or because the parent company does not have a very large tech-

nological advantage over other firms. Minority ownership might represent a

price for entry into a market more often than does majority ownership.

     Because minority-owned affiliates did not receive the questionnaire on

the disposition of their sales, we cannot calculate net local sales or net

export sales for them. The activity measure for them in the following

equations is net sales, whatever the measure used for majority-owned aff i-

hates. We are also limited here to equations for four industry groups instead

of the 28 industries used earlier because these equations are based on

published data.

     The coefficients for majority—owned and minority-owned affiliate pro-

duction, both measured by net sales, are shown in Table 6. All the coef-
                                     — 22 -


ficients   for sales of minority—owned affiliates are positive, as they are

also in the equations in which net local sales are the production measure.

The only significant negative coefficient is for production by majority—

owned affiliates in food industries, as in some cases discussed earlier. On

the whole, the addition of data for minority-owned affiliates strengthens

the case for a positive effect of affiliates' production on home-country

exports.



                                   Table 6

                Coefficientsa for Net Sales of Majority—Owned and
              Minority-Owned Affiliates in a Countryb in EquationsC
                     Explaining U.S. Exports to that Country

                               Majority-Owned            Minority-Owned
Indus Group                      Affiliates                Af f i 1 a_
Foods                               -134                       25
                                    (3.5)                    (.2)

Chemicals                             16                      417
                                     (.7)                   (6.6)

Metals                                 3                       66
                                    (0.1)                   (0.7)

Non-Elect. Machinery                 289                      547
                                    (3.0)                   (1.4)

Electrical Machinery                 142                      320
                                    (1.4)                   (1.4)

Tranport Equipment                    50                       44
                                    (3.0)                   (1.9)


at_statistics in parentheses          Clncluding, as independent variables,
bExclud-jng Canada                     GDPj, GDPC and measures of affiliate
                                       proauct ion

     Source: Appendix Table US-3

     8ecause many observations were missing, we could use the separate measures

for net local sales and net export sales of majority-owned affiliates in only
                                    — 23 —


four   of the industry groups. This is shown in Table 7. The positive relation

of minority-owned affiliate production to exports is again evident. For

majority-owned affiliates, there is a predominantly positive relation of

total production to U.S. exports. However, in two of the industries, U.S.

firms' production for sale in the host country is negatively related to

exports to that country. That negative effect, not observed within more

disaggregated industries in the earlier calculations, is offset by the

expected positive relation of U.S. exports to             production f or

export from the country. Thus, there is some hint that a degree of substi-

tution may take place in countries where U.S. firms' production is on a

large enough scale to provide for export sales as well as domestic sales.

The high coefficients on net export sales also suggest that affiliate pro-

duction in one country may be substituting to some extent for U.S. exports

to other countries.
                                      - 24   -



                                          Table 7

                 Coefficientsa for Affiliate Production in a Country
                 in Eguationsb Explaining U.S. Exports to the Country

                                  Production Measured by

                      Majority-Owned Affiliates     Minority Owned Affiliates
                        Net Local   Net Export               Net Sales
Industry group            Sales       Sales                 *______
Chemicals                 —124          127                      337
                          (3.1)        (2.9)                    (5.5)

Non-Electrical              85         441                       587
                           (.3)        (2.0)                    (1.3)

Electrical Machinery      —595        1,289                     606
                          (3.2)        (4.8)                    (3.6)

Transport Equipment         59           16                       23
                          (2.4)         (.6)                    (1.1)



at_statistics in parentheses           bIncud.jng as independent variables,
CExclud.jng Canada                      GDP, GDPCJS and measures of affiliate
                                         proäuct ion.

     Source: Appendix Table US-3

     A check on the results for U.S. exports is to run parallel sets of

equations in which the dependent variable is exports by other countries to

the same destinations. If U.S.-owned production serves to increase U.S.

shares in a country's imports, without expanding the level of imports,

U.S.-owned production should be negatively related to exports by other

countries to the host countries. If U.S.-owned production increases U.S.

sales by expanding markets in host countries, we might find no relation to

exports by other countries or even a positive one. A positive relationship

could also reflect an expansion of a company's exports to the host country

from its other operations outside the U.S. A more troublesome implication
                                     — 25 —


of   a positive coefficient would be that -it shows that we have not success-

fully accounted for important determinants of a host-country's imports.

       The coefficients in equations for 28 industries using net sales as the

affiliate production measure, shown in Appendix Table US-4, are all posi-

tive and all but a few are statistically significant. Among the possible

interpretations we lean toward the likelihood that some important factor

explaining trade may have been omitted from the equations for U.S. exports.

       We can include minority affiliate activity and the division of sales

between local and export for only four industries. While the number of

cases is too small to be conclusive, if we introduce production by U.S.

minority-owned affiliates into the equations, as we can do for the broad

industry groups, we find (Table 8) that the positive relation between

U.S.-owned production and sales by other countries remains. However, produc-

tion by minority-owned U.S. firms does appear to substitute for a country's

imports from countries other than the U.S.
                                     — 26 —


                                    Table 8

             Coefficientsa for Production by Majority-Owned and
               Minority-Owned U.S. Affiliates in a Countryb in
                Equationsc Explaining Exports to a Country by
                        Countries other than the U.S.

                               ______         Production   of
                               Majority-Owned                   Minor I ty-Owned
            'p                                                  _I1iIIQt_
Foods                               585                            -2.194
                                   (1.7)                            (1.8)

Chemicals                           255                            —2,446
                                   (3.5)                            (4.6)

Metals                            2,279                            —2,252
                                   (4.1)                            (1.6)

Non—Elect. Machinery                593                             1,152
                                   (2.0)                            (0.9)

Electrical Machinery              2,043                              -158
                                   (6.7)                             (.2)

Transport Equipment                 512                              -641
                                   (2.9)                             (2.7)


at_statistics in parentheses        clncluding, as independent variables,
                                     GOP GDPC. and measures of affiliate
bExciuding Canada                    production

    Source: Appendix Table US-5

    Some further hint of what we may be missing by omitting minority affi-

hates from our earlier calculations can again be gleaned from the

equations in Table 9. These separate affiliate production for local sale

from production for export and include minority affiliate net sales. The

large positive coefficients in the equations for exports by other countries

are associated mainly with U.S. affiliates' production for export. We would

not expect these to compete with foreign countries' exports to the produc-
                                      — 27   —




tion   location. Production by U.S. minority-owned affiliates in two

industries, and production for local sale by majority-owned affiliates in

one industry, do appear to substitute for imports from countries other than

the U.S.

                                     Table 9

              Coefficientsa for U.S. Affiliate Local and Export Sales
                 in Equationsb Explaining Exports to a Countryc by
                          Countries other than the U.S.

                       Majority-Owned Affiliates       linority—0jf_fj hates
                         Net Local   Net Export               Net Sales
                           Sales       Sales

Chemicals                  -270         1,141                  —2,616
                           (.8)         (3.0)                   (5.0)

Non—Elect. Machinery     -1,665         2,355                   1,304
                          (2.7)         (4.8)                   (1.3)

Elect. Machinery          1,212         3,408                      -1
                          (1.4)         (2.7)                    (.0)

Transport Equipment         586            15                  —1,025
                          (7.0)          (.2)                   (15.0)


at..statistics in parentheses         blnciuding, as independent variables,
                                       GDP, GDPC and measures of affiliate
CExciuding Canada                      production

       Source: Appendix Table US-5

       There is a preponderance of positive coefficients for minority-owned

U.S. affiliate production in U.S. export equations, and of negative coef-

ficients in equations for exports by others to a market. That suggests that

minority-owned production, even more than production by majority-owned aff i-

hates, is a way in which U.S. firms buy entry into a market or market share

for themselves, and hinder it for their foreign rivals.
                                   - 28   -



Conclusions

     The predominant relationship between production in a country by affiliates

of Swedish and U.S. firms and exports to that country from Sweden and the U.S.

is something between no effect on home-country exports at all and inducing a

higher level of home-country exports.

     The higher the level of Swedish affiliate production in a country, the

higher the level of Swedish exports to that country in that industry. This rela-

tionship in OLS equations is confirmed in a 2SLS analysis that attempts to

remove the effects of the simultaneous determination of Swedish exports and

host-country affiliate production by Swedish firms and is observed whether pro-

duction is measured by affiliate net sales or by net local sales. The same

conclusions are produced by an analysis of changes over time in Swedish exports.

Both high initial levels of Swedish affiliate production in a country and

increases in production are positively associated with increases in Swedish

exports to the country.

     The results for the U.S. are more mixed. At the most disaggregated industry

level there is a predominance of positive relationships between affiliate net

sales and U.S. exports, but there are a few negative coefficients implying some

substitution of affiliate production for exports from the U.S. Data for broad

industry groups give some indication that part of the positive influence of

affiliate production on exports from the U.S. is the effect of affiliate produc-

tion for export from the host country. Minority—owned affiliates of U.S. firms

were somewhat more likely to be a means of buying market shares for the U.S. and

denying them to others than were majority—owned affiliates.
                                     - 29   -




                              List   of References


Bergsten, C. Fred, Thomas Horst, and Theodore H. Moran. 1978. American
     Multinationals and American Interests. Washington, D.C.: The Brook-ings
     Institution.

Blomström, Magnus and Robert E. Lipsey. 1986. "The Export Performance of
     Swedish and U.S. Multinationals." NBER Working Paper No. 2081.
     November.

Chenery, Hollis B. 1960, "Patterns of Industrial Growth," American
     Economic Review (September)

Kravis, Irving B. and Robert E. Lipsey. 1982. "The Location of Overseas
     Production and Production for Export by U.S. Multinational Firms."
                                         12,    pp. 201-223.
                                        1984. "The Diffusion of Economic
    Growth in the World Economy," in John W. Kendrick, ed., International
    risonsofProductivjtand Causes of the Slowdown. Cambridge, MA:
    Ballinger for the American Enterprise Institute.

Learner, Edward E. and Robert M. Stern. 1970. qyantitative International
    Economics. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Linneman, Hans. 1966. p ometricStuof Trade_Flows. Amsterdam:
    North-Holland Publishing Company.

Lipsey, Robert E. and Merle Yahr Weiss. 1981. "Foreign Production and
     Exports in Manufacturing Industries." Review of Economics and Statistics,
     Vol. LXIII, No. 4, November, pp. 488-494.

      _________— and    ____ ______ . 1984. "Foreign Production and Exports
     of Individual Firms." Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 66, No. 2,
     May, pp. 304—308.

Swedenborg, Birgitta. 1979. It    1in
     Stockholm: Industriens Utredningsinstitut.
                                                   pofsh_Firms.
____________          1982. Svensk Industri i Utlandet. Stockholm:
     Industriens Utredningsinstitut.

United Nations and Commission of the   European Communities. 1986. World
     Comparisons of Purchasing Power   and Real Product for 1980. Phase IV
     of the International Comparison   Project; Part One: Summary Results
     for 60 Countries. New York, NY:   United Nations and Eurostat.

U.S. Department of Commerce. 1973. jal_Sury2f_U.S. Multinational
     Companies, 1970. Bureau of Economic Analysis.

_____________     _________ 1985. U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: 1982
     Benchmark Survey Data, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                      - 30   -




Data

       The U.S. affiliate production data are from the individual firm reports

underlying U.S. Department of Commerce (1985), a presumably quite complete

census of U.S. direct investment abroad in 1982. Since these reports are con-

fidential, the calculations described here were carried out for us within the

Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U.S. Department of Commerce.

       The Swedish data for production of individual foreign affiliates come

from the Industriens Utredningsinstitut (IUI) of Stockholm. The IUI has

completed four surveys of Swedish multinationals foreign investment abroad

covering 1965, 1970, 1974, and 1978. These surveys cover virtually all Swedish

firms investing abroad and are in general comparable to the BEA surveys (see

Swedenborg, 1979 and 1982).

       Exports by the U.S. and all market economies to different countries, by

the industry classifications used in the U.S. direct investment survey, were

taken from United Nations trade tapes and converted from the SITC to this

industry classification. Swedish exports by industry are from Statistiska
            S
Centralbyran    (Utdrag ur Makrobasen).
                                              - 31   —



                                      Appendix Table S—i
  OLS Regression Results for the Determinants of Swedish Manufactured Exports, 1978

                                       7 Industry Groups



                                      Coeffi cients of
                                                            Dummy for
                                                             being a
                                                GOP per      nordic         Net
Industry                                        capita      country       Sales
(No. Obs.)                           GOP                                              -2
                       Intercept                (GOPC)      (NOROIC)       (NS)       R



Paper Products              997       —.02        1.72          225         .229      .81
(66)                       (.16)     (1.82)      (1.28)         (11.3)    (4.98)

Chemicals             —30,912         -.03       14.89        1,032         .836      .78
(66)                      (1.03)      (.41)      (2.30)         (10.7)    (4.05)

Metal Mfg.            —21,199         —.01           9.86      459          .379      .75
(66)                      (1.26)      (.27)      (2.62)          (8.5)    (4.43)

Non—Elect. Mach.      —15,989          .23       17.62         849          .359      .92
(66)                       (.68)     (4.22)      (3.40)        (11.5)    (12.9)

Elect. Mach.          —16,629          .00       20.54         500          .086      .72
(66)                       (.91)      (.11)      (5.29)          (8.6)    (1.40)

Transp. Equip.        —43,300          .69       20.08       1,010         .312       .73
(66)                       (.97)     (7.60)      (2.06)          (7.1)   (3.49)

Other Mfg.            -44,522          .04       24.77         764        1.137       .68
(66)                      (1.07)      (.43)      (2.79)          (5.9)   (6.64)


GOP          = Real GOP in 1978 in millions of international dollars, derived from data

               for 1980 in United Nations and Commission of the European Communities

               (1986) and extrapolated to 1982 and to countries not covered in the survey

               by methods described in Kravis and Lipsey (1984).

GOPC         = Real GOP per capita in 1978 international dollars

NORDIC:       Coefficient -in millions of Kroner

Net Sales =   Affiliate   net sales, derived as total affiliate sales minus imports

              from Sweden (thousand Kroner)

Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics
                                          — 32 —


                                 Appendix Table S-2
  2SLS Regression Results for the Determinants of Swedish Manufactured Exports, 1978

                                   7 Industry Groups


                                                   Coeffi cients of
                                                                       Dummy
                                                           Dummy for    for
                                                            being a     EEC
                                             GOP per        Nordic     member-    Net
Industry                                      capita       country      ship     sales
                                                                                          -2
(No. Obs.)          Intercept     GOP         (GDPC)       (NORDIC)    (EEC)     (NS)     R



                                             First Stage

Paper Products       -16,422       .13         3.68         119        138        -—     .56
(66)                   (1.11)    (4.55)       (1.10)         (2.57)     (4.50)

Chemicals             -4,767       .18         3.96          93        106        -—     .49
(66)                    (.27)    (5.22)       (1.01)         (1.71)     (2.93)

                      -4,723       .22         2.80         140        309        -—     .76
Metal Mfg.
(66)                    (.28)    (6.48)        (.74)         (2.68)     (8.93)

Non—Elect. Mach.                   .97        12.01        —120     1,201         -—     .68
                     —72,056
(66)                    (.91)    (6.10)        (.67)          (.48)    (7.29)

Elect. Mach.          19,358       .19         6.26         32         115        -—     .17
(66)                    (.51)    (2.56)        (.73)          (.27)     (1.46)

                      -6,631      -.10        15.21        -254        384        -—     .16
Transp. Equip.
(66)                    (.11)     (.84)       (1.12)         (1.35)     (3.08)

                                   .08         2.97          —5        225        -—     .26
Other Mfg.           -14,096
(66)                    (.51)    (1.36)        (.47)          (.06)     (3.91)



                                     (continued)
                                             — 33 —



                                Appendix Table 5-2 (concluded)


                                                        Coefficients of

                                                                          Dummy
                                                           Dummy for       for
                                                            being a        EEC
                                               GDP per      Nordic        member-    Net
Industry                                        capita     country         ship     Sales
(No. Obs.)          Intercept         GOP       (GOPC)     (NORDIC)        (EEC)     (NS)    R-2


                                                Second Stage

Paper Products        6,172          - .05       -.26         201           --       .435    .75
(66)                   (.82)        (2.61)       (.14)         (7.9)                (4.09)

Chemicals              -122          -.51       -7.98         783           --      3.511    .50
(66)                   (.00)        (2.17)       (.51)         (3.7)                (3.09)

                                     —.04        7.90         443           —-       .500    .75
Metal Mfg.          —18,247
(66)                  (1.06)         (.85)      (1.97)         (7.9)                (4.34)

Non-Elect. Mach,    -14,603           .22       17.02         850           --       .368    .91
(66)                   (.61)        (3.60)      (3.08)        (11.5)                (9.05)

Elect. Mach.                         —.08       15.73         487           —-       .516    .60
                    -21,828
(66)                   (.87)         (.78)      (2.19)         (6.2)                (1.15)

                                      .76         .75                       —-       .921    .60
Transp. Equip.      —24,446                                 1,165
(66)                   (.41)        (6.06)       (.05)         (5.7)                (2.85)

Other Mfg.           —6,108          —.06        7.60         772           --      2.490    .50
(66)                   (.10)         (.47)       (.54)         (4.2)                (4.58)




For definitions, see notes to Appendix Table S—i
                                            — 34 —

                                   Appendix Table S-3
       OLS Regression Results Separating Net Sales (NS) and Net Local Sales (NLS)

                 in Equations Explaining Swedish Manufactured Exports, 1978



                                                    Coef ficients of
                                                           Dummy for
                                                            being a              Net
                                                GDP per     Nordic      Net     local
Industry                                        capita      country    Sales    sales
                                                                                          -2
(No. Obs.)             Intercept     GOP        (GDPC)     (NORDIC)     (NS)    (NLS)     R



Paper Products         -25,102      —.03         5.83       217         .217      -—     .74
(19)                       (.56)   (1.16)a       (.87)       (5.20)    (2.11)

Chemicals              -92,998      —.07        27.62       984         .809      --     .74
(30)                      (1.10)    (.61)       (1.91)       (6.52)    (2.29)

Metal Mfg.            —112,624      —.03        25.15       424         .330      -—     .60
(19)                      (1.01)    (.35)       (1.52)       (3.68)    (1.59)

Non—Elect. Mach.       -64,951       .21        29.79       794         .336      -—     .85
(21)                       (.57)   (2.00)       (1.82)       (5.49)    (5.87)

Elect. Mach.           -14,801       .01        19.98       504         .083      --     .80
(24)                       (.27)    (.24)       (2.39)       (7.54)    (1.11)




Paper Products         -20,370     —.05          5.15       209          --      .351    .76
(19)                       (.50)   (1.79)        (.85)       (5.43)             (2.79)

Chemicals              —98,567     —.09         29.42       995          --      .870    .73
(30)                      (1.16)    (.73)       (2.06)       (6.64)             (2.32)

Metal Mfg.            -109,646       .02        30.34       400          --      .268    .52
(19)                       (.93)    (.22)       (1.77)       (3.18)              (.80)

Non-Elect. Mach.       -56,852       .09        33.00       787          --      .508    .86
                                                                        ——
(21)                      (.52)     (.83)       (2.15)       (5.74)             (6.32)

Elect. Mach.           -15,333       .01        20.19       505          -—      .085    .79
(24)                      (.28)     (.25)       (2.42)       (7.55)             (1.12)



Net local sales in thousands of Kroner
                                       — 35 —


                                  Appendix Table S-4
               OLS Regression Results for the Determinants of Changes in

                       Swedish Manufactured Exports, 1970-1978

                                   7 Industry Groups



                                            Coefficients of
                                  Change    Exports   Change in    Net
Industry                          in GDP     1970     Net Sales   Sales
(No. Obs.)                                                                   2
                     Intercept    (GDP)     (EXP7O)     (iNNS)    (NS7O)    R


Paper Products          -.53        -.04        2.44      .058      -—     .83
(66)                     (.02)      (.98)   (14.1)       (1.62)

Chemicals             -1,280        -.10        2.68      .179      —-     .93
(66)                    (.14)       (.88)       (25.1)   (1.60)

Metal Mfg.               469         .05        2.27     -.158      -—     .94
(66)                    (.11)       (.85)       (25.3)   (3.19)

Non—Elect. Mach.      -7,683         .36        1.54      .062      --     .93
(66)                    (.73)      (2.96)   (14.6)       (1.81)

Elect. Mach.          24,239        -.02        2.03     -.132      --     .46
(66)                   (1.64)       (.12)    (7.5)       (1.46)

Transp. Equip.        15,199        1.14       .84        .276      —-     .61
(66)                    (.60)      (4.0)     (6.2)       (3.64)

Other Mfg.            16,233        —.21      1.68        .444      --     .89
(66)                   (1.40)      (1.64)    (17.3)      (4.65)


                                     (continued)
                                        - 36   -


                              Appendix Table S-4 (concluded)


                                               Coeffients of
                                                           Changes
                                    Changes      Exports     in        Net
Industry                            in GDP        1970    Net Sales   Sales
                                                                                -2
(No. abs.)         Intercept         (AGOP)        (EXP7O)   CANS)    (NS7O)    R


                     -849              -.01         2.49       -—       .201    .83
Paper Products
(66)                  (.28)            (.33)        (15.2)             (1.36)

Chemicals                              -.08         2.67       -—       .448    .93
                   -3,334
(66)                  (.38)            (.83)        (26.7)             (2.34)

                                                               ——
Metal Mfg.             214             -.01         2.27               —.271    .93
(66)                  (.05)            (.18)        (22.5)             (2.60)

Non-Elect. Mach.   -6,759               .31         1.56       -—       .122    .93
(66)                  (.65)           (2.45)        (17.5)             (2.27)

Elect. Mach.                           -.15         1.78       -—       .282    .47
                   21,589
(66)                 (1.44)            (.94)         (6.2)             (1.04)

                                       1.08           .87      -—      1.899    .57
Transp. Equip.     18,450
(66)                  (.70)           (3.59)         (6.1)             (2.71)

                                                               ——       .836    .86
Other Mfg.         11,328              —.12         1.71
(66)                  (.88)            (.88)        (14.3)             (2.44)




For definitions of variables, see text
                                      — 37 —


                              Appendix Table US-I

      Equations for U.S. Exports to a Country as a Function of

      Country Characteristics and of Net Sales in that Country

                by Majority-Owned U.S. Affiliates, 1982

                      OLS Regressions, 28 Industries



                                Coefficients of
md.                                 GOP per          Net          No. of
No.   Intercept         GDP         Capita          Sales    R2    Obs.
                                     (GDPC)          (NS)


 1     —3,586           .09           4.5             .01   .24     48
         (0.3)        (1.9)           (2.1)         (0.6)
 2       -498           .02             .26         -.0     .56     47
         (0.6)        (4.4)           (1.9)        (0.0)
 3        720           .03            1.8          —.04    .05     44
         (0.1)        (1.2)           (1.6)        (1.4)
 4    -21,024          1.4            3.8           -.24    .77    48
         (0.6)       (11.7)           (0.6)        (4.3)
 5     —3,176           .15           4.6            .15    .64    48
         (0.4)        (5.2)           (3.0)        (2.3)
 6                                    NA

 7                                    NA

 8      2,583          -.04             .80         -.01    .20    48
         (0.6)        (2.8)           (1.1)        (0.6)
 9      1,809           .03             .48          .31    .80    48
         (0.5)        (2.4)           (0.8)       (10.3)
10    -12,142           .44           1.6           -.08    .86    48
         (1.8)       (13.9)          (1.4)         (4.7)
11     -1,317           .03           1.0            .01    .47    48
         (0.6)        (2.3)          (2.6)         (0.9)
12     15,796           .08          —1.2            .26    .60    47
         (4.0)        (5.7)          (1.7)         (4.2)
13     12,058         1.5              .72           .02    .83    48
         (0.4)       (13.0)          (0.1)         (0.5)
14      1,296           .33           1.6           -.04    .83    48
         (0.2)       (12.3)          (1.3)         (1.1)
15        291           .04           1.4            .02    .60    48
         (0.1)        (4.4)          (3.4)         (1.6)
16     -1,802           .03           1.2            .06    .60    48
         (0.7)        (3.1)          (2.6)         (2.4)
                            — 38 —


                  Appendix Table US-i (continued)


                           Coefficients of
md.                            GDP per        Net          No. of
                                                     -2
                                                     R     Obs.
No.   Intercept      GOP       Capita        Sales
                               (GOPC)         (NS)



17                               NA

18    —26,747        .54         3.5         —.31    .85     48
          (2.7)   (14.0)        (2.0)        (3.2)
19      2,038        .18         7.7           .02   .21     48
          (0.1)    (1.9)        (1.7)        (0.4)
20                               NA


21      22,299       .07         6.5           .07   .14     48
          (1.0)    (0.8)        (1.6)        (0.1)
22     -19,834       .12        16.8           .28   .83     48
          (0.6)    (0.7)        (3.0)        (7.5)
23       6,151       .73        21.6           .18   .54     48
          (0.1)    (3.8)        (2.4)        (1.7)
24      -4,143      -.01         2.5           .03   .13     48
          (0.7)    (0.4)        (2.5)        (0.5)
25       2,524       .26         2.4          -.05   .56     48
          (0.2)    (6.5)        (1.2)        (0.4)
26      22,660       .05         2.0           .70   .61     48
          (0.9)    (0.5)        (0.4)        (6.3)
27     -19,825       .61        13.4           .03   .61     48
          (0.7)    (5.8)        (2.8)        (0.2)
28     -19,400       .03        19.4           .01   .14     48
          (0.5)    (0.2)        (2.6)        (0.7)
29                               NA

30     -45,886      1.26         -.67        —3.75   .74     48
          (1.5)   (11.2)        (0.1)        (5.6)
31                               NA

32      -1,907       .03         1.5          -.01   .37     48
          (0.6)    (3.0)        (2.8)        (0.4)
33     -44,303       .84        12.2           .16   .94     48
          (2.8)   (14.6)        (4.4)        (7.7)
34     -15,518       .12         6.0           .49   .54     48
          (1.1)    (2.1)        (2.5)        (2.5)
                                    — 39 —

                         Notes to Appendix Table US—I.


Canada is excluded from the equations

GOP = Real GOP in 1982 in millions of international dollars (see notes to
      Appendix Table S—i).

GOPC = Real GOP per capita in 1982.

Net Sales =  Affiliatenet sales, derived as total affiliate sales minus
      imports from the U.S.

Numbers in parentheses are t—statistics.

The 34 industries are the following:

1. Grain Mill and Bakery Products
2. Beverages
3. Tobacco
4. Other Food Products
5. Textiles and Apparel
6. Leather and Leatherware
7. Pulp and Paper
8. Paper Products
9. Printing and Publishing
10. Drugs
11. Soap, Cleansers, Toilet Goods
12. Agricultural Chemicals
13. Industrial Chemicals
14. Other Chemicals
15. Rubber Products
16. Plastic Products
17. Primary Metals, Ferrous
18. Primary Metals, Nonferrous
19. Fabricated Metals
20. Farm and Garden Machinery
21. Construction and Related Machinery
22. Office and Computing Machinery
23. Other Non Electrical Machinery
24. Household Appliances
25. Radio, TV and Communication Equipment
26. Electronic Components
27. Other Electrical Machinery
28. Motor Vehicles and Equipment
29. Other Transport Equipment
30. Lumber, Wood, Furniture, and Fixtures
31. Glass Products
32. Stone, Clay, Cement, Concrete
33. Instruments and Related Products
34. Other Industries
                                              — 40 —

                                        Appendix Table US-2

      Equations for U.S. Exports to a Country as a Function of Country Characteristics

        and of Production in that Country by Majority-Owned U.S. Affiliates, 1982

                                 OLS Equations, Six Industry Groups

                                                               Net        Net
md.                                 GDP per        Net        Local     Export      -2
                                                                                         No. of
Group      Intercept      GOP       Capita        Sales       Sales      Sales      R      Obs.
                                     (GOPC)        (NS)       (NLS)      (NXS)

  A          —54.6       1.80         5.98       —135.4                            .87      23
              (0.89)   (11.16)       (0.52)         (4.26)
  B           17.7       2.53        11.85        —60.90                           .87      27
              (0.21)   (11.22)       (0.83)         (1.96)
  C            7.9        .80        2.03          -6.99                           .78      20
              (0.15)    (7.10)       (0.26)         (0.17)
  D           66.8        .59       48.14         222.1                            .64      26
              (0.36)    (0.46)       (1.88)        (1.80)
  E          156.2       1.14       —9.50         155.6                            .59      24
              (1.31)    (3.80)       (0.48)        (1.56)
  F          -81.1        .88       51.24           5.92                           .52      24
              (0.67)    (2.82)       (2.83)        (0.22)

  B           21.9        2.88      17.92                    —202.2                .92      17
              (0.20)   (11.0)        (0.88)                    (3.82)
  0           20.0        .92       55.52                     334.3                .63      24
              (0.10)    (0.52)       (2.09)                    (1.13)
  E          103.0        1.07       6.99                     185.8                .61      18
              (0.76)     (3.09)      (0.30)                    (1.10)
  F         -72.0          .92      48.35                      19.15               .53      22
              (0.56)     (2.88)      (2.54)                    (0.40)

  B         110.2        3.11      —10.84                    —255.3      125.3     .92      17
              (0.94)   (10.80)       (0.41)                    (4.26)     (1.56)
  0          48.1        1.22       45.46                      50.1      312.7     .62      24
              (0.24)     (0.68)     (1.57)                     (0.12)     (0.90)
  E          44.9         1.32       4.64                    —303.3      914.6     .73      18
             (0.39)      (4.34)     (0.24)                     (1.32)     (2.73)
  F         -75.0          .93      48.64                      37.0      —27.6     .51      22
              (0.57)     (2.83)     (2.49)                     (0.50)     (0.32)


Industry Groups defined in terms of the industries of Appendix Table US—i are:

A. Foods and Kindred Products (Nos. 1-4)

B. Chemicals and Allied Products (Nos. 10-14)

C. Metals (Nos. 17-19)

0. Non—electrical machinery (Nos. 20—23)

E. Electrical Machinery (Nos. 24-27)

F. Transport Equipment (Nos. 28 & 29)
                                                — 41 —

                                            Appendix Table US-3
       Equatic- for       Exports to   a Louritly as a t-unction ot Country Characteristics

         and of Production in that Country by both Majority-Owned and Minority-Owned

                                       U.S. Affiliates, 1982

                                  OLS Equations, Six Industry Groups


                                                Coefficients of
                                                                                Minority—
                                   GOP                     Net        Net        Owned
 Industry                          per          Net       Local      Export     Aff 1 1 iate         No. of
  Group      Intercept    GOP     Capita       Sales      Sales      Sales      Net Sales       -2
                                                                                                R      Obs.
                                   (GDPC)      (NS)        (NLS)       (NXS)     (MONS)


   A          -58.6        1.75    8.05       -133.6                                25.4       .86     22
               (0.91)    (6.85)   (0.64)        (3.54)                              (0.20)
   B          100.0       1.02     3.04         15.5                              417.0                27
               (1.88)    (3.82)   (0.35)        (0.70)                              (6.55)
   C          -34.8         .75    5.17          2.7                               66.4        .81     18
               (0.63)    (5.37)   (0.65)        (0.07)                              (0.66)
   0          277.3       -.44     2.28        289.2                              546.9        .85     24
               (2.41)    (0.54)   (0.13)        (3.03)                              (1.37)
   E          149.0        .85    -7.03        142.3                              320.2        .61     24
               (1.28)    (2.38)   (0.36)        (1.45)                             (1.40)
   F           34.9        .36    18.53         50.0                               43.8                19
               (0.61)    (1.26)   (2.31)        (3.00)                             (1.92)
   B           18.7       1.42    26.20                   —74.9                   335.9        .96     17
               (0.26)    (3.79)   (1.94)                   (1.66)                  (4.40)
   0          224.0       —.33    13.06                   424.7                   769.5        .82     22
               (1.65)    (0.27)   (0.68)                   (1.81)                  (1.70)
   E           90.0        .85     9.65                   142.0                   289.6        .62     18
               (0.67)    (2.16)   (0.42)                   (0.83)                  (1.16)
   F           18.3        .73    16.17                    65.0                    18.1        .92     17
               (0.40)    (3.23)   (2.46)                   (3.04)                  (1.02)
   B          108.3       1.64    -2.93                  -124.0       127.1      337.1         .98     17
               (1.68)    (5.32)   (0.20)                   (3.11)      (2.90)      (5.54)
   0          268.3        .06    -3.40                    85.2       440.7      586.7         .85     22
               (2.11)    (0.05)   (0.17)                   (0.31)      (2.03)      (1.34)
   E           -6.3        .95     9.25                  —595.4     1,289.0      606.3         .85     18
               (0.07)    (3.88)   (0.64)                   (3.19)      (4.81)      (3.59)
   F           23.1        .67    16.03                    59.2        15.5       22.6         .92     17
               (0.48)    (2.59)   (2.37)                   (2.42)      (0.55)      (1.13)



For notes, see Appendix Table US-2
                                      — 42 —


                                   Appendix Table US-4
      Equations for Exports to a Country by Countries other than the U.S.

 as a Function of Country Characteristics and of Net Sales in that Country

                     by Majority-Owned U.S. Affiliates, 1982

                           OLS Equations, 34 Industries



                                      Coefficients of
md.                                       GDP per         Net           No. of
                                                                   -2
No.         Intercept        GDP          Capita         Sales     R     Obs.
                                          (GDPC)           (NS)



 1           —1,501          .08           13.64           .12    .48     48
                (.1)        (.9)           (3.3)         (3.4)
 2          -67,692          .35           19.21           .56    .65    47
               (2.0)       (2.3)           (3.3)         (3.0)
 3          -12,361          .16            5.84           .05    .27    44
                (.6)       (2.4)           (1.7)          (.5)
 4        —524,864          6.11          127.38          1.57    .77    48
               (1.9)       (7.0)           (2.6)         (3.5)
 5        -595,386          4.40          188.19         7.20     .62    48
               (1.8)       (4.1)           (3.2)         (2.9)
 6                                          NA

 7                                          NA

 8          —35,804           .08          15.80           .25    .48    48
               (1.7)       (1.0)           (4.4)         (2.3)
 9          -32,392          .10           19.49           .79    .57    48
               (1.3)       (1.1)           (4.3)         (3.5)
10          -28,181          .50          22.67            .15    .81    48
               (1.2)       (4.7)           (5.7)         (2.6)
11          -28,862         —.08           15.03           .22    .73    48
               (2.2)       (1.2)           (6.5)        (5.2)
12          —4,176           .36           10.22          .60     .32    47
                (.1)       (3.0)           (1.7)        (1.1)
13        —204,377          4.22          115.87         1.05     .66    48
                (18)       (4.7)           (2.5)        (3.4)
14          —42,332          .51          26.06           .62     .77    48
               (1.3)       (4.4)           (4.7)        (4.2)
15          -78,931          .30          30.73           .33     .55    48
               (2.1)       (2.2)           (4.7)        (2.1)
16         -33,130          —.12          15.26          1.79     .84    48
               (1.9)       (1.7)           (4.8)        (9.9)
17                                         NA

18        -189,789         2.65           52.63          4.31     .86    48
               (2.2)       (8.0)           (3.4)        (5.1)
19         —94,157           .01          84.50           .75     .69    48
               (1.1)        (.03)          (5.8)        (4.6)
                                    — 43 —


                         Appendix Table US-4 (concluded)



                                  Coefficients of
 md.
 No.                                                                   No. of
            mntercept       GOP       Capita         Sales     -2
                                                               R       Obs.
                                      (GDPC)         (NS)


 20
                                        NA

 21         20,148          .08       3175            .44     .51       48
               (.4)        (.5)       (3.9)         (3.3)
 22          -4,195       —.78        31.14           .58     .89       48
                (.1)      (4.2)       (4.7)
 23                                             (13.12)
             23,828       1.22       122.35        1.69       .72       48
                (.2)     (2.1)        (4.5)       (5.0)
 24         —46,371        .07        24.80        2.00      .72        48
               (1.6)      (.7)        (5.0)      (6.2)
 25        -106,328       1.06        64.86         .93      .45        48
               (1.0)     (3.0)        (3.6)        (.9)
 26         -36,407        .08        18.52        1.27      .80        48
               (1.1)      (.6)        (3.2)      (9.0)
27         —103,211        .92        79.26        1.25      .63        48
               (1.1)     (2.8)        (5.0)      (2.5)
28         -334,881       1.72       237.42         .41      .56        48
               (1.0)     (1.4)        (4.1)      (3.6)
29                                     NA

30        -286,367        3.29        69.63          .61     .85        48
               (3.5)    (10.9)        (4.9)         (.3)
31                                    NA

32         -42,197       —.02        33.65          2.20     .56       48
               (.8)       (.1)       (3.8)       (4.1)
33        —100,277         .84       64.71        .75        .77       48
              (1.2)     (2.8)        (4.4)      (6.7)
34        -182,887        .02        88.65          6.03     .56       48
              (1.5)     (0.0)        (4.2)      (3.4)



For definitions and industry list, see notes to Appendix Table US-I.

Numbers in parentheses are t-statjstjcs. -
                                                   - 44    —



                                               Appendix Table US-5
      Equations for Exports by Countries Other than the U.S. to a Country as a Function of

                Country Characteristics and of Production in that Country by both

                        Majority-Owned and Minority-Owned U.S. Affiliates, 1982

                                    OLS Equations, Six Industry Groups



                                                  Coefficients of

                                                  Majority-Owned Affiliate              Minority-
                                     GDP                    Net       Net                Owned
Industry                              per          Net     Local     Export             Affiliate         No. of
                                                                                                    -2
 Group       Intercept     GOP       Capita       Sales    Sales     Sales              Net Sales   R       Obs.
                                     (GOPC)        (NS)        (NLS)        (NXS)         (MONS)


  A           —1,289       8.96      353.7         584.8                                 -2,194     .80      22
               (2.14)      (3.76)     (3.0)        (1.66)                                 (1.85)
  B           —1,055       11.75     511.5        254.6                                  —2,446     .87      27
               (2.41)      (5.33)     (2.80)       (3.54)                                 (4.65)
  C          —810.4         5.20     323.3       2,278.8                                 —2,252     .81      18
               (1.07)      (2.70)     (2.98)       (4.14)                                 (1.63)
  0            52.4         2.68     181.4         592.6                                  1,152     .88      24
              (0.14)       (1.06)     (3.33)        (1.97)                                (0.92)
  E          —255.1         —.08     151.7       2,042.7                                   -158     .80      24
              (0.70)       (0.07)     (2.52)        (6.72)                                (0.22)
  F          -547.7         7.59     215.7         511.8                                   -641     .85      19
              (0.92)       (2.51)     (2.57)        (2.94)                                (2.69)

  B           —2,034       11.27     615.4                        170.9                  —2,627     .89      17
               (3.27)      (3.45)     (5.22)                       (0.43)                 (3.95)
  0          -201.3        5.93      211.6                        148.8                   2,282     .86      22
               (0.48)      (1.58)     (3.50)                       (0.20)                 (1.61)
  E          —208.5         -.57     215.1                      3,160.4                    -843     .78      18
               (0.44)      (0.41)     (2.62)                       (5.20)                 (0.95)
  F          —398.0        13.13     139.2                         591.4                 —1,030     .99      17
               (2.59)     (17.1)      (6.26)                       (8.16)                (17.19)

  B        —1,230.5        13.26     353.8                        —270.2 1,140.9         —2,616     .93      17
               (2.22)      (5.02)     (2.81)                       (0.79)      (3.04)     (5.03)
  0            35.0        7.97      123.6                     —1,665.3 2,355.2           1,304     .94     22
               (0.12)      (3.11)     (2.77)                       (2.67)      (4.76)     (1.34)
  E          —463.1         —.29     214.0                       1,211.2 3,407.5           -.6      .89     18
               (1.14)      (0.25)     (3.13)                       (1.37)      (2.69)     (0.01)
  F          —393.2        13.07     139.1                         585.7        15.4      —1,025    .99     17
               (2.41)     (14.75)     (6.01)                       (7.00)      (0.16)     (15.0)


For notes, see Appendix Table US-2.
