NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO AMERICANS WANT TO TAX CAPITAL? EVIDENCE FROM ONLINE SURVEYS
Raymond Fisman
Keith Gladstone
Ilyana Kuziemko
Suresh Naidu
Working Paper 23907
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23907

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

We thank Wojciech Kopczuk, Christopher Roth, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, Stefanie
Stantcheva, Matt Weinzierl, Divya Singh, Jon Zytnick, and participants at the American
Economic Association 2016 meetings (and in particular discussant Charlotte Cavaillé) and the
Journées Louis-André Gérard-Varet conference for helpful comments and conversations. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Raymond Fisman, Keith Gladstone, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Americans Want to Tax Capital? Evidence from Online Surveys
Raymond Fisman, Keith Gladstone, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu
NBER Working Paper No. 23907
October 2017
JEL No. D6,D7,E22,H21
ABSTRACT
A vast theoretical literature in public finance has studied the question of the desirability of capital
taxation. Distinct from questions of the optimality of taxing wealth is whether it is politically
feasible. We provide, to our knowledge, the first investigation of individuals' preferences over
jointly taxing income and wealth, via a survey on Amazon's Mechanical Turk. We provide
subjects with a set of hypothetical individuals' incomes and wealth and elicit subjects' preferred
(absolute) tax bill for these individuals. Our method allows us to unobtrusively map both income
earned and accumulated wealth into desired tax levels. Our regression results yield roughly linear
desired tax rates on income of about 14 percent. Respondents' suggested tax rates indicate
positive desired wealth taxation. When we distinguish between sources of wealth we find that, in
line with recent theoretical arguments, subjects' implied tax rate on wealth is three percent when
the source of wealth is inheritance, far higher than the 0.8 percent rate when wealth is from
savings. We show these tax rates are consistent with reasonable parameterizations of recent
theoretical optimal wealth tax formulae.
Raymond Fisman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road, 304A
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu

Ilyana Kuziemko
Department of Economics
Princeton University
322 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
kuziemko@princeton.edu

Keith Gladstone
Department of Economics
Princeton, NJ 08544
keithag@princeton.edu

Suresh Naidu
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sn2430@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

The question of how to treat capital in an optimal taxation framework is of first-order importance to both theory and policy. Earlier contributions to optimal tax theory, in particular
Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976), Judd (1985), and Chamley (1986), argue that tax on capital
should be zero, albeit for distinct reasons. More recently, these classic results in optimal
taxation have been challenged by, among others, Piketty and Saez (2013), Diamond and
Saez (2011), Kopczuk (2013a), Farhi and Werning (2010), Straub and Werning (2014), and
Piketty (2014).1
These questions of optimality of tax policy are distinct from questions of political feasibility, i.e., whether the political economy of tax setting would allow for wealth taxation.
Putting aside legal impediments and the practical challenges of implementation, there is
the separate issue of whether a wealth tax is even desired by the electorate. And if it is,
what are the wealth tax parameters that a responsive legislator would aim to translate into
policy? This question is taking on practical significance given recent discussion of wealth
taxation among policy-makers: for example, many prominent Democratic Party politicians
are endorsing a policy providing “Medicare for All”, and proposals to finance this include
an increase in the estate tax and, more novel, a new wealth tax beginning at $21 million in
net worth.2
We provide, to our knowledge, the first investigation into individuals’ preferences toward
jointly taxing wealth and income, via a survey on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk). Each
subject in our study was confronted with scenarios describing an individual’s income and
wealth. For each scenario, the subject then provided the level of taxation he thought was
appropriate for the individual to pay. By asking for absolute levels of taxation in response
to a hypothetical individual’s (multi-dimensional, in our case two-dimensional) financial
situation, we believe our approach is less likely to lead subjects to use misplaced heuristics
(for example, to choose current levels or to confuse marginal and average rates). We also
argue that, by asking for desired absolute tax levels rather than rates on income and wealth
per se, our methodology is unobtrusive—the implied T (income, wealth) function, which we
trace out from individual responses, may be a complicated nonlinear function that would be
much more costly to elicit, for example, by asking for separate tax rates on a large set of
1 In

assessing the gaps between theory and practice in tax policy Mankiw et al. (2009) find that
the gap between the optimal policy of 0 and actual tax policy is farthest for capital taxes, suggesting that either the normative theory is underdeveloped or political/administrative constraints are
particularly binding.
2 See
https://www.sanders.senate.gov/download/options-to-finance-medicare-forall?inline=file.

1

income and wealth brackets (at the same time). However, we recognize that our approach is
not without problems: as McCaffery and Baron (2006) show, desired income tax rates differ
when elicited in absolute versus percentage terms—for large values of a tax base, subjects
tend to choose higher taxes when asked to give a percentage as opposed to an absolute tax
bill. As such, our methodology is less likely to exhibit progressive tax schedules than the
more traditional method of asking subjects to give preferred rates. We return to discuss this
limitation later in the paper.
Our empirical findings are as follows: First, subjects’ tax recommendations over income
versus wealth are, roughly speaking, “sensible.” Respondents seem to intuitively understand
the difference between a stock and a flow and choose implied wealth tax rates that are
typically an order of magnitude smaller than those on income. Second, their chosen tax bills
imply a linear tax rate on income of approximately 13-15 percent, in line with past work,
another sign that our respondents appear roughly representative in their views and to have
taken the task seriously.
Third, and of greater interest, subjects’ choices imply positive rates of wealth taxation.
When we restrict the relationship of the tax bill and wealth to be linear, the implied average
tax rate on wealth is about 1.2 percent in our baseline estimate. In follow-up sessions, we
tell subjects the source of the hypothetical wealth. In one treatment they are told it is from
saving past income, while in another treatment they are told it is from a bequest from a
deceased relation. Preferred taxes on wealth from savings are 0.8 percent, versus 3.0 percent
on wealth from inheritance. For wealth from savings, the point estimates suggest a progressive
tax schedule, though we cannot reject linearity at conventional levels of significance. However,
as noted earlier our methodology makes it hard to pick up progressive tax preferences, so we
find the progressivity in the point estimates to be noteworthy, despite their imprecision.
We complement our analysis of subjects’ chosen tax rates with an examination of respondents’ open-ended explanations of how they made their decisions. In general, subjects do not
mention efficiency concerns (e.g., that higher taxes on wealth would reduce savings or induce
capital flight or that higher labor income taxes would discourage work). Simplicity of the
tax schedule (e.g., a flat tax) is attractive to many. Also, “double taxation” is often noted as
an objection to taxing wealth, with respondents saying it was “already taxed” at the time
it was earned. These considerations are quite removed from the trade-offs that economists
weigh in the classic optimal tax framework.
In the final part of the paper, we interpret our empirical estimates through the lens
of recent theoretical work on capital taxation. While empirical work on preferences for —
and consequences of — capital taxation is limited, the theoretical literature is vast. While
classical theories suggest zero capital taxation, recent models have found non-zero optimal
2

wealth taxes (see Kopczuk, 2013b for a survey).3 A recent paper by Saez and Stantcheva
(2016b) alters the utility function to include direct preferences over wealth, and yields closed
form expressions characterizing the optimal joint wealth and income tax formulae, which we
use to calibrate our results in the discussion below.4 The formulas are general enough to
incorporate some of the non-utilitarian normative ideas expressed by our subjects.
While wealth taxes have only recently re-entered the political discourse, they were more
commonly discussed in the nineteenth century. Indeed, prior to the 16th Amendment, in a
period of similarly high wealth inequality and wealth-income ratios, many U.S. state governments had “general property taxes” where real estate, financial assets, livestock, jewelry
and vehicles were all taxed at value. But feasibility issues arose then as well. Economists
of the late 19th century decried such taxes as inefficient, given the widespread evasion and
avoidance that occurred, and advocated instead for the income tax. With the income tax,
state governments gave up taxing personal property, and devolved real estate taxation to
the local level (Einhorn (2008)).
Recent policy and public interest in wealth taxation has been stimulated by Piketty
(2014), who proposes a one to two percent net global wealth tax on wealth above one million
euros.5 The theoretical basis for this recommendation partly derives from Piketty and Saez
(2013), who show positive optimal tax rates in a model with both received bequests and
stochastic savings rates. They calculate an optimal bequest tax that depends on the percentile
of the bequest distribution: the median bequest receiver would prefer an optimal bequest
tax of 50 percent.
Interestingly, we find that both the desired wealth tax rates as well as the differential
3 The

classic theoretical argument against capital taxation of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) follows
from the general logic of indirect versus direct taxation. If leisure is separable from consumption
and fully non-linear labor income taxes are available, there is no need to distort intertemporal
consumption (or any other type of consumption) at the optimum. The famous Judd (1985) and
Chamley (1986) result follows from the infinite horizon nature of the optimal growth model: any
permanent wedge between the rate of return on capital and the intertemporal rate of substitution
would distort consumption and saving every period, leading in the limit to either 0 or infinite
consumption in steady-state. Straub and Werning (2014) show that this result is due to a particular
assumption on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
4 Also using Mechanical Turk, Weinzierl (2014) shows that there is support for both “equal
sacrifice” as well as utilitarian normative principles among subjects.
5 “At what rate would [a global wealth tax] be levied? One might imagine a rate of 0 percent for
net assets below 1 million euros, 1 percent between 1 and 5 million, and 2 percent above 5 million.
Or one might prefer a much more steeply progressive tax on the largest fortunes (for example, a
rate of 5 or 10 percent on assets above 1 billion euros). There might also be advantages to having
a minimal rate on modest-to-average wealth (for example, 0.1 percent below 200,000 euros and 0.5
percent between 200,000 and 1 million)”, Piketty (2014), Chapter 15. Note that he envisions this
tax as replacing the property tax, which is a tax on gross property wealth.

3

treatment of saved versus inherited wealth line up closely with the proposed capital taxation
of Piketty (2014). Thus, while there may be objections to capital taxation on theoretical
grounds or owing to legal or logistical impediments (which we discuss in the conclusion), our
findings indicate that there appears to be support among the electorate for such policies.
We view our main contribution as two-fold. First, to the best of our knowledge we are
among the first to directly elicit preferences for wealth taxation from prospective voters.6
While there are no immediate payoff consequences for survey respondents, the sensible estimates we obtain on income taxation suggest that subjects exert effort in providing responses.
Following Weinzierl (2014) and Saez and Stantcheva (2016a), incorporating these tax schedules into recent optimal wealth tax formulas allows us to recover the implicit normative
weights our respondents have over wealth (rather than just income) holdings.
The credibility of our estimates on desired wealth taxation is bolstered by our novel
methodology, which we view as our second contribution. Since we elicit subjects’ preferred
tax rates through their (absolute) tax choices over a number of hypothetical income/wealth
pairs we avoid, for example, leading subjects to gravitate toward responses that reflect current
tax rules. Our methodology likely understates desired progressivity (at least relative to the
traditional method of eliciting preferred rates), so we suspect that our estimates for implied
wealth tax rates serve as lower bounds. With sufficient data, this methodology could be
extended across many tax-relevant characteristics (for example, consumption, real estate
holdings, and age) to elicit the full tax schedule preferred by respondents. The disadvantage,
as we have noted above, is that respondents are typically unaccustomed to thinking in terms
of absolute tax bills, and based on past work our methodology will tend to give lower and
less progressive rates than when choices are framed as percentages.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines our experimental
design. Section 3 describes our data collection procedures and provides summary statistics
on our resulting sample of subjects. Section 4 describes results from the baseline experiment,
in which we do not specify to subjects the source of the wealth values they are asked to
consider, and then Section 5 shares results from the surveys that compare responses for
wealth accumulated via saving past income versus wealth gained via a bequest. Section 6
uses our results, past estimates of relevant elasticities, and recent models of optimal capital
taxation to calculate the implied social welfare weights our subjects’ place on individuals
6 See,

for example, McCaffery and Baron (2006), Singhal (2008), and Kuziemko et al. (2015)
for attempts at quantifying income tax preferences. More commonly, researchers have explored
the determinants of redistributive preferences using responses to attitudinal questions on whether
there should be, for example, more or less equal incomes in society (see, for example, Alesina and
Ferrara (2005) and Ashok et al. (forthcoming) and citations therein). We discuss how our estimates
compare to these in Section 4.

4

with varying levels of wealth. Section 7 concludes and offers suggestions for future work.

2

Experimental Design

We developed our survey experiment with two main goals in mind. First, we wanted to be as
unobtrusive as possible, allowing subjects to consider both income and wealth levels when
choosing their desired tax but not asking them explicitly how much they wanted to tax
income versus wealth. We worried that asking for specific rates on income and wealth would
prime them, perhaps toward submitting the current tax rate on income or, more worrisome
in our context, presuming that there should be a non-zero rate on wealth. Second, we wanted
to gather the most information on individuals’ preferred tax schedule with minimal cost to
our subjects. Asking for absolute tax bills under varying levels of income and wealth allows
us to trace out the implied schedule of tax rates on both bases. We worried that the most
obvious alternative—asking subjects to explicitly set the rate and bracket structure—would
be tedious for our subjects and difficult to aggregate.

2.1

Experimental Procedures

We recruited and compensated our subjects through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (mTurk)
market place, but redirected them to surveys that we built with Qualtrics’ online survey
software. The experiments were conducted over several waves spread out from November
2014 through December 2015. The full set of dates, along with details on the differences in
survey design across waves, are included in Appendix Tables 1 and 2.
In each experiment, subjects were asked how much hypothetical individuals should pay
in taxes, based on their income and wealth levels. In the first two survey dates, subjects were
provided the following definitions:
Wealth is the total amount of assets an individual owns minus any debt. Examples
of assets include money in savings or retirement accounts, stocks, and the value
of real estate owned; examples of debt include remaining mortgages, credit card
balances, and student loans.
Income is the amount of money an individual earns in a year. Examples of income include salary from employment, interest on savings accounts, and stock
dividends.
Subjects were then asked to consider a hypothetical individual with a certain amount of
income and wealth. These values were randomized within and across subjects (so, subjects
5

do not all see the same sequence of wealth and income values). Specifically, subjects were
confronted with a sequence of ten questions that all had the following form (note that the
underlining appears in the original):
Consider a person who, at the end of 2014, had $X in wealth. His 2014 income was $Y.
How much should this person pay in taxes for the year?
Subjects were asked to type in the amount. The field into which they typed was formatted
so that only numeric values could be entered. If a subject typed more than three digits, a
comma automatically appeared, to help subjects see exactly the amount entered. The comma
was not pre-populated, so as to avoid priming subjects that they “should” enter a value of at
least a thousand. Subjects answer ten iterations of this question. Interested readers can take
the survey themselves at the following link: https://az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/preview/
SV_cOqUTFMhLulW3dP.
In the surveys we fielded in 2015, subjects were initially randomized into a “savings” and
“inheritance” treatment. For those who were randomized into the “inheritance” treatment,
questions took the form:
Consider a person who, at the end of 2014, had $X in wealth, accumulated mostly
from inheritance received from a deceased relative. His 2014 income was $Y. How
much should this person pay in taxes for the year?
For those who were randomized into the “savings” treatment, questions took the form:
Consider a person who, at the end of 2014, had $X in wealth, accumulated mostly
by saving his past earnings. His 2014 income was $Y. How much should this
person pay in taxes for the year?
Subjects answered seven iterations of each of these questions. We collect fewer iterations
for each question, because they then went on to answer seven iterations of whichever version
they did not initially encounter (i.e., the “reverse experiment,” savings questions for those
randomized to encounter the inheritance questions first, and vice versa). We selected the
wealth levels presented to subjects to be below the estate tax thresholds. In comparing
tax preferences on wealth from savings versus inheritance, we focus on the between-subject
variation driven by initial randomization, though we also show that results hold using the
within-person variation driven by the reverse experiment.
The distributions from which income and wealth values were randomly drawn vary
slightly by survey date. In early rounds, wealth values were drawn at random from $50,000,
6

$100,000, $200,000, $500,000, $1,000,000, and $2,000,000; income values were drawn from
$13,000, $27,000, $50,000, $86,000, and $210,000. While the wealth values were chosen in

order to capture salient levels of wealth, the income values were chosen to roughly match
the tenth, twentieth, fiftieth, seventy-fifth and ninety-fifth percentiles in the U.S. income
distribution.
To “fill out” the distribution, in the two November 2015 waves we added two new wealth
values, $300,000 and $750,000. Finally, in late November 2015, we “jittered” both the wealth
and income values to ensure we were not picking up “round number” effects from, for example, very high tax rates on wealth values of $1,000,000. In this wave, wealth and income
figures were generated by (a) drawing a value at random from the same distribution as earlier
experiments; (b) adding or subtracting 5 percent (with equal probability) of the parameter
value, rounded to the nearest thousand. So, for example, $100,000 would be ‘jittered’ to
either $95,000 or $105,000, and $86,000 would be jittered to $82,000 and $90,000.
Finally, in December of 2015, we sampled from the joint distribution of income and wealth
in the 2013 Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF). As such, in this survey, wealth and income
were not drawn independently, as they were in all the others.
Following the tax scenarios, subjects were asked whether they believe the government
should redistribute from the rich to the poor (the wording of this question is taken from
the General Social Survey), the importance of luck in life’s outcomes, whom they supported
in the 2012 presidential election, as well as basic socio-demographic data, such as gender,
household income, age and marital status. We also asked respondents if they felt the survey
was biased. Finally, we gave respondents the chance to respond to open-ended questions on
whether the survey was confusing and also invited them to share, in words, how they made
their tax decisions.7
Before describing the data, two aspects of our experimental design warrant elaboration.
First, in defining income, we use a rough description of taxable income under current law,
which includes some capital income as well as labor income. We suspect that most of our
respondents merely thought of “income” as earnings. If anything, including capital income
would likely make respondents less likely to choose to tax wealth, though we return to this
issue in some detail in Section 4.2. Second, as we only allowed numerical entries, respondents are not able to enter negative values (which, in full disclosure, we had not anticipated
when originally designing the survey), implicitly disallowing transfers. However, not a single
respondent complained about this restriction in the open-ended responses. There was no
mention of the EITC; the only subsidy mentioned, noted by one subject, was for food. The
7 The

exact wording of this question is: “Please describe how you decided on the level of tax
payments for the hypothetical individuals in the survey.”

7

one relevant mention of “negative” was a respondent who wrote that: “[o]ne’s total wealth
should not factor in since people that have negative wealth due to student loan debts etc
do not get a credit.” Future work may wish to allow for negative taxation, but given the
responses of our subjects it appears this constraint was rarely binding.

3

Data

3.1

Data collection procedures

All of our subjects were recruited through MTurk, an online labor market where “requesters”
can post human intelligence tasks (HITs) to be completed by “workers.” At the time our
experiments were fielded, MTurk advertised that requesters can “access more than 500,000
workers.”8
Over the past few years, social scientists have increasingly used MTurk to perform experiments and collect survey data (see Kuziemko et al., 2015 and papers cited therein for
a review). We registered as a requester and posted a HIT with the following description:
“The survey asks your opinion on a variety of topics. There are no right or wrong answers.”
We tried to use a neutral description that would limit selection bias while also giving workers an honest description of the task. As we are interested in respondents’ preferences, we
also emphasized that there were “no right or wrong answers” to limit to the extent possible
social-desirability bias. Compensation was set to $1, which approximated minimum wage
assuming that subjects took eight minutes to complete the task. Actual median completion
time was indeed eight minutes, implying an hourly wage of $7.50. Though we cannot find
official data on average wages on MTurk, reading through worker forums suggests that we
are paying a very generous wage (and indeed when we post a request for 300 survey takers,
the full sample is typically gathered within an hour).
Each MTurk worker logs in with unique ID. Because we collected data across multiple
dates, we drop any worker who has taken a previous survey with the same ID, to ensure that
we gather a fresh set of participants each time (though we will show that our estimated tax
preferences change little when we do not drop repeat-takers from the sample).9
Another issue that arises on MTurk is the possibility of ‘robots,’ algorithms that masquer8 Based

on viewing the mTurk website on January 18, 2016.
workers maintain multiple mTurk IDs then some individuals remaining in our main sample
may have participated in a previous session. Outside of surveys (which appear to make up a very
small fraction of all tasks), in which case requesters may want unique workers, there is little incentive
for workers to create multiple IDs. It is not possible to rule out the possibility that some workers
may have done so, however, and thus could have passed through our screening process.
9 If

8

ade as humans. To address this concern we begin each survey with a “captcha” (non-standard
writing difficult for computers to interpret), followed by a series of animal sketches (handdrawn by one of the authors) that subjects needed to identify before starting the experiment,
in case robots have been trained to read captchas.10
To limit heterogeneity of the sample, we collect all data on workdays during daylight hours
on the East Coast of the United States. Given our focus on American tax policy, we limited
the survey’s availability to those with U.S. billing addresses; we also asked respondents to
confirm their residency in the United States. To further ensure the attentiveness of our
subjects, we limit respondents to those with positive ratings from at least 90 percent of past
requesters.
The data pass basic reality checks (for example, subjects that report having supported
Mitt Romney in 2012 tend to be white and male, mirroring patterns observed in polling
data). Almost all respondents went on to answer open-ended “feedback” questions, providing
answers in colloquial, American English. In particular, we asked whether any part of the
survey had been confusing, and the vast majority wrote that no part had been unclear to
them.

3.2

Data sample and randomization check

Table 1 provides detail on the MTurk workers who completed our survey (pooling across
all survey rounds), comparing them to the (weighted) population of adults sampled in the
2014 General Social Survey (GSS), which is representative of the U.S. adult population.
Consistent with past work using MTurk, we find that younger, male, and college-educated
subjects are over-represented in our sample.
Importantly, however, the political and redistributive views of our sample match those
in the GSS very closely. In both samples, just under two-thirds of respondents supported
Barack Obama in the 2012 election (included in this share for both our sample and the GSS
are those who did not vote but nonetheless report having supported Obama over Romney at
the time). To gauge redistributive preferences, we asked our MTurk sample a question taken
verbatim from the GSS:
Some people think that the government in Washington ought to reduce the income differences between the rich and the poor, perhaps by raising the taxes of
wealthy families or by giving income assistance to the poor. Others think that
the government should not concern itself with reducing this income difference
10 Examples

of “captchas” can be found here: http://www.fileflash.com/graphics/screens/
Captcha_Creator_PHP_Script-69.gif.

9

between the rich and the poor. Here is a card with a scale from 1 to 7. Think
of a score of 1 as meaning that the government ought to reduce the income differences between rich and poor, and a score of 7 meaning that the government
should not concern itself with reducing income differences. What score between
1 and 7 comes closest to the way you feel?
In both samples, we flip this question so that it is increasing in the redistributive position.
The average responses in our sample and in the GSS are nearly identical, with values of 4.3
and 4.2 respectively (on the slightly more redistributive side of the neutral answer of 4.0).
Roughly a third of our respondents say that “luck and help from others” is more important
than hard work in determining success.11
In general, the redistribution question and 2016 election question left us encouraged by
how representative our sample appears to be in terms of political ideology. Additionally, we
will show that our results are robust to weighting along the dimensions in which our sample
and the GSS sample differ the most: gender, age and attainment of a college degree.
Table 1 also shows the average wealth and income values that our subjects are asked to
consider in the tax scenarios. The average income value our respondents evaluate is roughly
$83,000 and the average wealth value is roughly $624,000 (thought the median is only $44,000,
as both our sample and the actual wealth distribution is extremely right-skewed). The average
income and wealth values are comparable to average family income ($87,200) and net wealth
($534,600) in 2013, though our survey question was vague on whether the income and wealth
of the hypothetical individual was personal or household.12
In the Appendix, we show that our randomization rendered treatment status uncorrelated with subjects’ observable characteristics. Appendix Tables 3 and 4 show that in our
baseline surveys (in which the source of wealth is unspecified), the demographic and other
characteristics of our subjects have no ability to predict the levels of income and wealth they
evaluated. Appendix Table 5 and Appendix Table 6 show that this experimental balance also
holds in the surveys in which wealth sources are specified. Finally, Appendix Table 7 shows
that subjects randomized to see the savings questions first appear no different on observables
than those who initially saw inheritance questions.
11 While

we took this question from the GSS as well, we inadvertently did not include a “both”
option as the GSS did, so we cannot make a direct comparison.
12 Statistics on U.S. averages can be found here: http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/
bulletin/2014/pdf/scf14.pdf.

10

4

Baseline results when the source of wealth is not specified

We begin with an analysis of preferred tax schedules using the surveys in which the source
of the hypothetical individuals’ wealth was unspecified. These results will serve as a baseline
for examining how preferred tax rates are affected by the source of wealth.
In our initial specification we assume that the tax-income and tax-wealth relationships
are linear in levels. That is, we estimate
T axij = β W W ealthij + β I Incomeij + γXij + eij ,
where i indexes the subject and j the question order, T axij is the chosen tax bill, W ealthij
is the wealth level subject i encounters in question j, Incomeij is the income level subject i
considers in question j, and Xij are additional covariates that vary to probe robustness. The
coefficients on the wealth and income levels will be the implied linear tax rates on these two
tax bases.

4.1

Graphical evidence

Before estimating the regression equation above, we show the relationship between the preferred total tax bill and hypothetical income and wealth values graphically. Figure 1 depicts
vintiles of the chosen tax bills as a function of vintiles of the wealth values. We residualize these values by survey date and income value and then add back in the means of the
tax bill and the hypothetical wealth values. We fit a quadratic line through the scatter
plot to allow the data to display non-linear relationships. In fact, the graph shows that the
relationship between chosen tax bill and wealth levels is similar throughout the wealth distribution. Note that the fitted line does not hit (0,0), nor would we expect it to do so. As
T = T (income, wealth), for low values of wealth the average income is still considerable
(around $100,000) and thus not surprisingly respondents on average choose non-zero tax
bills in such scenarios.
Figure 2 performs the same analysis for the hypothetical income values, this time absorbing the wealth values. The relationship is again quite linear, with a steeper slope, consistent
with a higher rate on flows than stocks. The intercept on this graph is notably lower than
that in Figure 1. As we will see in the regression analysis, respondents put far greater weight
on income than on wealth in determining the total annual tax bill, and thus for individuals
with very low income, respondents indeed choose very low tax bills, so the implied intercept
is much closer to zero.

11

4.2

Regression results

Col. (1) of Table 2 shows results from the tax regression specified at the beginning of this
section, including only survey date fixed effects as controls. Subjects choose tax bills that
yield a 1.2 percent linear tax on wealth and a 15.8 tax on income. This result is precisely
estimated and essentially unchanged when we include fixed effects for each of the ten rounds
the subject completes and subject-specific fixed effects (cols. 2 and 3, respectively).
Given that our focus is on preferences over wealth taxation, in col. (4) we absorb fixed
effects for each of the income values that subjects encounter, essentially treating income as
a nuisance variable. Since wealth and income values are chosen independently, it is largely
unsurprising that controlling more flexibly for income has no effect on the wealth coefficient.
In col. (5), we drop subjects who completed the survey in less than four minutes (the fifth
percentile of survey duration); in col. (6) we drop answers that give a tax bill of zero. Neither
of these sample restrictions affect the coefficient of interest.
A common worry in repeated survey experiments is anchoring bias: in later rounds,
respondents may be unconsciously influenced by responses given in early rounds.13 A simple
version of anchoring bias (anchoring, in levels, to the first-round response) would drive our
coefficients of interest toward zero, as it makes respondents less responsive to the wealth and
income values in subsequent vignettes.14 In col. (7) we simply use the very first observation
from each respondent. While the coefficient is somewhat smaller (0.074) it is statistically
indistinguishable from our estimate derived from the larger sample. In fact, when we include
the first (income, wealth) pair as an explanatory variable in a regression using data from the
subsequent nine questions, coefficients on these variables are small and insignificant (results
available upon request).
In col. (8) we use the GSS to generate weights that correct for our under-representation of
women and individual over age 30 and over-representation of those with a college education
(i.e., we weight observations in our sample so that the proportions in the eight cells defined by
these three binary variables are the same as in the GSS). In fact, weighting makes almost no
difference to the coefficient of interest. As weighting makes little difference, in the remainder
of the paper we present unweighted results only.
Finally, as we noted earlier, our definition of income was essentially taxable income under
current law, meaning it includes some capital income. While we felt that using the current
13 See

Green et al. (1998) for evidence of anchoring bias in respondents’ valuation of policy (in
their case environmental protection) and Beggs and Graddy (2009) for evidence of anchoring bias
even in high-stakes settings (art auctions).
14 Of course, one could imagine more complicated versions of anchoring bias—e.g., anchoring to
the rate chosen in the first round, which might over or under-state the preferred rate if individual’s
true (non-anchored) preferred rates are non-linear.

12

definition of taxable income would be the most natural baseline from which to measure
whether individuals had, in addition, a preference to tax wealth, one might worry that a
careful reader would note that wealth is being implicitly taxed twice, first as wealth and
then as capital income. While not a single respondent in the baseline survey voiced this
concern—either in their open-ended response explaining how they made their choices or in
any open-ended response where we invited them to describe any confusing aspect of the
survey—we nonetheless try to gauge the potential size of any bias. Col. (9) replaces the
income measure with a measure of imputed labor income, which subtracts 0.05 × W ealthi
from income (we set negative values to 0). This procedure results in coefficients on the wealth
variable that are larger, as the labor income variable is negatively correlated with wealth.15

4.3

Reliability of survey answers

There are inherent challenges in interpreting hypothetical survey results; our experiment is
no exception. We ask unfamiliar and potentially challenging questions to subjects who have
no direct monetary incentive to exert cognitive effort. Some respondents may have low levels
of numeracy. Given that the U.S. does not have, strictly speaking, a wealth tax, respondents
may have been especially unfamiliar with the concepts we seek to study (though they should
have some familiarity with the property tax). While we do not believe we can ever fully dispel
these worries, we provide some evidence that respondents in fact understood our questions
and took the survey seriously.
First, we find very few “reversals” in our data. For any pair of scenarios in which the
income and wealth levels are both higher in one scenario than in the other, we define a
“reversal” as an occasion where the subject chooses a larger tax bill in the scenario in which
the hypothetical individual is strictly poorer. For the ten scenarios each subject confronts,

there are 10
= 45 pairs, though not all will be comparable (e.g., within a pair, one could
2
have a higher income level but a lower wealth level than the other). On average, our subjects
confront 15 comparable pairs, ranging from zero to 35. We find that fewer than five percent
of comparable pairs indicate “reversals” of the form described above. Not surprisingly, we
find that reversals are more common among those who finish the survey in an unrealistically
short amount of time.
While the small number of reversals suggest that the respondents understood the questions, we also directly asked subjects at the survey’s conclusion to tell us if any part of it
LI

Cov(LI,W )
follows from the partitioned regression formula, where β W = Cov(W,T ax)−β
,
V ar(W )
LI
W
and we expect β , the coefficient on labor income, to be > 0, as Cov(LI, W ) < 0, so the β from
ax)
this specification will be greater than Cov(W,T
V ar(W ) , the estimate when income and wealth are drawn
independently.
15 This

13

was confusing. While almost all respondents answer this question (usually with some variant
of “no,” “nope”) less than four percent tell us they felt confused at any point.16
Third, social-desirability bias (see, e.g., Bernardi, 2006, Dalton and Ortegren, 2011) is a
concern in our context, though some work suggests that web-based surveys may be less prone
to it than tradition in-person interviews (Kreuter et al., 2008). We did our best to remind
readers that any answer they gave was valid by stressing in the introduction to the task
that it was an opinion survey with no “right or wrong answers.” Nonetheless, we might still
worry that respondents attempt to provide the responses that they perceive the conductors
of the survey to want. For this reason, at the end of our survey, we ask respondents whether
they perceived it to be biased in any manner. The vast majority (85 percent) indicate that
they perceived no bias, eleven percent a left-wing bias, four percent a right-wing bias, and
less than one percent a bias of some other type.
Finally, respondents’ open-ended answers to how they chose their preferred tax bills suggests they took the task seriously. After all decisions were made and demographic questions
posed, we asked respondents to explain in words their general thinking when choosing the
hypothetical tax bills. More than 99 percent of respondents wrote at least something in response to this question, which we take to be a testament to the care they seemed to devote
to our survey. Moreover, answers were written in colloquial English, indicating that our attempts to screen out non-American residents were largely successful. We discuss the actual
responses in the next subsection.

4.4

Discussion of results

Are the coefficients that we estimate based on respondents’ answers “reasonable” in a publicfinance sense? To the extent that our methodology unobtrusively tests individuals’ general
understanding of the difference between income and wealth (that wealth, a stock, would
quickly disappear if taxed at the same rate as income, a flow), these results are encouraging.
The tax rate on income is more than an order of magnitude larger than that on wealth.
While our question abstracts from federal versus state tax (“how much should this person
pay in taxes?”), 15.8 percent is in fact very close to the average federal plus state income
tax rate in the U.S. in 2011 (the actual value is 14.5 percent).17
16 We

include in this number those who describe not so much being confused but just challenged
by the task (“just the estimating of taxes—a calculation chart would be helpful”) and who had
temporary problems with the interface (“ the first question i couldn’t type in a number,” or “they
way you had to enter the money amounts. it took me a few questions just to figure that out”).
17 The most recent year available is 2011. See http://users.nber.org/ taxsim/allyup/ally.
~
html.

14

Since we are, to our knowledge, the first to estimate wealth tax preferences, we cannot
compare our wealth tax estimates to past work. We can, however, compare our implied
preferred average income tax rates to prior estimates. The most directly comparable paper
is McCaffery and Baron (2006), who estimate income tax preference by asking subjects to
give an absolute tax bill (as we do) for different values of income. They find that the implied
preferred average rate is 16.8 percent on those making $200,000 and 11.7 percent on those
making $50,000, so our point estimate falls in between these values. As we noted earlier,
they find that preferred average tax rates are substantially higher when rates (rather than
absolute amounts) are directly solicited. Their subjects’ give a preferred average rate of 24.6
percent on those making $200,000 and 13.0 percent for those making $50,000. Other recent
work on income tax preferences tend to ask for preferred rates directly and also focus on top
earners. These estimates are thus unsurprisingly higher than what we find (e.g., Kuziemko
et al. (2015) and Charité et al. (2015) find that subjects choose average tax rates of around
thirty percent on, respectively, those in the top one percent and those making $250,000 a
year).
Finally, to gain a better understanding of respondents’ tax preferences, we analyze their
answers to the open-ended question: “Please describe how you decided on the level of tax
payments for the hypothetical individuals in the survey.” In Table 3 we report the most
common two-word (bigram) and three-word (trigram) phrases that appear in these openended responses.18 Simplicity, in the sense of a single bracket, appears attractive to many
respondents, with “flat tax” and “everyone pay 10 [percent]” appearing frequently. We also
note that efficiency concerns (that high taxes would make individuals work or save less) are
rarely voiced, a point we return to later.
In summary, we take away from our baseline results that our elicitation procedure produces reasonable differences between preferred levels of income and wealth taxation (with
the preferred rate on wealth being much lower than the preferred rate on income, and the
preferred rate on income matching well with past work). In the next section we focus on how
preferred taxes differ when subjects are told that wealth comes from savings versus bequests.

5

Results when the source of wealth is specified

We now turn to data from surveys in which we specify the source of the hypothetical individual’s wealth. Before describing these results, we note that the data pass the same “qual18 We

use the “tm” package in R to process the text of the responses to this question. We convert
all text to lowercase, strip punctuation and common English stopwords, and stem words with a
Porter stemmer. We then take all 2-word (bigram) and 3-word (trigram) sequences in the remaining
text, and calculate frequencies across subject responses.

15

ity checks” as the baseline data. We find that only five percent of comparable pairs of
(income, wealth) values lead to reversals (in the sense that a subject chooses a lower tax
bill in a scenario A versus B when the individual is strictly richer in A). A somewhat higher
share, eight percent, tell us that they were confused at some point in the survey, though the
increase relative to the baseline survey is driven by a handful of respondents who appeared
to have trouble with the interface. Similar to the baseline surveys, 83 percent of respondents
felt the surveys were unbiased, with eleven, five and one percent indicating they perceived
bias in the left-wing, right-wing, or “other” direction, respectively. Over 98 of respondents
go on to explain in the open-ended question how they made their decisions.

5.1

Assuming a linear functional form

The results in the previous section showed that our estimated wealth coefficients were robust to a variety of specification checks. For brevity, we will present a more limited set of
specifications in this section. Our preferred specification, which we present first, controls for
question order and subject fixed effects (as in, for example, col. 3 of Table 2). Col. (1) of
Table 4 is identical to col. (3) of Table 2 except that we include only observations for which
(a) wealth is specified as coming from savings and (b) the subject was randomized into seeing
the savings questions first (that is, we do not use the reverse experiment).
The coefficient on income in col. (1) in Table 4 is slightly smaller than that in col. (3)
of Table 2, 13.2 versus 15.7 percent. Of greater interest, the coefficient on wealth in Table 4
is over a third smaller than its analogue in Table 2: 0.766 versus 1.17 percent. Subjects in
these surveys appear to reward wealth from savings with a lower implied tax rate relative to
surveys in which the source of wealth is unspecified. Col. (2) is identical to col. (1) except
that income is treated as a nuisance variable and fully absorbed; results remain unchanged.
The next two columns perform the parallel analysis for observations in which wealth
was specified as coming from inheritance (and in which subjects were randomized to see
these questions first). The coefficients on income are nearly identical to the wealth-fromsavings observations. However, the coefficient on wealth is over four times larger, at just over
3.0 percent. Interestingly, the implied tax from wealth when the source of wealth was left
unspecified (roughly 1.1 percent, as in Table 2) falls between that on savings and that on
inheritance. While few respondents spelled out their assumptions on the source of wealth in
the baseline survey, of the five that did, four mention they assume it came from savings of
past earnings.19 As such, it is not surprising that the results on generic wealth are closer to
19 For

example, one person in the open-ended answers to the baseline surveys wrote: “After the
first one, I set it at 10% of income, regardless of wealth, because the wealth should have been taxed
in the year it was earned.” Another wrote: “People should only be taxed in [sic] annual income.

16

those from savings.
The final columns test whether the large differences in preferred tax rates on wealth from
savings versus inheritance can be detected within-person as well, using the reverse experiment
and comparing, within person, whether subjects choose higher taxes when they encounter the
wealth-from-inheritance. The differences are still significant and in the expected direction,
but smaller than those implied by the between-subject identification of this difference. For
example, the first four columns imply a difference of about 2.2 percentage points (3.03−0.77),
whereas the difference identified within-person is only 1.3 percentage points.
In fact, the smaller within-person results seem to suggest some anchoring bias on the first
set of questions that the respondent encounters. While (as shown in Table 4) respondents
choose a tax on savings of 0.76 percent when they encounter these questions first, this figure
rises to 1.3 percent when they encounter them after the inheritance questions, consistent
with subjects’ being primed to respond with relatively larger tax bills (see Appendix Table
8). Similarly, while respondents who see the inheritance questions first choose to tax wealth
from inheritance at three percent, those who first view the savings questions choose to then
tax wealth from inheritance at 1.7 percent. Nonetheless, even those who are “anchored”
to give a lower inheritance tax (because they see the savings questions first) give higher
inheritance questions than those who are anchored to give a higher savings tax (because
they see the inheritance questions first). This type of anchoring bias makes us prefer the
between-person estimates, which we focus on for the rest of the paper.
In summary, we find a robust, average difference in respondents’ willingness to tax wealth
from bequests versus wealth from their own past savings. On the one hand, this result is
not surprising, given the large literature from lab experiments showing that subjects acting
as social planners are more willing to redistribute endowments gained via luck versus those
gained through effort or skill (see, e.g., Cherry et al. (2002) and Oxoby and Spraggon (2008)).
On the other hand, it is surprising given survey evidence showing that large majorities of
Americans are opposed to the estate tax. Consistent with past surveys, a recent Gallup poll
showed that 54 percent of Americans favor eliminating the estate tax, relative to 19 percent
who oppose its elimination.20 Whereas we do not use the term estate tax, our results in fact
imply robust support for taxes on inheritance. In that sense, it echoes results in Kuziemko
et al. (2015) that Americans’ views on an inheritance tax may be sensitive to framing and
information.
They’ve already been taxed once on the money they earned in the past.”
20 See http://www.gallup.com/poll/190067/americans-react-presidential-candidatestax-proposals.aspx.

17

5.2

Exploring non-linear functional form

Figures 3 and 4 show the shape of the implied tax schedule over wealth separately for the
savings and inheritance scenarios (we relegate the analogous figures for income to Appendix
Figures 1 and 2.) Again, we fit quadratic lines to see whether the data imply a linear or nonlinear relationship. The solid gray line is the fitted quadratic line for the full distribution of
wealth values and appears linear. Cognizant that our methodology understates progressivity
for large values of the tax base (relative to asking for tax preference as rates), we also estimate
fitted lines in which we exclude wealth values above $2 million (long dashed line) and $1.75
million (short dashed line). For these truncated distributions, some evidence of progressivity
emerges.
For the wealth-from-inheritance data depicted in Figure 4, the tax bill appears very well
explained as a linear function throughout the wealth distribution. Our respondents appear
willing to tax even modest amounts of inherited wealth at the same rate they would tax,
say, $2,000,000 in inherited wealth.
In Table 5, we explore whether the progressivity depicted in Figure 3 (over wealth from
savings) can be distinguished from linearity at conventional levels of significance. While in
no case can we reject linearity (either when we specify progressivity as a quadratic function
of wealth or as a spline function of wealth), we find the point estimates to be suggestive.21
First, our method is known to understate progressivity relative to asking for preferred rates,
so even positive point estimates implying some degree of progressivity may be noteworthy.22
Second, once we drop the very largest levels of wealth, we get an implied tax schedule of
around zero for wealth under $500,000 and 1.5 percent for wealth above that value. This
schedule is close to that proposed by Piketty (2014).
Finally, we explore whether individuals consider the interaction between wealth and income when setting the total tax bill. Table 7 displays results for three samples, based on
how the source of wealth was presented to respondents: the generic baseline sample, the
wealth-from-savings sample, and the wealth-from-inheritance sample. In the first column for
each of the three samples, we include the interaction between income and wealth (scaled
by 100 million for readability), as well as the main effects of income and wealth. While the
coefficients do not lend themselves to straightforward interpretation, in no case do any point
estimates approach statistical significance and in fact they even vary in sign. As another
indication that subjects view the interaction as unimportant, the coefficients on the main
data suggest a break point of roughly $500,000 in a spline specification, so we use this
value as the “knot” of our spline specification.
22 The result that asking about taxes in levels understates progressivity relative to asking it in
rates is also found in Reimers (2009).
21 The

18

effects of wealth and income are identical to their original values (i.e., col. 3 of Table 2 and
cols. 1 and 3 of Table 4).
We may further ask whether respondents’ views on taxing the hypothetical individual’s
wealth differ if the individual’s income is modest. To that end, in the even-numbers columns,
we interact wealth with a dummy variable denoting whether the hypothetical individual’s
income is below $50,000. While the point estimates are negative in all cases (as one would
expect), they are small and insignificant, with all p-values greater than 0.45. Again, the
coefficient on the wealth main effect is essentially unaffected across all specifications.
We find these results to be somewhat surprising, as standard models in which only consumption enters the utility function would imply that wealth is merely a source of capital
income, and is substitutable for labor income in generating consumption. In such cases, a
social planner would generally impose a low tax rate on individuals with limited income,
regardless of wealth holdings, whereas our subjects continue to impose significant wealth
taxes on these individuals. We return to this point in Section 6.

5.3

Heterogeneity in tax preferences

How do demographic and political characteristics mediate the relationship between preferred
taxation over wealth levels, and, further, is any difference mediated by whether wealth is
gained via savings or inheritance? We explore these questions using the following regression
specification:
T axisj = βW ealthj × Inheritances × Xi + λijs + eisj ,
where T axisj is subject i’s preferred tax on the wealth observed in question j when the
source of the wealth is s ∈ {inheritance, savings}; W ealth is the amount of wealth being
considered in question j, Inheritances is a dummy variable denoting whether the source of
wealth is from inheritance; Xi is a given set of individual characteristics; and λisj is a vector
of all lower-order terms of the triple interaction term. As usual, we only use observations
that come from the first set of questions each subject encounters.
The results are displayed in Table 6 for individual characteristics related to political views.
In col. (1) we see that non-Obama supporters want to tax inherited wealth significantly
more than saved wealth, but this tendency is in fact significantly more pronounced for
Obama supporters. Otherwise, Obama supporters appear similar to other subjects. Similarly,
belief that the government should redistribute income and wealth is associated with higher
preferred wealth tax rates and a preference for taxing inherited wealth more than other types
of wealth.
19

In the final column, we include interactions with a dummy variable indicating that the
respondent feels luck is more important than effort in determining success. The triple interaction is small and insignificant in this specification, perhaps consistent with these respondents
believing that luck also determines past savings as well, as would be the case with uninsurable and idiosyncratic rates of return to past savings or luck being integral in determining
past income flows.
Finally, we find no mediating effect for gender, age, own household income, race or parenthood (see Appendix Table 9).

5.4

Discussion

Table 8 displays the most common bigrams and trigrams in the open-ended answers in the
surveys that specify the source of wealth. Interestingly, phrases (e.g., “alreadi tax,” “alreadi
paid tax”) often suggest an aversion to “double taxation,” which did not emerge as a key
concern in the baseline survey. It appears that specifying the source of wealth (especially in
the case of savings) reminds individuals that income taxes may already have been paid on
it. As economists focus almost entirely on the elasticity of relevant tax bases to determine
efficiency consequences of taxation, “double taxation” is merely an accounting issue, and yet
it appears very salient to our respondents.
Bigrams and trigrams allow us to derive some broad patterns from the universe of responses, but obviously subtle meanings are lost. We therefore randomly sampled 100 of these
responses for further scrutiny. As a very rough count, approximately 14 percent of respondents stated explicit opposition to a wealth tax (e.g., “how much savings or inheritance
should not determine the amount of tax paid. I used their income and took 5% ; the govn’t
[sic] is too big and needs to get out of our business.”). Another 12 percent suggested decision
rules that did not include wealth but did not state explicitly any opposition to the concept
(e.g., “10% of all income earned in the year”).23
The remaining explanations were either too vague to classify (e.g, “I kept taxes low for
everyone, as they should be” or “I took mental evaluations and gave a good answer” or
“Randonmly [sic]”) or explicitly supported including wealth in the tax base at least under
some circumstances (e.g., “I taxed people with inheritance more because it’s not like they
23 For

the purposes of this definition, we do not code as one if the respondent left the door open for
some wealth taxation even if for the most part they felt income was more important. For example,
“to be honest I don’t know how taxes are decided but I was going off their income of that year
more so [emphasis added]” was not coded as implicitly excluding wealth from their calculation.
Similarly, “I really couldn’t decide how to factor in wealth so I decided to focus more on income”
was not coded as explicitly or implicitly against a wealth tax.

20

had that money before so how much could it harm them?” or “The most important factor
was the income to determine the tax amount though in some cases I also took into account
a person’s wealth”).
Notable in both the bigrams and trigrams and our close reading of the random sample of
responses was the absence of efficiency concerns (in both the baseline survey in Section 4 and
in the current section in which wealth sources are specified). No one argued that taxation
would reduce savings or work effort. Those who voiced general opposition to taxes did not
rely on efficiency arguments but instead made more moral claims (e.g., it’s not “fair” to be
taxed twice) or libertarian ones (e.g., the government needs to “get out of our business”).
Neither sentiment is easily embodied in familiar social welfare functions, but are suggestive
of more complex normative theories that can provide rationales for limited redistribution
even in the presence of no incentive effects (Saez and Stantcheva, 2016a; Weinzierl, 2014).

6

Calibrating with Optimal Tax Formula

In a standard optimal tax model, the observed tax preferences will be a function of the
normative weights the social planner puts on wealth holders as well as the elasticities of
wealth and income with respect to net-of-tax rates. For the purposes of this section, we
assume agents see the economic environment just as a traditional, Mirleesian social planner
would, and know the supply elasticity of wealth perfectly. Saez and Stantcheva (2016b)
simplify the taxation of capital literature by putting wealth directly into the utility function
(with linear utility in consumption), and show numerous other models can be embedded in
this framework. Putting wealth directly in the utility function is motivated, in their paper,
by either bequest motives, entrepreneurship, service flows from wealth (e.g., the peace of
mind of potential liquidity, housing services) or motivated beliefs and social norms.
The resulting optimal tax formulas are transparent and easy to calculate, and nest a wide
variety of normative justifications and dynamic models. In their model, the government raises
revenue from capital and labor income taxes, used to transfer a fixed demogrant to each
individual in society. When welfare is weighted inversely with (the sum of capital and labor)
income and utility is separable over capital and labor income, they find that the optimal
nonlinear tax schedule calibrated to the US joint capital and labor income distribution is
quite close to linear. If eK is the supply elasticity of aggregate capital, then the capital income
tax rate is given by 0.8 (eK = 0.25) or 0.5 (eK = 1). If we assume constant rates of return
of five percent, this rate corresponds to wealth taxes of between two and four percent, on a
similar order of magnitude as our subjects’ elicited tax rates on wealth.
We use the linear tax version of their model to calibrate our results and recover the
21

required normative weights a social planner would need to have over wealth-holding to generate the preferred tax rates we observe (under a series of elasticity assumptions). There is a
population of measure 1 with average (aggregate) wealth K. The weight put on the welfare
of agent i is gi , which may be a function of the agent’s wealth ki or other characteristics.
Given the results in Table 7 that our subjects do not consider interactions between income
and wealth in setting the total tax bill, we also use the version of the formula that assumes
separability of wealth and income taxes.
In the separable case, the optimal formula for a linear capital tax τk is given by:
τK =

1 − g¯K
1 − g¯K + eK

(1)

R1
ki
where eK is the supply elasticity of aggregate K, and ḡK = i=0 gi K
di is the inner product of
R
the welfare weights (normalized so that i gi di = 1) with wealth shares. It is easy to show that
ḡK is equal to the covariance of welfare weights with the wealth shares plus 1.24 Redistributive
motives can be captured with gi (ki ) decreasing in ki . If ḡK = 0 then the optimal tax rate
is the revenue maximizing one (equivalent to no consideration being given to wealth-holders
and thus the only objective being to maximize the demogrant, which benefits the worst off).
If taxes are being chosen by a social planner who cares equally about the wealthy and the
poor (so the covariance of the weight with wealth shares is 0) then ḡK = 1 and the optimal
tax is 0. The formula also reflects the standard result that the optimal tax declines with the
supply elasticity of the tax base, and it is immediate that an infinite elasticity implies a zero
optimal tax.
We can rearrange (1) to obtain an expression for the implicit weight put on wealthholders:
ḡK =

1 + eK τk
1 + τk

(2)

Our estimates for ḡK obviously depend on the estimate for eK . The empirical literature
estimating eK is sparse and unsettled, and indeed eK may differ for savings and bequests.
Seim (2017) uses kinks in the Swedish wealth tax schedule to estimate eK , finding small
responses of wealth and no response of labor income.25 These micro short-run elasticities
will be different from the macro or long-run elasticities, which may be much larger.
R ki
ki
definition, Cov(gi , K
) = gi K
di − K1 E(gi ) · E(ki ). Recall
that over an interval of measure
R
one, the average
and aggregate values
equal, so E(gi ) = gi di , which equals 1 by assumption,
R
R kare
ki
i
and E(k) = ki di . As such, ḡK = gi K
di = Cov(gi , K
) + 1.
25 Seim (2017) also estimates the cross-elasticity of labor income with respect to capital taxes,
and finds a zero, which justifies the use of the separable utility formula.
24 By

22

Table 9 shows the resulting ḡK for our different sources of wealth and different assumptions about eK . Unsurprisingly, the higher the elasticity, the higher the redistributive motive
required to rationalize a given tax rate, and thus the lower ḡK .
An important special case is eK = 0, which implies there is no supply response of wealthholders to taxation. Given the evidence above that none of our subjects mentioned any
evasion or avoidance margin as a reason for limiting wealth taxes, it could be that our
subjects believe the true elasticity is zero. If this is the case, traditional utilitarian welfare
weights would imply that all wealth should be equalized, with tax rates set at one, making our observed tax rates below what would be expected. However, Saez and Stantcheva
(2016a) show that richer non-utilitarian ideas can be expressed with more general weights.
If subjects prefer tax rates less than one even in the absence of supply responses, then it
suggests more complex normative ideas than in the standard model. For example, it could
be that subjects indeed put additional weight on the welfare of the wealthy or believe that
taxation is unjustly punitive. Put differently, in a society where 50% of the people have $1
in wealth and the other 50% have Wrich >> 1 in wealth, the social value of giving $1 to the
rich class is 62 cents when the tax base is all wealth, 73 cents when the tax is levied on saved
wealth only, and only 23 cents when inherited wealth is taxed. This result follows because in
ki
rich )+0.5grich Wrich
is given by ḡK = 0.5(1−g0.5+0.5×W
≈ grich .
this example the inner product of gi and K
rich
Are these values for ḡK large or small? We can compare our estimated ḡK to those that
would obtain under a natural baseline normative weight of gi = k1i .26 In this case the implied
ḡK would be K1 , the inverse of mean wealth (which is also aggregate wealth given unit mass
population). Given the high mean wealth subjects saw in our experiment, this would result
in an extremely small ḡK , on the order of 10−6 , implying that one dollar transferred to the
rich in the case above is virtually worthless to the social planner.27 Our estimates above,
under the assumption that eK = 0, imply that agents are much less redistributive than this
benchmark. A similar logic applies to our finding of a 14% income tax rate and the lack of
any mention of taxable income responses.
Consider the other extreme, where our subjects are internalizing a much higher capital
supply elasticity of eK = 1. In contrast to the eK = 0 case, the implied welfare weights
here are extremely punitive of wealthholders, particularly inheritors. If gi is monotonically
26 1
ki

would be the weight under a utilitarian social welfare function with utilities that are logs of
wealth only. Saez and Stantcheva (2016b) have agents with quasi-linear utility over consumption
as well as wealth, so utilitarian weights imply no redistribution in their model. Instead, they use
more general social welfare weights, set equal to the inverse of disposable income, in their normative
analysis.
27 A higher but still extremely small number would obtain if the weight was the inverse of capital
1
income (rather than the stock of wealth) with a rate of return of 5%: gi = .05×k
.
i

23

decreasing in wealth, and ḡK < 0 there must be negative weight put on the wealth of large
inheritors. This willingness to actively punish large inheritors rules out Pareto-optimal allocations of inherited capital: there is no regular social welfare function that implements
allocations consistent with these weights (Saez and Stantcheva, 2016a). This result is consistent with evidence on fairness preferences from ultimatum games, in which receiving subjects
sacrifice their own payoffs in order to deny the giver too unequal a share of unearned income
(Fehr and Gächter, 2000), as well as recent experimental evidence that individuals seek to
lower the income of the richest person in larger distributions (Fisman et al., 2017).
Finally, recall that our subjects imposed a non-zero wealth tax even on individuals with
limited income. Saez and Stantcheva (2016b) offer one interpretation for our result above that
wealth and income taxes seem to be set independently. In their model, if wealth and income
both enter the utility function, but are independent (i.e. additively separable) sources of
utility, then the optimal wealth tax does not take income into account. Another interpretation
is that subjects believe idle wealth should be mobilized into productive uses that generate
income, or be taxed.28
Let us put aside for the moment the difficulties we noted in previous sections in interpreting subjects’ answers as preferred tax rates and interpreting their responses to the
open-ended questions. Two key results from the paper are that respondents have non-trivial
preferred tax rates on wealth and that they have little (stated) concern about the elasticity
of the tax base with respect to the net of tax rate. In an optimal tax framework, these two
conditions imply that respondents must also have relatively limited redistributive motives
(as, given an inelastic tax base, even a utilitarian would choose full redistribution). This
section has allowed us formalized that intuition. Indeed our respondents (again, assuming,
as they seem to suggest in their open-ended responses, that they believe there is no or very
limited aggregate capital elasticity) appear orders of magnitude less redistributive than common baselines assumed in the literature. Of course, this exercise requires that we shoehorn
our respondents’ preferences into an optimal tax model (when perhaps they think of the
problem in a completely different manner), but it is still noteworthy that they seem to have
the opposite concerns of the classical social planner, who has strong redistributive motives
due to diminishing marginal utility of consumption but is constrained by efficiency concerns.
28 Piketty

(2014) describes this argument, which is associated with Allais (1977). Those wealth
holders who can only manage, say, a two percent annual return would quickly see their wealth taxed
away, presumably redistributed to sectors of the economy that enjoy higher returns.

24

7

Discussion and Conclusion

A recent literature documents the increasing importance of wealth and wealth inequality.
Saez and Zucman (2016) find that 20% of American wealth is held by the top 0.1% of
owners, a share that has doubled in the last forty years.29 Piketty (2014) documents a secular
increase in wealth-income ratios over the same period. In eras of high wealth inequality and
high wealth-income ratios, it is perhaps not surprising for wealth taxes to enter the political
debate. We elicit taxes over joint income and wealth holdings using an online survey. We find
that Mechanical Turk subjects appear to understand the difference between stocks and flows,
choosing wealth tax rates that are an order of magnitude smaller than those on income. Our
estimates indicate that on average subjects prefer a 0.8% tax rate on saved wealth, a 3% tax
rate on inherited wealth, and a 13-15% percent tax on income. Desired wealth taxes remain
at the same rate even at low income levels, and there is some evidence of progressivity, which
varies in expected ways with political affiliation.
Were they to be implemented, the budget implications of these taxes would be substantial.
Aggregate net wealth in the United States at the end of 2016 was 93 trillion dollars, and
Davies and Shorrocks (2000) estimates that between 35-45% of wealth is inherited. Ignoring
supply responses, our subjects’ implied tax rates would result in an extra 1.11 trillion dollars
in government revenue if no consideration were given to the source of wealth, and between 1.4
and 1.6 trillion dollars if preferred inherited and saved wealth taxes were levied separately.
This is an enormous sum, well over a quarter of the United States federal government budget.
Our results also suggest that much of the theoretical literature on capital taxation, with
the exception of Piketty and Saez (2013) and Kopczuk (2013a), does not capture the intuitive tastes individuals have for taxing wealth. Far from the prescribed zero capital tax or
positive subsidy predicted by various models, it appears that respondents have a preference
for positive wealth taxation, even for wealth accumulated out of savings and even for lowincome individuals. Indeed, some of our calibrations suggest that for plausible wealth bequest
elasticities, the implied welfare weight put on inherited wealth would be negative. However,
none of our subjects list bequests, or indeed any type of wealth supply response, as their
justification for their chosen tax rate, implying that our subjects are much less redistributive
than would be expected given no supply response.
As noted in the introduction, separate from the proscriptions of economic theory or the
extent of popular support, questions about the practical and legal feasibility of wealth taxes
remain. Legal scholars have debated the constitutionality of a wealth tax in the United States
29 Wolff

(2014) also finds an increase in wealth inequality since 1962, even in the Survey of
Consumer Finance, which is generally viewed as unable to sample very large wealth-holders and
thus under-states inequality.

25

(see Bankman and Shaviro (2014)). Assessing the value of different forms of wealth may be
difficult, particularly given sophisticated tax-sheltering services or tax havens, for complex
financial contracts or assets that are not transacted very often (although see Posner and Weyl
(2016) for both why low transaction rates imply optimal positive wealth taxes as well as how
technological changes may make this less of a problem in the future). Wealth taxes may also
be inferior to capital income taxation when rates of return vary widely and unpredictably, as
they would exempt transitory changes in returns on wealth. But the infeasibility of wealth
taxes in the United States should not be taken for granted, and as we discussed earlier
they used to play a more prominent role in the US. Thick financial markets, cross-border
information sharing, and modern digital records may improve enforcement, and, given our
findings, make the wealth tax a policy option Americans may be willing to entertain again.
Further research on the costs, benefits, and political economy of wealth taxation may become
of increasing policy relevance.

26

References
Alesina, A. and Ferrara, E. L. (2005). Preferences for redistribution in the land of
opportunities. Journal of Public Economics, 89 (56), 897 – 931.
Allais, M. (1977). L’impôt sur le capital et la réforme monétaire. Hermann.
Ashok, V., Kuziemko, I. and Washington, E. (forthcoming). Demand for redistribution
in an age of rising inequality: Some new stylized facts and tentative explanations. Brookings
Papers for Economic Activity.
Atkinson, A. B. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1976). The design of tax structure: direct versus
indirect taxation. Journal of public Economics, 6 (1), 55–75.
Bankman, J. and Shaviro, D. (2014). Piketty in america: A tale of two literatures. Tax
L. Rev., 68, 453.
Beggs, A. and Graddy, K. (2009). Anchoring effects: Evidence from art auctions. The
American Economic Review, pp. 1027–1039.
Bernardi, R. A. (2006). Associations between Hofstedes cultural constructs and social
desirability response bias. Journal of Business Ethics, 65 (1), 43–53.
Chamley, C. (1986). Optimal taxation of capital income in general equilibrium with infinite
lives. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 607–622.
Charité, J., Fisman, R. and Kuziemko, I. (2015). Reference Points and Redistributive
Preferences: Experimental Evidence. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cherry, T. L., Frykblom, P. and Shogren, J. F. (2002). Hardnose the dictator. The
American Economic Review, 92 (4), 1218–1221.
Dalton, D. and Ortegren, M. (2011). Gender differences in ethics research: The importance of controlling for the social desirability response bias. Journal of Business Ethics,
103 (1), 73–93.
Davies, J. B. and Shorrocks, A. F. (2000). The distribution of wealth. Handbook of
income distribution, 1, 605–675.
Diamond, P. and Saez, E. (2011). The case for a progressive tax: from basic research to
policy recommendations. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (4), 165–190.
Einhorn, R. L. (2008). American taxation, American slavery. University of Chicago Press.
Farhi, E. and Werning, I. (2010). Progressive estate taxation. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 125 (2), 635–673.
Fehr, E. and Gächter, S. (2000). Fairness and retaliation: The economics of reciprocity.
The journal of economic perspectives, 14 (3), 159–181.
Fisman, R., Kuziemko, I. and Vannutelli, S. (2017). Social preference in larger groups:
Keeping up with the joneses and keeping track of the tails, unpublished manuscript.
Green, D., Jacowitz, K. E., Kahneman, D. and McFadden, D. (1998). Referendum
contingent valuation, anchoring, and willingness to pay for public goods. Resource and
Energy Economics, 20 (2), 85 – 116.
Judd, K. L. (1985). Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model. Journal of
public Economics, 28 (1), 59–83.
27

Kopczuk, W. (2013a). Incentive effects of inheritances and optimal estate taxation. The
American Economic Review, 103 (3), 472–477.
— (2013b). Taxation of transfers and wealth. Handbook of Public Economics, 5.
Kreuter, F., Presser, S. and Tourangeau, R. (2008). Social desirability bias in cati,
ivr, and web surveys: The effects of mode and question sensitivity. Public Opinion Quarterly, 72 (5), 847–865.
Kuziemko, I., Norton, M. I., Saez, E. and Stantcheva, S. (2015). How elastic are
preferences for redistribution? evidence from randomized survey experiments. American
Economic Review, 105 (4), 1478–1508.
Mankiw, N. G., Weinzierl, M. and Yagan, D. (2009). Optimal taxation in theory and
practice. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 147–174.
McCaffery, E. and Baron, J. (2006). Thinking about tax. Psychology, Public Policy,
and Law, 12 (1), 106.
Oxoby, R. J. and Spraggon, J. (2008). Mine and yours: Property rights in dictator
games. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 65 (3), 703–713.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-first Century. Harvard University Press.
— and Saez, E. (2013). A theory of optimal inheritance taxation. Econometrica, 81 (5),
1851–1886.
Posner, E. A. and Weyl, E. G. (2016). Property is another name for monopoly facilitating efficient bargaining with partial common ownership of spectrum, corporations, and
land.
Reimers, S. (2009). A paycheck half-empty or half-full? framing, fairness and progressive
taxation. Judgment and Decision Making, 4 (6), 461.
Saez, E. and Stantcheva, S. (2016a). Generalized social marginal welfare weights for
optimal tax theory. The American Economic Review, 106 (1), 24–45.
— and — (2016b). A Simpler Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation. Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research.
— and Zucman, G. (2016). Wealth inequality in the united states since 1913: Evidence
from capitalized income tax data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131 (2), 519–578.
Seim, D. (2017). Behavioral responses to wealth taxes: Evidence from sweden. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy (forthcoming).
Singhal, M. (2008). Quantifying preferences for redistribution. Harvard University, Working Paper.
Straub, L. and Werning, I. (2014). Positive Long Run Capital Taxation: Chamley-Judd
Revisited. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Weinzierl, M. (2014). The promise of positive optimal taxation: normative diversity and
a role for equal sacrifice. Journal of Public Economics, 118, 128–142.
Wolff, E. N. (2014). Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962-2013: What
Happened over the Great Recession? Working Paper 20733, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

28

Figure 1: Tax bill as a function of wealth (source of wealth unspecified)

Notes: Data are taken from surveys in which we do not specify to respondents the source of wealth
in the vignettes. The figure shows residualized vintiles of the tax and wealth data using the Stata
binscatter package. The tax choices have been adjusted for income decile fixed effects and survey
date fixed effects. We then add back in the means of the x- and y-axis variables. Note that the
scatter points are collapsed to vintiles; subjects were confronted with more than the twenty wealth
choices plotted in the figure. Fitted lines are based on the underlying data, not the scatter points.

29

Figure 2: Tax bill as a function of income (source of wealth unspecified)

Notes: Data are taken from surveys in which we do not specify to respondents the source of
wealth in the vignettes. The figure shows residualized vintiles of the tax and income data using
the Stata binscatter package. The tax choices have been adjusted for wealth decile fixed effects
and survey date fixed effects. We then add back in the means of the x- and y-axis variables. Note
that the scatter points are collapsed to vintiles; subjects were confronted with more than the
twenty income choices plotted in the figure. Fitted lines are based on the underlying data, not the
scatter points.

30

Figure 3: Tax bill as a function of wealth (wealth from savings)

Notes: Data are taken from surveys in which we specify to respondents the source of wealth in the
vignettes. This figure uses only those subjects who encountered the savings vignettes first and
uses their preferred tax bills when wealth comes from savings. The figure shows residualized
vintiles of the tax and wealth data using the Stata binscatter package. The tax choices have been
adjusted for income decile fixed effects and survey date fixed effects. We then add back in the
means of the x- and y-axis variables. Note that the scatter points are collapsed to vintiles;
subjects were confronted with more than the twenty wealth choices plotted in the figure. Fitted
lines are based on the underlying data, not the scatter points.

31

Figure 4: Tax bill as a function of wealth (wealth from inheritance)

Notes: Data are taken from surveys in which we specify to respondents the source of wealth in the
vignettes. This figure uses only those subjects who encountered the inheritance vignettes first and
uses their preferred tax bills when wealth comes from inheritance. The figure shows residualized
vintiles of the tax and wealth data using the Stata binscatter package. The tax choices have been
adjusted for income decile fixed effects and survey date fixed effects. We then add back in the
means of the x- and y-axis variables. Note that the scatter points are collapsed to vintiles;
subjects were confronted with more than the twenty wealth choices plotted in the figure. Fitted
lines are based on the underlying data, not the scatter points.

32

Table 1: Summary statistics in our sample compared to the General Social Survey
(1)
MTurk sample

(2)
GSS sample

Female

0.422
(0.494)

0.545
(0.498)

Age

33.17
(10.29)

47.46
(17.24)

White

0.754
(0.431)

0.743
(0.437)

Has at least college education

0.605
(0.489)

0.316
(0.465)

49869.1
(37047.7)

80999.9
(80637.8)

Supported Obama in 2012

0.646
(0.478)

0.632
(0.482)

Supports gov’t redistribution
(scale 1-7)

4.345
(1.962)

4.244
(2.062)

Luck, help from others more
important to success than hard work

0.329
(0.470)

Household income

Wealth value considered in tax
scenarios

623510.3
(631022.1)

Income value considered in tax
scenarios

82780.4
(81769.5)

Observations

1899

2538

Notes: GSS sample is taken from the 2014 GSS. GSS surveys weights are used. The MTurk
sample pools subjects from all survey dates.

33

Table 2: Relationship between total tax bill and income and wealth values (surveys where source of wealth not specified)
Dep’t variable: Subjects’ chosen total tax bill (dollars)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Wealth (dollars)

0.0119∗∗∗
[0.00301]

0.0119∗∗∗
[0.00300]

0.0117∗∗∗
[0.00271]

0.0117∗∗∗
[0.00271]

0.0124∗∗∗
[0.00289]

0.0117∗∗∗
[0.00272]

0.00741∗∗
[0.00351]

0.0114∗∗∗
[0.00261]

0.0166∗∗∗
[0.00283]

Income (dollars)

0.158∗∗∗
[0.00897]

0.158∗∗∗
[0.00896]

0.157∗∗∗
[0.00920]
0.163∗∗∗
[0.00939]

Imputed labor income

34

Dept. var. mean
Question order FE?
mTurk ID FE?
Income FE?
Ex. short
Ex. zero tax bills?
First obs. only?
Weighted?
Observations

22415.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
5420

22415.1
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
5420

22415.1
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
5420

22415.1
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
5420

22821.0
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
5060

22514.8
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
5396

20668.8
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
542

22413.7
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
5410

22415.1
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
5420

Notes: Data taken from surveys where the source of wealth in the vignettes is not specified. Question order fixed effects include ten
dummies for each of the ten iterations of the question each respondent encountered. mTurk ID fixed effects include a fixed effect for
each unique mTurk id (roughly speaking, for each subject, unless they take the survey with multiple IDs). “Ex. short” drops subjects
who complete the survey in less than four minutes, roughly the fifth percentile of the duration distribution. “Ex. zero tax bills” drops
those who enter a preferred tax bill of zero. “First obs. only” includes only the very first iteration that each subject encounters, in order
to address concerns about anchoring bias. “Weighted” shows results after weighting our mTurk observations to match the 2014 GSS in
terms of the 2 × 2 × 2 weights based on dummies for being greater than thirty, female and having a BA (those characteristics where our
mTurk and GSS samples differ the most). Finally, “imputed labor income” takes into account the fact that our definition of income also
includes capital income and thus uses max(0, income − .05 · wealth) as an approximation of labor income. Standard errors (clustered by
mTurk ID) are reported in brackets. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 3: Most common bigrams and trigrams (surveys where source of wealth not specified)

Bigrams
Phrase
base incom
incom wealth
incom tax
tax rate
flat tax
incom year
year incom
pay tax
10 incom
incom level
tax incom
wealth incom
percentag incom
amount wealth
annual incom
everyon pay
much wealth
person wealth
tax bracket
thought fair

Trigrams
Count

Phrase

48
40
36
32
28
22
22
20
19
19
19
19
18
16
13
13
13
13
13
13

base incom wealth
flat tax rate
base incom year
incom made year
tax rate incom
think flat tax
base incom level
base much wealth
everyon pay 10
flat tax incom
incom accumul wealth
incom high wealth
pay amount tax
percentag incom tax
take wealth consider
tax base incom

Count
7
6
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

Notes: Data are taken from surveys were we do not specify the source of wealth in the vignettes.
At the end of these surveys (after all chosen tax bills and entered and demographic questions are
asked) we ask respondents “Please describe how you decided on the level of tax payments for the
hypothetical individuals in the survey.” We use the “tm” package in R to process the text of the
responses to this question. We convert all text to lowercase, strip punctuation and common
English stopwords, and stem words with a Porter stemmer. We then take all 2-word (bigram) and
3-word (trigram) sequences in the remaining text, and calculate frequencies across subject
responses.

35

Table 4: Chosen tax bill as a function of income and wealth (source of wealth specified)
Dependent variable: Total tax bill (dollars)
Wealth from savings
(1)

Wealth from inherit.

(2)

(3)

Wealth (dollars)

0.00766∗∗∗ 0.00758∗∗∗ 0.0303∗∗∗
[0.00218] [0.00216] [0.00354]

Income (dollars)

0.132∗∗∗
[0.00759]

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0306∗∗∗
[0.00357]

0.0112∗∗∗
[0.00187]

0.0111∗∗∗
[0.00181]

0.135∗∗∗
[0.0178]

0.136∗∗∗
[0.00793]

Wealth is from
inheritance
Wealth x
Inheritance
Dept. var. mean
Question order FE?
mTurk ID FE?
Inc. decile FE?
Observations

13008.0
Yes
Yes
No
4503

13008.0
Yes
Yes
Yes
4503

26570.0
Yes
Yes
No
4802

Pooled, w/in-subject

26570.0
Yes
Yes
Yes
4802

36.99
[715.1]

35.95
[713.3]

0.0130∗∗∗
[0.00243]

0.0129∗∗∗
[0.00242]

19125.0
Yes
Yes
No
18572

19125.0
Yes
Yes
Yes
18572

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for survey date, question order and MTurk ID. In the
first four columns, only the subjects’ first seven questions are used in the sample. Half the sample
was randomized so that the first seven questions involve wealth from savings and half so that the
first seven questions involve wealth from inheritance. So, one set of individuals is sampled in cols.
(1) and (2) and another set in cols. (3) and (4). In cols. (5) and (6) we combine both sample and
use all 14 questions (so the sample size increases by a factor of four). As we retain the mTurk ID
fixed effects, identification of the Wealth x Inheritance coefficient is coming from contrasting how
the same person answers the first set of seven questions versus the second set of seven questions.
Standard errors (clustered by MTurk ID) are in brackets. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

36

Table 5: Testing for convexity of tax schedule over wealth (wealth from savings)
Dependent variable: Chosen tax bill (in dollars)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Wealth (dollars)

0.00575∗ -0.00135 -0.00800 0.00380 0.00132 0.00242
[0.00336] [0.00747] [0.0131] [0.00296] [0.00434] [0.00369]

Wealth squared / 10M

0.00902
[0.0236]

0.0794
[0.0696]

0.146
[0.132]

Max(Wealth - 500,000, 0)
Dept. var. mean
Question order FE?
mTurk ID FE?
Ex. if wealth above...
Observations

13008.0
Yes
Yes
N/A
4503

12118.1
Yes
Yes
2M
4011

11697.3
Yes
Yes
1.75M
3932

0.00481
[0.00581]

0.0136
[0.0108]

0.0115
[0.0103]

13008.0
Yes
Yes
N/A
4503

12118.1
Yes
Yes
2M
4011

11697.3
Yes
Yes
1.75M
3932

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for survey date, question order, MTurk ID and income
decile fixed effects. Squared terms are scaled for readability. Standard errors (clustered by MTurk
ID) are in brackets. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

37

Table 6: Testing for heterogeneous tax preferences on wealth
(1)
(2)
(3)
Var: Obama supporter Var: Supports redistr. Var: Luck important
Var x Wealth x
Inheritance

0.0151∗
[0.00811]

0.00308∗
[0.00179]

0.000526
[0.00814]

Wealth x Inheritance

0.0120∗
[0.00628]

0.00715
[0.00734]

0.0249∗∗∗
[0.00507]

Inheritance question

1264.8
[2090.0]

67.27
[2195.5]

-1726.2
[1347.5]

Var x Wealth

-28.31
[510.8]

151.9∗
[80.41]

465.1
[367.2]

Var x Inheritance
questions

-1452.4
[2558.9]

43.85
[543.2]

2822.8
[2603.3]

Wealth (dollars)

0.00777
[0.00473]

0.000487
[0.00244]

0.00461∗∗∗
[0.00121]

Var

2384.5
[1896.8]

290.8
[330.2]

350.6
[1586.6]

Dept. var. mean
Observations

20006.9
9305

20006.9
9305

20025.3
8290

Notes: All regressions include fixed effects for survey date, question order, MTurk ID and income
decile fixed effects. Support for Obama and belief that luck is more important than hard work are
binary variables. Support for redistribution is on a 1-7 scale. Standard errors (clustered by MTurk
ID) are in brackets. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

38

Table 7: Testing for separability between wealth and income tax preferences
Dependent variable: Total tax bill (dollars)
Generic wealth
(1)
(Income x Wealth)/100M

Wealth from savings Wealth from inherit.

(2)

(3)

1.129
[1.046]

(4)

-0.431
[1.662]

(5)

(6)

1.468
[3.591]

Wealth (dollars)

0.0105∗∗∗ 0.0122∗∗∗ 0.00797∗∗ 0.00877∗∗∗ 0.0292∗∗∗
[0.00285] [0.00281] [0.00312] [0.00315] [0.00446]

0.0308∗∗∗
[0.00419]

Income (dollars)

0.147∗∗∗ 0.157∗∗∗ 0.135∗∗∗
[0.0106] [0.00954] [0.0105]

0.124∗∗∗
[0.0128]

0.139∗∗∗
[0.0221]

Wealth x (Inc. <50,000)

-0.00143
[0.00194]

-0.00273
[0.00388]

-0.00116
[0.00471]

Income <50,000

1397.5
[1595.8]

-29.20
[1453.1]

1399.8
[2616.2]

Dept. var. mean
Observation

22415.1
5420

22415.1
5420

13008.0
4503

13008.0
4503

0.126∗∗∗
[0.0173]

26570.0
4802

26570.0
4802

Notes: Data for the first two columns are taken from the baseline surveys (where the source of
wealth is not specified). Data for the middle two columns uses the surveys where the source is
specified, but only use the answers to the vignettes where wealth comes from savings (and only
from those who saw the savings vignettes first). The last two columns are analogues to the middle
two but use the questions where wealth comes from inheritance. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

39

Table 8: Most common bigrams and trigrams (surveys where source is specified)
Bigrams
Phrase
base incom
incom tax
pay tax
tax rate
flat tax
tax incom
year incom
alreadi tax
inherit money
inherit tax
incom wealth
10 incom
tax payment
incom year
earn year
save inherit
tax inherit
10 tax
incom level
peopl pay
tax money
percentag incom
save money
decid base
tax peopl
wealth incom

Trigrams
Count

Phrase

100
87
80
77
68
64
49
46
45
42
41
40
37
35
34
34
34
32
32
32
31
30
29
28
28
28

went gut feel
base incom wealth
just went gut
10 tax incom
alreadi paid tax
base tax payment
flat tax rate
money alreadi tax
tax base incom
10 flat tax
level tax payment
base incom level
flat 10 tax
incom regardless wealth
most base incom
peopl pay tax
think peopl pay
think peopl tax
believ flat tax
decid base incom
flat tax 10
money save inherit
peopl inherit money
percentag base incom
tax money save

Count
12
11
11
10
10
10
10
10
10
9
9
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
7
7
7

Notes: Data are taken from surveys in which we specify the source of wealth in the vignettes. At
the end of these surveys (after all chosen tax bills are entered and demographic questions are
asked) we ask respondents “Please describe how you decided on the level of tax payments for the
hypothetical individuals in the survey.” We use the “tm” package in R to process the text of the
responses to this question. We convert all text to lowercase, strip punctuation and common
English stopwords, and stem words with a Porter stemmer. We then take all 2-word (bigram) and
3-word (trigram) sequences in the remaining text, and calculate frequencies across subject
responses.

40

Table 9: Implied redistributive motives, given subjects’ preferred tax rates and select elasticity assumptions)
Supply elasticity of aggregate capital K
Subjects’ chosen τ ...

(1)
eK =0

(2)
eK =0.1

(3)
eK =0.25

(4)
eK =0.5

(5)
eK =1.0

...on generic K inc. (23.3%)
...on K inc. from savings (15.2%)
...on K inc. from bequests (61.3%)

0.622
0.737
0.240

0.603
0.724
0.202

0.574
0.704
0.145

0.527
0.671
0.0499

0.432
0.605
-0.140

Notes: See Section 6 Rfor a full definition of redistributive motives. Briefly, the redistributive
gk
motive is defined as Ri ki i , where gi is the welfare weight put on an individual i with capital
i i
R
income ki . ByR assumption, Ri gi = 1, so that if welfare weights are negatively correlated with
wealth then

Ri

gi ki
ki

i

< 1. For

Ri

gi ki
ki

< 0 welfare weights on the wealthy are negative. Subjects’

i

preferred capital tax rates are taken from col. (4) of Table 2 and cols. (2) and (4) of Table 4. We
multiply these rates on wealth by 20 to convert them into rates on capital income (assuming a
five percent rate of return). ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

41

Appendix Figure 1: Tax bill as a function of income (wealth from savings)

Notes: The figure shows residualized vintiles of the tax and wealth data. The tax choices have
been adjusted for income decile fixed effects and survey date fixed effects. Note that as the scatter
points are collapsed to vintiles, subjects were confronted with more than the twenty wealth
choices plotted in the figure. Fitted lines are based on the underlying data, not the scatter points.

42

Appendix Figure 2: Tax bill as a function of income (wealth from inheritance)

Notes: The figure shows residualized vintiles of the tax and wealth data. The tax choices have
been adjusted for income decile fixed effects and survey date fixed effects. Note that as the scatter
points are collapsed to vintiles, subjects were confronted with more than the twenty wealth
choices plotted in the figure. Fitted lines are based on the underlying data, not the scatter points.

43

Appendix Table 1: Survey rounds where the source of wealth is not specified
Round
1
2

Date
2014-11-11
2014-12-12

Sample size
2,740
2,680

Variation
Basic
Extended Wealth Support

Notes: “Basic” indicates that wealth values were drawn from the distribution {$50,000, $100,000,
$200,000, $500,000, $1,000,000, $2,000,000}. Extended Wealth Support adds values $300,000,
$750,000 and $1,500,000 to the support of the wealth distribution.

Appendix Table 2: Survey rounds where the source of wealth is specified
Round
1
3
4
5
6
7

Date
2015-04-06
2015-04-14
2015-11-10
2015-11-24
2015-12-22
2015-12-23

Sample size
2,618
3,010
3,962
4,214
4,200
4,228

Variation
Basic
Basic
Extended Wealth Support
Jittered
Jittered
SCF Values

Notes: “Basic” indicates that wealth values were drawn from the distribution {$50,000, $100,000,
$200,000, $500,000, $1,000,000, $2,000,000}. Extended Wealth Support adds values $300,000 and
$750,000 to the support of the wealth distribution. Jittered means that wealth values from the
extended distribution were additionally given a 5% addition or subtraction. SCF values means
that wealth, income pairs were drawn from 2010 Survey of Consumer Finance survey. Round 2
(N =32) was dropped due to implementation problems.

44

Appendix Table 3: Verifying that levels of wealth subjects are asked to consider are uncorrelated with their characteristics (in
surveys where source of wealth is unspecified)
(1)
Female
Wealth/100,000
Observations

(2)
Obama

(3)
Age

(4)
College

(5)
White

(6)
Black

0.000692 0.000227 -0.00210 -0.000289 -0.000122 -0.000290
[0.000967] [0.000931] [0.0190] [0.000983] [0.000881] [0.000493]
5420

5420

5410

5420

5410

5410

(7)
Own HH inc.
-16.66
[62.38]
5410

(8)
Married

(9)
Emp. FT

-0.000564 0.0000903
[0.000940] [0.00100]
5420

5410

Notes: Data are taken from surveys where the source of wealth is not specified. Each coefficient is from a regression of the form
V ari = βW ealthit + λt + eit , where V ar take the values of the characteristics listed in the columns. These regressions include survey
date fixed effects (λt ), given our different sampling rules for income and wealth employed across survey dates. As in our main
regressions, we cluster standard errors by mTurk ID. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

45
Appendix Table 4: Verifying that levels of income subjects are asked to consider are uncorrelated with their characteristics (in
surveys where source of wealth is unspecified)
(1)
Female
Income/10,000
Observations

(2)
Obama

(3)
Age

(4)
College

(5)
White

(6)
Black

-0.000290 -0.000159 0.0101 -0.000759 0.000171 -0.000352
[0.000681] [0.000694] [0.0139] [0.000677] [0.000614] [0.000366]
5420

5420

5410

5420

5410

5410

(7)
Own HH inc.
-29.12
[38.11]
5410

(8)
Married

(9)
Emp. FT

0.000370 -0.000162
[0.000665] [0.000692]
5420

5410

Notes: Data are taken from surveys where the source of wealth is not specified. Each coefficient is from a regression of the form
V ari = βIncomeit + λt + eit , where V ar take the values of the characteristics listed in the columns. These regressions include survey
date fixed effects (λt ), given our different sampling rules for income and wealth employed across survey dates. As in our main
regressions, we cluster standard errors by mTurk ID. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Appendix Table 5: Checking randomization of wealth values within survey date (surveys where source of wealth is specified)
(1)
Female
Wealth/100,000
Observations

(2)
Obama

(3)
Age

(4)
College

(5)
White

(6)
Black

-0.000285 -0.000242 0.0106 0.0000184 0.000382 -0.0000928
[0.000710] [0.000711] [0.0152] [0.000730] [0.000627] [0.000331]
9305

9305

9305

9305

9305

9305

(7)
Own HH inc.
1.645
[57.45]
9305

(8)
Married

(9)
Emp. FT

-0.000227 -0.00101
[0.000691] [0.000740]
9305

9305

Notes: Data are taken from surveys where the source of wealth is specified. Each coefficient is from a regression of the form
V ari = βW ealthit + λt + eit , where V ar take the values of the characteristics listed in the columns. These regressions include survey
date fixed effects (λt ), given our different sampling rules for income and wealth employed across survey dates. As in our main
regressions, we cluster standard errors by mTurk ID. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

46
Appendix Table 6: Checking randomization of income values within survey date (surveys where source of wealth is specified)
(1)
Female
Income/10,000
Observations

(2)
Obama

(3)
Age

(4)
College

(5)
White

(6)
Black

-0.000388 -0.000271 -0.00435 -0.00106 -0.000167 -0.000128
[0.000647] [0.000653] [0.0131] [0.000656] [0.000548] [0.000325]
9305

9305

9305

9305

9305

9305

(7)
Own HH inc.
-27.76
[53.47]
9305

(8)
Married

(9)
Emp. FT

0.000582
0.000771
[0.000626] [0.000657]
9305

9305

Notes: Data are taken from surveys where the source of wealth is specified. Each coefficient is from a regression of the form
V ari = βIncomeit + λt + eit , where V ar take the values of the characteristics listed in the columns. These regressions include survey
date fixed effects (λt ), given our different sampling rules for income and wealth employed across survey dates. As in our main
regressions, we cluster standard errors by mTurk ID. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Appendix Table 7: Comparing respondents randomized into first seeing savings versus inheritance questions
(1)
Income
47

Saw savings
questions first

(2)
Wealth

(3)
Female

(4)
Obama

(5)
Age

(6)
(7)
College White

(8)
Black

749.4
1907.9 -0.00419 0.000184 0.320 -0.0220 0.00515 -0.00706
[1328.7] [12369.2] [0.0269] [0.0259] [0.558] [0.0265] [0.0233] [0.0140]

Mean, inheritance 72664.7 608291.3
Observations
9305
9305

0.429
9305

0.652
9305

33.18
9305

0.618
9305

0.757
9305

0.0743
9305

(9)
(10)
(11)
Own HH inc. Married Emp. FT
-242.1
[2119.9]
51027.2
9305

-0.0257 -0.00295
[0.0258] [0.0271]
0.356
9305

0.541
9305

Notes: Data taken from surveys where the source of wealth is specified. Each coefficient is from a regression of the form:
V arit = βSaw savings f irstit + λt + eit , where Saw savings f irst is a dummy for having been randomized to see first the vignettes
where wealth is due to savings. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Appendix Table 8: Do respondents’ answers depend on which types of vignette (savings
versus inheritance) they encounter first?
Wealth from savings

Wealth from inherit.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Wealth (dollars)

0.00766∗∗∗
[0.00218]

0.0134∗∗∗
[0.00318]

0.0303∗∗∗
[0.00354]

0.0170∗∗∗
[0.00254]

Income (dollars)

0.132∗∗∗
[0.00759]

0.149∗∗∗
[0.0227]

0.135∗∗∗
[0.0178]

0.122∗∗∗
[0.0111]

Dept. var. mean
Module viewed first
Round FE?
mTurk ID FE?
Observations

13008.0
Savings
Yes
Yes
4503

17080.1
Inheritance
Yes
Yes
4570

26570.0
Inheritance
Yes
Yes
4802

19367.4
Savings
Yes
Yes
4697

Notes: Data taken from surveys where the source of wealth is specified. All regressions include
question-order and mTurk ID fixed effects. The headings indicate the type of vignette (wealth
from savings or wealth from inheritance) the respondents are answering. Standard errors clustered
by mTurk ID. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

48

Appendix Table 9: Testing for heterogeneous tax preferences on wealth (additional results)

49

(1)
Var: Female

(2)
Var: Older than 30

(3)
Var: Above med. inc.

(4)
Var: Has kids

(5)
Var: Has BA

(6)
Var: White

Var x Wealth x
Inheritance

-0.00196
[0.00845]

0.000316
[0.00802]

0.000243
[0.00784]

0.00685
[0.00805]

-0.00365
[0.00864]

-0.0105
[0.0105]

Wealth x Inheritance

0.0227∗∗∗
[0.00453]

0.0216∗∗∗
[0.00631]

0.0218∗∗∗
[0.00526]

0.0171∗∗∗
[0.00638]

0.0244∗∗∗
[0.00746]

0.0300∗∗∗
[0.00965]

Inheritance question

-1128.5
[1313.3]

604.1
[1974.8]

819.1
[1667.6]

546.5
[1732.8]

519.5
[2101.5]

-2122.1
[2705.8]

Var x Wealth

453.7
[474.3]

-263.7
[429.6]

-239.7
[352.9]

-125.2
[385.3]

-389.8
[457.5]

-189.3
[441.4]

Var x Inheritance
questions

3357.2
[2566.2]

-474.1
[2406.6]

-1269.4
[2278.8]

-328.4
[2293.7]

-504.4
[2521.0]

3145.6
[3000.7]

Wealth (dollars)

0.00570∗∗∗
[0.00151]

0.00904∗∗
[0.00398]

0.00851∗∗∗
[0.00307]

0.00847∗∗∗
[0.00282]

0.00988∗∗
[0.00419]

0.00906∗∗
[0.00373]

Var

-3966.2∗∗
[1726.3]

685.2
[1597.7]

1286.2
[1343.5]

338.4
[1468.4]

2588.2
[1670.5]

380.0
[1723.6]

Dept. var. mean
Observations

20006.9
9305

20006.9
9305

20006.9
9305

20006.9
9305

20006.9
9305

20006.9
9305

Notes: Data taken from surveys where the source of wealth is specified. All regressions include income fixed effects. Standard errors
clustered by mTurk ID. ∗ p < .1,∗∗ p < .05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

