                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MEASURING THE POTENTIAL HEALTH IMPACT OF PERSONALIZED MEDICINE:
                   EVIDENCE FROM MS TREATMENTS

                                     Kristopher J. Hult

                                    Working Paper 23900
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w23900


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




Thanks for useful comments from the attendees of the Economic Dimensions of Personalized and
Precision Medicine conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Kristopher J. Hult. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Potential Health Impact of Personalized Medicine: Evidence from MS Treatments
Kristopher J. Hult
NBER Working Paper No. 23900
October 2017
JEL No. I1,I10,I11,O3,O31

                                           ABSTRACT

Individuals respond to pharmaceutical treatments differently due to the heterogeneity of patient
populations. This heterogeneity can make it difficult to determine how efficacious or burdensome
a treatment is for an individual patient. Personalized medicine involves using patient
characteristics, therapeutics, or diagnostic testing to understand how individual patients respond
to a given treatment. Personalized medicine increases the health impact of existing treatments by
improving the matching process between patients and treatments and by improving a patient's
understanding of the risk of serious side effects. In this paper, I compare the health impact of new
treatment innovations with the potential health impact of personalized medicine. I find that the
impact of personalized medicine depends on the number of treatments, the correlation between
treatment effects, and the amount of noise in a patient's individual treatment effect signal. For
multiple sclerosis treatments, I find that personalized medicine has the potential to increase the
health impact of existing treatments by roughly 50 percent by informing patients of their
individual treatment effect and risk of serious side effects.


Kristopher J. Hult
Charles River Associates
1 S Wacker Dr # 3400
Chicago, IL 60606
khult@uchicago.edu
1      Introduction

Pharmaceutical treatments in the United States are homogeneous products that are tightly regulated by the


FDA to ensure that the dosage and delivery are consistent across each prescription. However, dierences


across patientsincluding genetics, age, comorbidity, preferences, and environmentand dierences across


diseasessuch as severity and progressioncause the impact of a treatment to vary across patients. Patients


respond to the same dosage dierently, from how their bodies process and react to the treatment to the side


eects that arise.
                    1

     This heterogeneity is often not apparent when assessing the impact of innovations because clinical trials


and cost-eectiveness research focus on the average treatment eect, even if this eect varies signicantly


across patients. To understand the potential impact of heterogeneity across treatments, consider two treat-


ments in the same disease category where the health impact of each treatment measured in quality-adjusted


life years (QALYs) across the patient population is an independent normal distribution with a mean of one


QALY and a standard deviation of one.
                                                  2 If patients match with the treatment that provides the highest

individual health impact, then the total impact across all patients is over 56 percent higher than if patients


are randomly assigned a treatment.
                                             3

     Personalized medicine is a growing eld that addresses the heterogeneity in treatment eects across


patients by targeting or tailoring treatments to individuals based on their characteristics.                       Personalized


medicine has the ability to create novel treatments, such as treatments that target specic genes or proteins,


and the ability to guide patients to the most ecacious treatment through diagnostic testing or data-driven


analysis.
          4

     Understanding the potential impact of incorporating patient heterogeneity in biology, environment, and


behavior, the United States announced a $215 million Precision Medicine Initiative in 2015.
                                                                                                                5 The purpose

of this initiative is to provide funding for research in personalized medicine, including building a research


cohort to collect individual level data to help develop more eective treatments and funding cancer genomics,


one of the leading research elds in personalized medicine.
                                                                       6

     We are just beginning to understand the potential impact of precision medicine. Goldman                       et al. (2013)

present a framework for understanding the value of diagnostic tests. In a case study of rofecoxib, a non-

    1 See discussions and examples in Basu   et al. (2014), Kravitz et al. (2004), and Segal et al. (2012).
    2 QALYs are a frequently used measure    of either disease burden or treatment eect that includes the quality and quantity of
life lived by the patient.
    3 The maximum of two independently distributed normal distributions with mean µ and a standard deviation of one is
distributed as a Gumbel or Extreme Value Type 1 distribution which has a mean of µ + π1 > µ + 0.56.
    4 Examples of targeted treatments include human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) in breast cancer, epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) in colorectal cancer, and BRAF inhibitors for melanoma. See Hutchinson et al. (2015).
    5 See www.whitehouse.gov/precisionmedicine.
    6 See Chin et al. (2011).




                                                                 2
steroidal anti-inammatory drug that was withdrawn from the market, they show that diagnostic testing


can have a large social value by avoiding unnecessary treatment and identifying patients who would not


otherwise be treated. Basu (2013) discusses the dierence between passive personalization, which is a form


of learning by doing where patients and physicians learn about patient-specic treatment eects through a


trial and error process, and active personalization, which involves biomarker and genetic tests that inform


patient-specic treatment eects.


   Egan and Philipson (2014) discuss the role of passive personalization in measuring adherence.                      They


create a dynamic model to argue that personalized medicine has the capacity to expedite this search process


which reduces over-adherence and increases under-adherence.


   The goal of this paper is to present a framework for understanding the potential health impact of per-


sonalized medicine and to compare it to the health impact of other types of pharmaceutical innovations.
                                                                                                                        7 I

present a theoretical framework for measuring the health impact of personalized medicine by modifying the


model of Hult (2014). The model in this paper measures the value of two types of personalized medicine:


allocating patients to treatments based on individual treatment eects and identifying individual risk to


serious side eects from a treatment. The health impact of these types of personalized medicine depends


on the number of treatments, the variance in the health impact within a treatment, the noise in a patients


signal of their treatment eect, and the correlation of treatment eect across the dierent treatment options.


   To understand the value of personalized medicine, consider two examples.                  First, consider a multiple


sclerosis (MS) patient deciding which rst line therapy to take. If that patient chooses a therapy on which


they will eventually fail (meaning they have a suboptimal response and switch to a dierent therapy), that


patient experiences a relapse rate ve times higher compared with their second therapy (Rio                  et al., 2012).

These patients stay on their unsuccessful rst treatment for almost as long as they stay on their successful


treatment (3.9 years versus 4.2 years). For diseases like multiple sclerosis where the disease progression is


irreversible and failing on a treatment produces similar results to taking no treatment at all, the eect of


choosing an ineective treatment can be signicant and permanent.


   Second, consider an MS patient deciding which second line therapy to take. Two second line options are


Tysabri, a treatment with the highest ecacy but the risk of a potentially fatal side eect, and Gilenya, a


treatment with lower ecacy but with much less severe side eects. When personalized information is used


to inform a patient of their individual side eect risk level (which ranges from less than 1 in 10,000 to 1


in 89), high risk patients are able to avoid being exposed to the potentially fatal side eect while low-risk


patients are able to take more ecacious treatments than they would have without personalized information

  7 This paper focuses on pharmaceuticals, but the implications of the paper are also relevant for medical devices and other
medical treatments.



                                                             3
(Sorensen   et al., 2012).

    I measure the relative impact of personalized medicine compared with the introduction of new treatments


in a case study of MS treatments. I nd that the potential health impact of personalized medicine for MS


patients would increase the health impact of existing treatments by 21 percent by improving the ability to


match patients with the treatment that provides the largest treatment eect and by 30 percent by properly


identifying the risk of a patient to serious side eects, which can prevent a patient from taking the treatment


that provides the largest treatment eect. I end with a discussion of the incentives for rms to invest in and


the return to personalized medicine.


    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the dierent types of pharmaceutical innovation,


which include novel, follow-on, and personalized innovations.              Section 3 discusses the theory of how to


measure the value of personalized innovations. Section 4 is a case study of disease-modifying therapies in


Multiple Sclerosis to illustrate the return to personalized medicine. Section 5 discusses the value of and the


incentive for rms to engage in personalized medicine. Section 6 concludes.




2        Types of Pharmaceutical Innovations

There are three main types of pharmaceutical innovations: novel innovations, follow-on innovations, and


innovations in personalized medicine. Novel innovations are the approval of a chemical entity that has not


already been approved by the FDA and is the part of the pharmaceutical treatment that is responsible for


the pharmacological action of the treatment. These approvals are either a new molecular entity (for smaller


chemically synthesized molecules) or a new biologic (for larger treatments extracted from biological sources).


Novel innovation is a necessary precursor for follow-on innovation and personalized medicine. However, novel


innovation in its original form often extracts only part of the potential health impact of the new molecule


because it generally provides only one treatment which has not been adapted to the heterogeneity of the


treatment population or to the learning that takes place from treatments being on the market. Follow-on


innovations and personalized medicine develop the molecule into a more ecacious or desirable treatment


for patients.


    Follow-on innovations take already FDA-approved molecules and create new treatments by changing the


dosage, formulation, indication, active ingredient, or by combining two molecules.
                                                                                                8 Roughly 70 percent of

all FDA approved innovations are and over half of all prescriptions use follow-on innovations (Hult 2014).


Follow-on innovations make three main types of improvements. First, they can create a new treatment by


combining existing molecules.       Second, they can make existing treatments either more eective or better

    8Afollow-on innovation that contains a new active ingredient means that it contains the same active moiety but includes a
dierent enantiomer, racemate, salt, ester, complex, chelate, or clathrate.


                                                             4
tolerated. Third, they can expand the number of treatment options available and expand the availability of


treatment to subgroups of the population.
                                                9 The main focus of these innovations is to expand the treatment

population, reduce treatment burden, or increase ecacy for a group of patients. For instance, HIV/AIDS


treatments in their original form were unable to be taken by pediatric, elderly, and pregnant patients. With


follow-on innovation, all of these patients groups now have a variety of treatment options, including oral


pellets that can be mixed into children's food or intravenous treatments for patients that cannot take the


pill regimen.
              10

   The third type of innovations are innovations in personalized medicine, which take follow-on innovations


a step further by creating directed treatments or diagnostics tests from the characteristics of an individual


patient.    These innovations can create new treatments, create datasets or diagnostic tests to determine


the best treatment considering individual treatment eects, and identify individual treatment burdens for


patients.




Improve Matching and Reduce Searching                      One way in which personalized medicine improves the


health outcomes of patients is that it can inform a patient about which treatment will either be more


ecacious or have a lower burden of treatment through diagnostic testing or patient databases.
                                                                                                                    11   If a


patient learns of their individual treatment eect, it can direct the patient towards a treatment that makes


them better o than if they do not have any individual specic information.


   Consider the two treatment options shown in Figure 1.                This gure plots the distribution of patient


outcomes for the treatment ecacy and burden of two treatments, treatment 1 (represented in blue) and


treatment 2 (represented in red). The indierence curves (IC) show the ecacy and burden combinations


for which patients are equally well o, so a patient is indierent between receiving the treatment eect of


any points along the same IC. Patients are better o with higher ecacy and lower treatment burdens so


they are better o on indierence curves closer to the upper left of the graph. A patient with no information


about his individual treatment eect would be indierent between these two treatments.
   9 Examples of follow-on innovations include the creation of CART treatments used in HIV/AIDS which combine three dierent
molecules in a treatment that reduces pill burden and potential drug interactions; Fetzima, a SNRI drug used to treat major
depressive disorder, was approved as a new active ingredient using a dierent orientation of the molecule in milnacipran HCI
(Savella) which is used to treat bromyalgia; and Norvir, an HIV/AIDS treatment, received a new formulation which eliminated
the need for refrigeration, reduced the number of drug and food interactions, and provided extended release for drugs.
  10 See UNAIDS (2015).
  11 As a simplication, throughout this paper I treat the patient as the person who decides what treatment to take when this
decision is heavily inuenced by the physician.




                                                             5
                                   Figure 1: Improve Matching and Reduce Searching




    However, if a patient learns from diagnostic testing that they receive the ecacy and treatment burden


at point A for treatment 1 and the ecacy and treatment burden at point B for treatment 2, then the patient


is better o taking treatment 1 than treatment 2.


    There are dierent ways that a patient can learn about their individual treatment eect, which can


broadly be categorized as passive and active personalized medicine.
                                                                                 12 In passive personalized medicine, a

patient or their physician learns about a patient's individual treatment eect through learning-by-doing. So


a patient may try dierent treatments and learn his treatment eect or the physician may learn about how


dierent patients respond to dierent treatments from experience.                 Passive personalized medicine can be


thought of as a dynamic process of a patient searching over treatments or making the decision to continue


taking a given treatment.
                              13

    Passive searching has several costs including opportunity costs, side eects, and nancial costs.                      For


example, if a patient has an aggressive form of MS, taking a treatment that the patient does not respond to


can cause irreversible damage and disability and allow the disease to progress to a form of MS that is less


responsive to therapy (see Rush        et al., 2015). In addition for MS patients, taking less ecacious but milder

treatments at an early stage of the disease can increase the risk of serious side eects for a patient who


takes more ecacious treatments at a later stage of treatment. Therefore, when patients have to passively


search over treatments, a patient with a more aggressive disease will be more prone to serious side eects


than a patient who can be matched to the more ecacious treatment earlier (see Saheer and Berger, 2012).


Finally, MS patients may develop neutralizing antibodies taking one treatment that makes other treatments


ineective. For example, if a patient takes either Betaseron (interferon beta 1-b), Extavia (interferon beta

  12 See adiscussion of passive and active personalization in Basu (2013).
  13 Egan and Philipson (2016) describe it as an optimal stopping problem as a patient learns his individual treatment eect as
he takes a treatment.


                                                              6
1-b), or Glatopa (glatiramer acetate), that patient may develop neutralizing antibodies that will block the


biological activity of the other two treatments.


   In active personalized medicine, physicians give patients a diagnostic test or use patient databases to learn


how an individual patient may respond to a treatment. In the MS examples above, this would include a test


that determines the aggressiveness of a patient's MS or susceptibility of developing neutralizing antibodies


to determine which course of treatment is best for that patient.




Risk Assessment           Another way that personalized medicine impacts health is through risk assessment.


Some treatments have very serious side eects for a fraction of the patient population. For example, Tysabri,


an MS treatment, has a side eect of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) for up to 0.013


percent of patients. PML is a devastating disease that has a mortality rate up to 50 percent within months


and potentially severe neurological disabilities for those who survive.
                                                                              14 The risk of PML was enough to

get Tysabri pulled from the market within four months of FDA approval.             However, Tysabri is the most


ecacious treatment for MS patients. The ability to identify patients with higher risk factors can reduce


the odds of getting PML from 0.013 to less than 0.001 percent.




                                              Figure 2: Risk Assessment




   For example, Figure 2 shows two treatments, treatment 1 in blue and treatment 2 in red. Treatment


1 has a potentially serious side eect (which increases the treatment burden) as shown by the two blue


distributions. The treatment 1 distribution on the left is for those patients who do not have the side eect,


and the treatment 1 distribution on the right is for those patients who have the side eect. Without any


information about their side eect risk factor, patients would choose treatment 2. However, if patients can

 14 See   https://www.tysabri.com/en_us/home/about/safety-side-eects.html.


                                                            7
identify whether they would have the serious side eect from treatment 1, then patients could incorporate


this information in their treatment decision.                     In this bifurcated outcome, the health impact of treatment


increases on average.




3        Measuring Health Impact

In this section, I describe a model from Hult (2014) that describes how to measure the health impact of


pharmaceutical treatments, and I discuss an extension of the model to incorporate patient heterogeneity and


the potential health impact of personalized medicine.




3.1          Health Impact of Novel and Incremental Innovation


The health impact of a novel or incremental innovation is how much it increases the patient population's


length and quality of life. Innovations aect health through three channels: adherence, quantity measured


as the number of users, and ecacy measured in QALYs.


       The health impact of treatment              t   on individual   i (hit )   is:




                                                                   hit = ait eit


where        ait   is the adherence and      eit   is the ecacy conditional on being fully adherent for patient               i   with


treatment          t.   Health impact is a one-dimensional measure of the total impact of a treatment incorporating


ecacy as well as the treatment burden, such as side eects or burden of administration. A negative value


for    hit   means that a patient is worse o taking the treatment relative to not taking the treatment, and the


more positive the value for          hit   the better o the patient is taking the treatment.


       Summing across all patients who take treatment                     t (i ∈ T ),    the aggregate health impact of treatment    t,

Ht ,   is:




                                                                    X             X
                                                         Ht   =           hit =         ait eit
                                                                    i∈T           i∈T
                                                              = qt h̄t = qt at¯et


where        qt    is the quantity measured as the number of users.                     If 100 people take a drug with a 60 percent


adherence rate that adds one QALY on average, then the health impact of the drug is 60 QALYs.
                                                                                                                          15

  15 100 ∗ 0.6 ∗ 1      QALY = 60 QALYs.



                                                                          8
    To measure the increase in health impact produced by treatment                         t,   which is how treatment       t   in-


creases health impact relative to the standard of care (SOC) that existed before the innovation, I construct


∆Htinnovation :



                                                             ∂ht      ∂ht      ∂ht
                                           ∆Htinnovation =       ∆q +     ∆a +     ∆e
                                                             ∂q       ∂a       ∂h
                                                         = ∆qt at et + ∆at qt et + ∆et qt at

                                                         = ∆qt ht + ∆ht qt


where     qt   is the average quantity of treatment      t per year, ∆qt    is how treatment    t changes the quantity relative

to the standard of care (SOC),             ∆at   is how treatment   t   changes the adherence rate relative to the SOC, and


∆et   is how treatment          t   changes ecacy relative to the SOC. Hence, the health impact of treatment            t   is the


eect of the change in the quantity, adherence, and ecacy relative to what would be used instead of that


treatment. For instance, if a treatment with 100 users and an ecacy of one QALY increases the adherence


rate relative to the previous SOC by ve percentage points, then the health impact of that innovation is


0.05 ∗ 100 ∗ 1 = 5          QALYs. If that drug innovation had an adherence rate of 60 percent and also increased


ecacy by 5 percent, then the health impact would be                    5 + 0.05 ∗ 100 ∗ 0.6 = 5.3   QALYs.




3.2       Potential Health Impact of Personalized Medicine


To understand the eect of innovations in personalized medicine, consider patient                      i   who receives a health


impact (h) measured in quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) and has the choice between two treatments,


treatment        A   and treatment       B.   The health impact for the two treatments is distributed as a bivariate


normal:                                                                         
                                                                   2
                                                        A   σA
                                                          µ                     σAB 
                                                 h ∼ N      ,
                                                                                  
                                                                                  2
                                                          µB     σAB             σB

where     µt   and   σt2   are the mean and variance of each treatment        t ∈ {A, B} and σAB      is the covariance between


A   and   B.     The covariance between treatment eects is important because the more correlated eects are


across treatments, the lower the value of identifying individual treatment eects.




Impact of Individual Treatment Eect on Searching                               Information about the patient's individual


treatment eect can come from numerous sources, including disease severity and progression, genetics, en-


vironment, and comorbid conditions. In this section I do not distinguish learning through passive or active




                                                                    9
learning, as they have the same eect. For simplicity in this section assume                           µA > µB .16

       If a patient has no information about their individual treatment eect, then the patient chooses the


treatment     t with the highest µt because the patient's expected health impact for each treatment is E[ht ] = µt .

In this scenario, each patient chooses treatment              A,   and the average treatment eect across all patients is


h̄1 = maxt∈{A,B} (µt ) = µA .17

       With perfect information, a patient knows his exact              h for each treatment so he simply chooses the highest

ht .   In this scenario, the average treatment eect across all patients is




                                           h̄2 = µA Φ(η) + µB (1 − Φ(η)) + θφ(η)


                                               µA −µB
                 p
          θ =         2 + σ 2 − 2σ
                     σA
where                      B      AB , η =        θ   , and   φ(·)      and   Φ(·)   are the pdf and cdf of a standard normal


distribution respectively (Nadarajah and Kotz, 2008).                    Note that        h̄2 ≥ h̄1 ,   so patients are not worse o


having perfect information about their individual treatment eect.
                                                                                         18

       The third scenario is patients receive a noisy signal of their individual treatment eect from                              t.    For a


patient who has treatment eect           ht   from treatment      t,   that individual gets a signal             st ∼ N (ht , σs ).    In this


scenario, patients choose the treatment with the highest signal                 st , and the average treatment eect across all

patients is     h̄3 = maxt∈{A,B} (st ).   Receiving an inaccurate signal means that a patient can choose a treatment


with a lower treatment eect (ht ). Across the population, patients get a greater health impact with perfect


information compared to either a noisy signal or no information (h̄2                          ≥ h̄3   and   h̄2 ≥ h̄1 )   but having a noisy


signal does not necessarily make the patient better o than having no signal (h̄1 can be greater than, less


than, or equal to       h̄3 ).

       As a result, the maximum potential health impact of personalized medicine in this market is:




                                                    ∆H p      = q∆hp
                                                                                     
                                                              = q h̄2 − h̄1


With a noisy signal the maximum potential health impact of personalized medicine is:




                                                    ∆H p      = q∆hp
                                                                                     
                                                              = q h̄3 − h̄1
  16 In this framework, generics and biosimilars can be thought of as treatments with the same distribution and perfect correlation
with the branded treatment. Therefore, having a generic option does not provide an increase in health impact. If a generic uses
a dierent formulation or delivery mechanism, then it would not necessarily be perfectly correlated with the branded version.
  17 Throughout this section, I assume patients are risk neutral.
  18 The max of two or more independently distributed normals generalizes to the Gumbel distribution, or type 1 extreme value
distribution, which for two standard normals has a mean of √1π ≈ 0.56.


                                                                   10
         ∂ h̄3              ∂ h̄3
where
        ∂σAB     ≤0   and
                            ∂σs     ≤ 0.   Therefore, the less correlated the dierent treatment outcomes and the less


noise that a patient has about his treatment eect, the larger the health impact of personalized medicine for


improving the matching of patients to treatments.


   For this paper the relevant comparison is how much personalized medicine can increase the total health


impact compared to how patients and physicians choose treatments in the real world:




                                                    ∆H p
                                                                                 
                                                            = q h̄3 − h̄actual                                     (1)




   To understand the eect of a patient's knowledge of his individual treatment eect, consider an example


where the distribution of           h   across two treatments A and B is:


                                                                                 
                                                             1.5   1.5         σAB 
                                           (hA , hB ) ∼ N      ,
                                                          
                                                                                     
                                                              1      σAB          1

and patients receive a noisy signal of their individual treatment eect observe:




                                                    st ∼ N (ht , 1) ∀t ∈ {A, B}


Figure 3 illustrates the average treatment eect for dierent covariances between the two treatments (σAB )


for the three scenarios discussed:             patients have no information about their individual treatment eect,


patients have full information about their individual treatment eect, and patients have a noisy signal of


their individual treatment eect.




                            Figure 3: Average Treatment Eect by         σAB     and Patient Signal




                                                                11
   In this example, perfect knowledge of an individual's treatment eect increases the health impact by up


to 33 percent relative to patients choosing the treatment with the highest average health impact. The largest


increase in health impact comes when the treatments are uncorrelated and there is no health impact when


the treatments are perfectly correlated. With a noisy signal, the increase in health impact with uncorrelated


treatment eects drops to 23 percent and is negative with perfectly correlated treatment eects.




Impact of Individual Treatment Eect on Risk Assessment                                       The impact of risk assessment is similar


to treatment eect of searching except the health impact of treatment                               A (hA )   comes from a multimodal


normal distribution. This distribution represents the two possible outcomes that occur depending on whether


the patient does not get the serious side eect (state 1) or the patient does get the serious side eect (state


2). Therefore:


                                                       µA = pµA1 + (1 − p)µA2


and

                                                    2     2            2
                                                   σA = pσA1 + (1 − p)σA2 +γ


where   γ = p(1 − p)(µA1 − µA2 )2           and   A1    represents treatment         A   in state 1 and       A2   represents treatment    A

in state 2.


   Consider a patient choosing between treatment                   A   and treatment          B   where a patient knows his individual


treatment eect for each treatment in each state in the world such that                               hA1 > hB > hA2 .19          With no


individual information about          p,   the probability a patient is in state 1 (no serious side eect) versus state 2


(serious side eect), the patient may have information about                     p̄,     the average share of patients in state 1 in


the patient population. A patient then chooses treatment                   A   if:



                                                                   hB − hA2
                                                            p̄ >
                                                                   hA1 − hA2

and treatment       B   if the inequality holds in the other direction.
                                                                                         20   As a result, all patients choose either


treatment     A   or treatment    B   based on    p̄   and the average health impact of the dierent treatments.


   If a patient has information about his individual probability of getting the serious side eect,                            pi ,   then he


chooses treatment       A   if:
                                                                   hB − hA2
                                                            pi >
                                                                   hA1 − hA2
  19 It is straightforward to adapt this example to the case where the patient has no information or noisy information about
his health impact and makes his choice based on either the treatment average across the population (µ) with no information or
the treatment signal (s) with noisy information.
  20 The patient chooses treatment A if p̄h
                                            A1 + (1 − p̄)hA2 > hB .




                                                                    12
                                                                                                                      hB −hA2
and treatment    B    if the inequality holds in the other direction. As a result, for the case when           p̄ >   hA1 −hA2 ,

patients with   pi   such that:
                                                          hB − hA2
                                                   p̄ >             > pi
                                                          hA1 − hA2

would choose treatment      A in the case of no information and treatment B          in the case of full information about


p.21   This patient is better o in the case of full information by       pi hA1 + (1 − pi )hA2 − hB > 0.     Summing over


all patients the increase in health eect is:



                                                   X
                                  ∆H p =                        pi hA1 + (1 − pi )hA2 − hB                                  (2)
                                             n              o
                                                   h −h
                                           i∈ pi < h B −hA2
                                                    A1    A2




4      Case Study in MS

MS is a good case study for understanding the value of innovations in personalized medicine because there


is profound heterogeneity in the MS population, disease course, and treatment response (Lucchinetti                      et al.,

2000). MS is a chronic condition that occurs when the body's immune system attacks the central nervous


system and damages or destroys the nerve's protective covering, causing are-ups that range from dizziness


to paralysis and cognitive loss.
                                    22 There are currently more than 400,000 patients with MS in the United

States with almost $14 billion in annual spending on MS treatments, which makes it the fourth largest


specialty pharmacy class in the US.
                                          23

    Currently, physicians can rely on clinical trials data, biomarkers, and passive searching to determine the


best course of treatment. Clinical trials data in MS is useful at the group level, but it is viewed as insucient


to inuence individual treatment decisions and few biomarkers have made their way into clinical practice


in MS (Derfuss 2012). As a result, there is very little predictive power about how a patient will respond


to an individual treatment (Derfuss 2012). Passive searching, while frequently used, is costly because, as


previously discussed, it can cause irreversible damage and disability, increase disease progression, increase


future side eects, and increase the probability that a patient will be unresponsive to alternative treatments.


    There are twelve disease modifying therapies (DMTs) available in the US to treat MS, which are listed


in Table 4. The purpose of these treatments is to reduce the number of are-ups that patients suer, and


they do not cure the underlying disease.           These treatments can broadly be categorized in two ways: by


line of treatment and mode of administration. Figure 4 shows the typical line of treatment for each DMT,

  21 The case when p̄ < hhA1
                           B −hA2
                                    and p̄ < hhA1
                                               B −hA2
                                                        < pi is symmetric.
                             −hA2                 −hA2
  22 There are four disease courses for MS patients, clinically isolated syndrome (CIS), relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS), primary
progressive MS (PPMS), and progressive relapsing MS (RPMS). 85 percent of MS patients have RRMS, which is the focus of
this case study (Trapp and Nave, 2008).
  23 See Pietrangelo and Higuera (2015) and IMS (2015).




                                                                13
where rst line treatments are safer treatments with lower ecacy and lower treatment burden, second line


treatments are more aggressive treatments that feature higher ecacy but also higher treatment burden,


and third line treatments feature the highest ecacy but also have potentially life-threatening side eects.


Most of the rst line treatments are referred to as ABCRE treatments which represents Avonex, Betaseron,


Copaxone, Rebif, and Extavia.




Source: Coles (2015)


                                   Figure 4: Market for MS Treatments



   The other way the market is divided is by the mode of administration. There are three modes of admin-


istration: injection, infusion, and oral. The ABCRE treatments are all injectable (either with intramuscular


or subcutaneous injection) and injectables were the only option from 1993 to 2004.


   In 2004, Tysabri, a more ecacious treatment that is administered through infusion was introduced.


Tysabri plays an important role in the MS market because it is not only the most ecacious treatment,


but it has been linked to a rare and highly fatal brain disease PML. Tysabri was approved by the FDA in


2004 as the rst infusion treatment and was almost six times more ecacious than any existing treatment.


By February 2005, the treatment was withdrawn from the market after three patients developed PML. In


February 2006, Tysabri returned to the market with conditions including mandatory patient registration in


a database, follow-ups every six months, and MRI evaluation prior to initiation.


   In 2010, oral treatments were introduced which reduced the burden of treatment administration yet have


among the lowest adherence rates of any MS treatment.




                                                    14
4.1     Data


There are three main types of data necessary to estimate the health impact of MS treatments: the distribution


of QALYs for each treatment           t   (previously denoted as      µt   and   σt ),   the covariance in treatment outcomes


between treatments (σt1 t2 ), and the patient count estimates for each treatment (qt ).                      The data appendix


provides additional details about the data.


    The QALYs estimates are taken from published clinical studies, most of which are summarized in the Tufts


Medical Center Cost-Eectiveness Analysis Registry (CEAR).
                                                                             24 CEAR includes over 4,800 pharmaceutical

cost-utility analyses in the peer-reviewed medical literature. It is intended to be a comprehensive dataset


of all cost-utility articles analyzed by trained professionals, who rate the quality of the study and provide


information about the quality level and quality relative to the standard of care found in the study. Of the 24


MS studies that use MS DMTs, I rely on the 15 that are for RRMS patients (which composes 85 percent of


all MS patients). CEAR rates the studies on a scale from 1 to 7 depending on the quality of the analysis. All


of the MS clinical studies used from the CEAR dataset have a rating above average. The ecacy measures


are relative to a patient taking no DMT, so a QALY of zero means that the treatment provides no benet


relative to not taking any DMT.


    The estimates of the covariance between treatment outcomes are more dicult to measure because clinical


studies generally provide information about how a patient responds to one treatment, not how each patient


responds to multiple treatments.
                                          25 However, there are observational studies that measure the treatment eect

of patients before and after a treatment failure, which is when a patient experiences a suboptimal response


to a treatment and switches to a substitute treatment.
                                                                   26 These studies show how a patient responded to two

dierent treatments conditional on the patient failing at least one of the treatments, but do not show how


many patients would have been successful on both treatments.
                                                                              27 Appendix 3 describes how the covariance

estimates were constructed.


    The patient count estimates come primarily from published reports that use Symphony Health Solutions


and IMS data.
  24 I assume the distributions of QALYs from clinical studies is equal to distributions of all patients in the disease category, that
the QALY measure incorporates all side eects as well as treatment ecacy, and that QALY measures incorporate adherence
and are not conditional on adherence.
  25 See Basu and Philipson (2011) for a discussion of the eect of the joint distribution of treatment eects.
  26 See, eg., Rio et al. (2012) and Gajofatto et al. (2009).
  27 A patient's response to their second treatment may be aected by the rst treatment. For example, I previously discussed
the eect of neutralizing antibodies which could be produced during the rst treatment and make the second treatment less
eective.




                                                                 15
4.2    Health Impact


I measure the actual or potential health impact of seven events in the history of MS treatments: (1) the


innovation of Betaseron, the rst MS DMT, (2) the innovation of the other ABCRE DMTs, (3) the potential


impact of improved matching between ABCRE treatments, (4) the innovation of oral DMTs, (5) the potential


impact of improved matching between oral DMTs, (6) the innovation of infusion DMTs, and (7) the potential


benet of risk assessment for Tysabri.




1. Innovation of Betaseron             Betaseron, approved in 1993, was the rst DMT for MS. As shown in Table


4, Betaseron provides patients with 0.34 QALY relative to no DMT, has an adherence rate of 52 percent,


and has a market share of 10 percent (or roughly 23,400 patients per year).


   To measure the health impact of Betaseron, I compare the market for MS with no DMT and a but-


for world where Betaseron is the only DMT. I assume that in this but-for world all interferon patients


and 63 percent of Copaxone patients (the share of actual Copaxone patients that are tolerant of interferon


treatments) would be on Betaseron (Bergvall            et al. 2014). .28 As a result, the introduction of Betaseron

provided 0.34 QALYs of treatment for 76 percent of the market (or 178,000 patients) for a total health


impact of roughly 61,000 QALYs.




2. Innovation of other ABCREs                 After Betaseron's entry to the market, the other ABCRE treatments


(Avonex, Copaxone, Rebif, and Extavia) hit the market between 1996 and 2009. The introduction of these


treatments had several eects. First, they expanded the market by the 21 percent of the market (or 63 percent


of actual Copaxone patients) who could take Copaxone but not an interferon. Second, the introduction of the


other ABCRE treatments made higher ecacy and adherence treatments available. For instance, Copaxone,


with an ecacy of 0.41 QALY and an adherence rate of 55 percent, has a higher ecacy and adherence rate


than Betaseron.


   To determine the increase in health impact from the other ABCRE treatments, I measure the share of


patients who failed or did not fail on treatment.
                                                       29 Failure is dened by either switching to a dierent rst line

treatment or switching to a second line treatment after being on treatment for less than 2 years. I assume


that patients who failed their treatment received a health impact similar to a patient who was randomly


assigned a treatment (h1 ) and a patient who did not fail their treatment received a health impact similar to


a patient who was assigned their optimal treatment (h2 ).


   The introduction of the ABCREs increased the health impact of MS treatments by 22,000 QALYs or a


36 percent increase in the total health impact.

 28 There   are four interferon treatments, Avonex, Betaseron, Extavia, and Rebif, which compose 55 percent of the market)
 29 These   shares are taken from Gajofatto et al. (2009).


                                                             16
3. Potential of ABCRE Heterogeneity              Using the distribution of health impact for each of the treat-


ments (shown in Table 1) and the covariance table found in Appendix 3, I estimate the potential impact


of personalized medicine to match patients to their highest individual treatment eect across the dierent


ABCRE treatments.


   I assume that the individual health impact from Avonex and Rebif (which are both interferon beta 1-a)


and from Betaseron and Extavia (which are both interferon beta 1-b) are perfectly correlated because they


are the same molecule.       Since Avonex and Rebif have dierent modes of administration, this assumption


provides a conservative estimate of the potential impact of heterogeneity.


                                                Mean Standard Deviation
                                   Avonex        0.20               0.08
                                  Betaseron      0.34               0.14
                                  Copaxone       0.41               0.20
                                   Extavia       0.34               0.14
                                    Rebif        0.20               0.08


                          Table 1: Distribution of Health Impact of ABCRE Treatments



   The health impact of the actual distribution of patients across treatments increases the health impact by


63 percent relative to patients being randomly distributed across treatments. The maximum potential health


impact given this distribution provides an 18 percent or 14,000 QALY increase compared to how patients


and physicians choose treatments in the real world.




4. Innovation of Oral Treatments           The three oral treatments, Aubagio, Gilenya, and Tecdera, entered


the market between 2010 and 2013. These treatments altered the MS landscape by oering an alternative


form of treatment administration. They also oered improved ecacy over the existing ABCRE treatments


for early line patients. The oral treatments expanded the market by the six percent of oral treatment patients


that were not on any MS treatment before taking an oral treatment.
                                                                           30 In addition, the oral treatments

increased the maximum health impact by a rst line treatment by 0.19 QALY.


   As a result, the introduction of the oral treatments increased the health impact by 18 percent over


ABCRE treatments which resulted in an increase of 15,000 QALYs.




5. Potential of Oral Treatment Heterogeneity                 As with the ABCRE treatments, properly matching


patients with treatments considering patient heterogeneity has a potential to increase the health impact of


treatments. The distribution of health impact across the oral treatments is listed in Table 2.


   The health impact of the current distribution of patients across treatments increases the health impact


by 100 percent relative to patients being randomly distributed across treatments. The maximum potential
 30 See   MS in America (2014).


                                                        17
                                                   Mean Standard Deviation
                                      Gilenya       0.60                0.27
                                     Aubagio        0.32                0.34
                                     Tecdera       0.59                0.23


                            Table 2: Distribution of Health Impact of Oral Treatments



health impact given this distribution provides am 18 percent increase over the current distribution. As a


result, personalized medicine that improves the ability of patients to identify the oral treatments with the


highest impact can improve the average health impact of these patients by 17,700 QALYs.




6. Innovation of Infusion Treatments                The innovation of infusion treatments, especially Tysabri, not


only brought a new form of treatment administration to the market but also an increase in ecacy. The


infusion treatments increased the market by 3 ppts since 35 percent of infusion patients were new to the


market (in other words they were not patients that would have been on another treatment in the absence


of the infusion treatments) and infusion treatments compose 9 percent of the market (Biogen, 2008).                        In


addition, the infusion treatments provide 1.70 QALY over the next highest treatment in terms of ecacy.


    As a result, the infusion treatments increased the total health impact by 60 percent or almost 58,000


QALYs.




7. Potential of Tysabri Risk Assessment                As discussed previously, Tysabri not only brought an increase


in ecacy but also the potential for a very serious side eects.
                                                                         31 Tysabri's PML side eect was not known

at the time of the FDA approval. Instead, the treatment was on the market for almost three months when


Biogen, the maker of Tysabri, learned about one conrmed and two suspected cases of PML. As a result,


Tysabri was temporarily pulled from the market until it was allowed to be reintroduced to the market roughly


one and a half years after learning about the PML side eect.


    Since the PML side eect was learned after Tysabri was on the market, I back out the eect that PML


has on Tysabri consumption to measure the potential eect of a PML diagnostic test. First, prior to learning


about PML, industry analysts expect Biogen sales to exceed 87,000 patients per year which amounts to over


40 percent of market share.
                                32 Second, when information about Tysabri's link to PML came out, Biogen's

stock dropped 44 percent or $10 billion which is consistent with an expected market share of Tysabri above


33 percent.
             33 Third, before the information about Tysabri's link to PML was known, industry projection

  31 It was recently discovered that Tecdera also poses a PML risk.
  32 Wall Street Journal (2005). Tysabri was expected to sell over $2  billion per year at $23,000 per year. For a market with
210,000 patients, which is roughly the market size in 2009, this would amount to over 40 percent of the market.
  33 See http://www.fool.com/investing/high-growth/2005/03/08/after-the-crash-is-biogen-idec-a-buy.aspx. If Avonex was re-
sponsible for the entire $12 billion remaining market share, had 40 percent market share, and had a nearly identical price to
Tysabri, this suggests that Tysabri's market share would be in excess of 33 percent market share



                                                             18
models predicted that Tysabri would have a market share that rose from 15 percent in 2005 (the treatment's


rst full year on the market) and would stay around 35 percent through 2015.
                                                                                               34 Finally, these estimates

are consistent with an estimate based on physician perceptions. If the only patients in the current market


that are prescribed Tysabri are patients with physicians who feel the benets of Tysabri outweigh the costs


(roughly 65 percent of physicians) and are JCV negative (55 percent of patients), then Tysabri's 9 percent


market share would be over 25 percent in a world with perfect information about a patient's PML risk.
                                                                                                                           35

    All of these examples suggest that Tysabri would have a market share between 25 and 40 percent of


the market with a diagnostic test that provides perfect information about a patient's PML risk.                         To be


conservative and allow for the introduction of other treatments that were not on the market in 2005, I


assume Tysabri would have a 20 percent market share if it did not have any PML side eect. By comparison


the number of PML cases in the US from 2005 to 2015 was 165.
                                                                            36

    As a result, a perfect PML diagnostic test that could correctly identify the PML side eect would have


allowed over 12 percent of the MS market to take Tysabri while restricting it to the hundreds of patients


that were subjected to PML.
                                  37 The health impact of putting 12 percent of the market that is not at risk for

PML onto Tysabri relative to the treatment with the next highest health impact (0.60 for Gilenya compared


with 2.30 for Tysabri) would increase the total health impact by almost 47,000 QALYs or 30 percent from


the current market.
                       38

    Although conservative in the 20 percent market share, this estimate serves as an upper bound for a PML


diagnostic test since the diagnostic test would not perfectly sort patients. The health impact of an actual


diagnostic test would depend on its accuracy.




Breakdown         Table 3 breaks down what share of the total health impact discussed in the previous sections,


come from each of the seven events.
  34 http://www.fool.com/investing/small-cap/2004/12/07/spin-the-medicine-bottle.aspx
  35 http://i.bnet.com/blogs/tysabri-condence-survey_gure-2.jpg
  36 http://wasmain.nationalmssociety.org/site/DocServer/PML._MS_Summit_2015.pdf?docID=75816.
  37 There is already a diagnostic test on the market for JCV. In a step toward incorporating personalized    medicine into MS
treatments, in 2012, the FDA approved the Stratify JCV Antibody ELISA test, which helps identify patients who are more
prone to PML. This diagnostic test tells if a patient is anti-JCV antibody positive or negative. If the patient is anti-JCV
antibody negative, they have a lower than 1 in 1,000 risk of developing PML. If the patient if anti-JCV antibody positive, that
risk is between 6 and 13 in 1,000 depending on prior treatments. However, 70 to 90 percent of the population has the JCV
virus, so the test is not very informative about a patient's actual risk factors (Holland and Nall, 2015). However,this test was
not on the market for most of the period of interest so the vast majority of MS patients did not have access to JCV diagnostic
test before taking Tysabri.
   38 Lemtrada is currently the second highest treatment on the market, but it has not been on the market long so it would not
have a signicant impact during the 2005 to 2015 time period.




                                                              19
             Table 3: Health Impact by Type of Innovation as a Share of Total Health Impact




    This breakdown shows that personalized medicine events in MS have the potential to increase the health


impact of treatments by over 50 percent (=0.34/0.66). The potential health impact of personalized medicine


is split between improving the matching process of patients to treatment through the individual treatment


eect and risk assessment for serious side eects.


    Betaseron had the largest impact even in large part because it was the rst treatment on the market


and the infusion treatments had the second largest impact because they were had the highest ecacy. The


potential impact of a Tysabri risk assessment shows that Tysabri would have by far the largest health impact


if the PML risk were better identied.


    The impact of perfectly sorting patients on both ABCRE and oral treatments is roughly equivalent to


the impact of the seven treatments (Avonex, Copaxone, Rebif, Extavia, Gilenya, Aubagio, and Tecdera).




5    Value of and Incentives to Engage in Personalized Medicine In-

     novation

Up to this point, this paper has focused on the health impact of personalized medicine. In this section, I


discuss the value of this personalized medicine, dened as the health impact divided by the cost of creating


the innovation, as well as the incentive for individual rms to engage in R&D in personalized medicine.




                                                     20
    It is dicult to measure the R&D cost of creating personalized medicine because R&D costs are generally


not observed and there are so many dierent ways to create personalized medicine. There are three broad


ways to categorize innovations in personalized medicine: innovations that create new treatments, innova-


tions create a diagnostic test for existing treatments, and innovations that predict a patients response to a


treatment through data on patient characteristics.


    For innovations that create new treatments, the cost to create an innovation in personalized medicine


is likely to be even higher than the cost of a standard novel innovation. For a standard novel innovation,


where new molecules cost in excess of $2.5 billion, a large share of the cost comes from the clinical trials


that are required for FDA approval (DiMasi         et al., 2016). For personalized innovations, the clinical trials are

more complex because there is a narrower patient population that respond to the targeted therapies, which


increases the cost of patient recruitment, and standard protocols may need to be enhanced to determine the


safety and ecacy of each treatment, including improved diagnostic and data collection (PhRMA, 2015).


    For innovations that create a diagnostic test, the cost of creating a personalized innovation is likely to


be a cheaper but potentially still a risky form of R&D. Rough estimates put the developement costs at $250


million to $300 million, or roughly 10 to 12 percent of the cost of a new treatment (McKinsey and Company,


2013).     Even after Tysabri was pulled from the market for the potential of PML and foregoing potential


revenues in excess of $1 billion per year, it took nearly seven years to get the rst PML diagnostic test


approved by the FDA. However, the cost of this diagnostic test is likely to be signicantly less than the cost


of funding a novel, competitive treatment for Tysabri.


    Innovations that predict a patients response to a treatment through data on patient characteristic are


likely to be signicantly cheaper to develop. For example, the Rio Score is a scoring system that combines


patient characteristics, including clinical and MRI parameters, to predict whether a patient will fail on a


treatment (Rio      et al., 2009).39 After one year of therapy, 92 percent of patients with a Rio Score of 2 or 3

failed on their treatment while 8 percent of patients with a Rio Score of 0 or 1 were failed their treatment


(Hyun      et al., 2015). Tests like these are far cheaper forms of innovations but can have signicant eects on

health impact.


    It is well documented that prot is a major driver of a rm's decision to engage in pharmaceutical


innovation.
              40   Firms have dierent incentives regarding the incentive to engage in personalized medicine

  39 The Rio Score is the count of how many of the following conditions are met: (1) more than 2 active T2 lesions on an MRI,
(2) at least 1 relapse, and (3) and increase of EDSS score by at least 1 point sustained over at least six months. Failure was
dened as having any of the following: switched therapy due to failure, clinical relapse, or EDSS progression.
  40 See Acemoglu and Linn (2004).




                                                             21
depending on how the personalized information aects expected prots. Prots for treatment                        t   are:




                                                      Πt = qt (pt − ct ) − rt


where     qt   is the number of patients,   pt   is the price per patient,   ct   is the cost per patient, and   rt   is the R&D


cost of   t.   The main eect of personalized medicine is through the number of patients.


    Personalized medicine that aects the active or passive searching over treatments has two eects on


prots. First, there is a redistribution of patients between treatments. Consider the extreme case of switching


from no information about individual treatment eects to perfect information about treatments eects, the


redistribution moves patients away from the treatment with the highest average treatment eect (which


all patients would take) to the other treatment depending on the distribution of each treatment and the


correlation of the treatments.        This redistribution gets more complicated when there is more noise in a


patient's signal of his individual treatment eect.


    The second eect is that information can cause the total number of patients on treatment to change. For


instance, in the market for infusion MS treatments, more patients could start treatment because they know


they will not get PML and some patients may stop taking treatment because they learn they are at risk for


PML and are not satised with the other treatments on the market.


    For risk assessment, there is a strong incentive for rms to engage in personalized medicine when their


product has an uncertain side eect risk. The reason, as discussed previously in this paper, is that uncertainty


about a potentially serious side eect can cause patients to avoid a product. For example, Biogen, the rm


that produces Tysabri, forgoes in excess of $1 billion per year by patients avoiding the treatment due to the


potential of PML.
                       41 It is no surprise that Biogen is the rm behind the Stratify JCV Antibody ELISA test

as well as investing in other research topics including a PML vaccine and two anti-PML treatments.
                                                                                                                             42




6     Conclusion

The potential of personalized medicine comes from its ability to either create treatments that address the


heterogeneity across patients or in the ability to provide information to patients that can improve the health


impact of existing treatments.        This paper explores the potential magnitude of the latter eect for MS


treatments.


    I nd that several factors inuence the health impact of personalized medicine. Personalized medicine has

 41 The $1 billion estimate comes from the potential of Tysabri loosing over 10 percent of the $14 billion annual MS market.
 42 http://www.xconomy.com/boston/2009/11/19/tysabri-the-ms-drug-haunted-by-deadly-side-eect-doesnt-look-so-deadly-
anymore/4/.



                                                                22
a greater potential health impact when treatment eects are less correlated across treatments, the variance


of the distribution of health impacts is larger, there is less noise in an individual's signal of their treatment


eect, and there are more treatment options.


   These results suggest that there is signicant potential for personalized medicine in MS due to the


heterogeneity in the MS population, disease course, and treatment response and twelve DMTs that vary in


their ecacy and administration. I nd that personalized medicine has the potential to increase the health


impact of MS patients by over 50 percent.


   One extension of this work is understanding the value of me-too innovations or evergreening, which


are innovations that are considered to be slight modications of existing treatments.         The conventional


wisdom is that these innovations provide little to no value and waste resources (see, eg., Collier, 2013).


With personalized medicine, me-too innovations can provide a health impact even if they have a lower


average treatment eect than similar existing products if the treatment eects are not well correlated across


treatments.   This result suggests that me-too innovations are more valuable in a world with personalized


medicine.


   Three areas for future research in personalized medicine are, rst, estimating the R&D costs to get a


better understanding of the value of investments in personalized medicine. Second, using data of how and


why patients switch between treatments to understand the value of improving the ability to match patients


to treatments in a dynamic method, similar to Egan and Philipson (2014). This type of analysis is ideally


suited to patient level data that includes a patient's treatment history and the disease progression over time.


Third, there are currently eight established biomarkers and at least six potential biomarkers in MS and it


would be valuable to understand how much health impact could be gained if these biomarkers could be more


eectively integrated into determining individual treatment eects (Derfuss 2012).




References

  1. Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn.         Market Size in Innovation:     Theory and Evidence from the


      Pharmaceutical Industry.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 3 (2004): 1049-1090.


  2. Basu, Anirban.    Personalized Medicine in the Context of Comparative Eectiveness Research.           In

      Forum for Health Economics and Policy, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. S73-S86. 2013.


  3. Basu, Anirban, Anupam B. Jena, Dana P. Goldman, Tomas J. Philipson, and Robert Dubois. Het-


      erogeneity in action: the role of passive personalization in comparative eectiveness research.    Health

      Economics 23, no. 3 (2014): 359-373.



                                                       23
 4. Basu, Anirban, Anupam B. Jena, and Tomas J. Philipson. "The Impact of Comparative Eectiveness


    Research on Health and Health Care Spending."       Journal of Health Economics 30, no. 4 (2011): 695-

    706.



 5. Biogen. Biogen Idec Q1 2008 Earnings Conference Call and Webcast, April 23rd, 2008.          Accessed


    September 3, 2016 at https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/875045/000095013508002670/b69762


    a1defa14a.htm.



 6. Center for the Evaluation of Value and Risk in Health.        The Cost-Eectiveness Analysis Registry


    [Internet]. (Boston), Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical Center.


    Available from: www.cearegistry.org Accessed on September 3, 2016.



 7. Chin, Lynda, Jannik N. Andersen, and P. Andrew Futreal.          Heterogeneity in Action:   the Role of


    Passive Personalization in Comparative Eectiveness Research.      Nature Medicine 17, no. 3 (2011):

    297-303.



 8. Coles, Alasdair. Newer Therapies for Multiple Sclerosis.   Annals of Indian Academy of Neurology 18,

    no. Suppl 1 (2015): S30.



 9. Collier, Roger. Drug Patents: The Evergreening Problem.        Canadian Medical Association Journal

    185, no. 9 (2013): E385-E386.



10. Derfuss, Tobias. Personalized Medicine in Multiple Sclerosis: Hope or Reality?.   BMC Medicine 10,

    no. 1 (2012): 1.



11. Devonshire, V., Y. Lapierre, R. Macdonell, C. Ramo-Tello, F. Patti, P. Fontoura, L. Suchet        et al.

    The Global Adherence Project (GAP): A Multicenter Observational Study on Adherence to Disease-


    Modifying Therapies in Patients with Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis.     European Journal of

    Neurology 18, no. 1 (2011): 69-77.


12. DiMasi, Joseph A., Henry G. Grabowski, and Ronald W. Hansen. "Innovation in the Pharmaceutical


    Industry: New Estimates of R&D Costs."     Journal of Health Economics 47 (2016): 20-33.


13. DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski.           The Price of Innovation: New


    Estimates of Drug Development Costs.    Journal of Health Economics 22, no. 2 (2003): 151-185.


14. Dionne, Caitlin A., Rik Ganguly, Ann Camac, and Claudia Chaves.           Do Oral Disease Modifying


    Agents (DMTs) Improve Adherence to MS Treatment? A Comparison of Oral and Injectable Drugs.


    Accessed September 3, 2016, https://cmsc.confex.com/cmsc/2015/webprogram/Paper3275.html.



                                                   24
15. Egan, Mark, and Tomas J. Philipson.      Health Care Adherence and Personalized Medicine.         No.


   w20330. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.


16. Gajofatto, A., P. Bacchetti, B. Grimes, A. High, and E. Waubant.       "Switching First-Line Disease-


   Modifying Therapy after Failure: Impact on the Course of RelapsingRemitting Multiple Sclerosis."


   Multiple Sclerosis Journal 15, no. 1 (2009): 50-58.


17. Goldman, Dana P., Charu Gupta, Eshan Vasudeva, Kostas Trakas, Ralph Riley, Darius Lakdawalla,


   David Agus, Neeraj Sood, Anupam B. Jena, and Tomas J. Philipson. The Value of Diagnostic Testing


   in Personalized Medicine.   In Forum for Health Economics and Policy, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. S87-S99.

   2013.


18. Halpern, Rachel, Sonalee Agarwal, Carole Dembek, Leigh Borton, and Maria Lopex-Bresnahan. Com-


   parison of Adherence and Persistence among Multiple Sclerosis Patients Treated with Disease-Modifying


   Therapies:    a Retrospective Administrative Claims Analysis.     Patient Preference and Adherence 5

   (2011): 73-84.


19. Holland, Kimberly, and Rachel Nall. The JC Virus and Risks for MS Patients. Accessed September


   3, 2016 at: http://www.healthline.com/health/multiple-sclerosis/jc-virus-risks-for-ms-patients.


20. Hult, Kristopher. Incremental Innovation and Pharmaceutical Productivity. Working Paper, (2014).


21. Hutchinson, Ryan A., Richard A. Adams, Darragh G. McArt, Manuel Salto-Tellez, Bharat Jasani, and


   Peter W. Hamilton. Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Immunohistochemistry: New Opportunities


   in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer.   Journal of Translational Medicine 13, no. 1 (2015): 1.


22. Hyun, Jae-Won, Su-Hyun Kim, In Hye Jeong, Suk-Won Ahn, So-Young Huh, Min Su Park, Young


   In Eom et al.    "Utility of the Rio Score and Modied Rio Score in Korean Patients with Multiple


   Sclerosis." PloS one 10, no. 5 (2015): e0129243.


23. IMS. Medicines Use and Spending Shifts. Accessed September 3, 2016 at: https://www.imshealth.com/


   les/web/IMSH%20Institute/Reports/Medicines_Use_and_Spending_Shifts/Medicine-Spending-and-


   Growth_1995-2014.pdf.


24. Kravitz, Richard L., Naihua Duan, and Joel Braslow.        Evidence-Based Medicine, Heterogeneity of


   Treatment Eects, and the Trouble with Averages.     Milbank Quarterly 82, no. 4 (2004): 661-687.


25. Lucchinetti, Claudia, Wolfgang Bruck, Joseph Parisi, Bernd Scheithauer, Moses Rodriguez, and Hans


   Lassman. Heterogeneity of Multiple Sclerosis Lesions: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Demyeli-


   nation.   Annals of Neurology 47, no. 6 (2000): 707-717.


                                                   25
26. Mauskopf, J. A., Monica Fay, Ravi Iyer, and T. Livingston. Cost-Eectiveness Of Delayed-Release


    Dimethyl Fumarate Compared To Glatiramer Acetate And Fingolimod For The Treatment Of Relapsing-


    Remitting Multiple Sclerosis.     Value in Health 3, no. 17 (2014): A60-A61.


27. Mckinsey and Company. Personalized Medicine: The Path Forward. 2013. Accessed August 29, 2017


    at: http://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/dotcom/client_service/Pharma%20and%20Medical%20Products/P


    .



28. MS in America 2014.       Accessed September 3, 2016 at https://multiplesclerosis.net/ms-in-america-


    2014/.



29. Nadarajah, Saralees, and Samuel Kotz. Exact Distribution of the Max/Min of Two Gaussian Random


    Variables."    IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 16, no. 2 (2008):

    210-212.



30. PhRMA. Biopharmaceutical Research and Development: The Process Behind New Medicines. Ac-


    cessed September 3, 2016 at http://www.phrma.org/sites/default/les/pdf/rd_brochure_022307.pdf.



31. Pietrangelo, Ann, and Valencia Higuera Multiple Sclerosis by the Numbers: Facts, Statistics, and You.


    Accessed September 3, 2016 at http://www.healthline.com/health/multiple-sclerosis/facts-statistics-


    infographic.



32. Pistoresi, Ryan Hay. Cost-Utility Analysis of Medications for Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis:


    A United States Third-Party Payer Perspective. PhD disseration, 2015.



33. Prosser, Lisa A., Karen M. Kuntz, Amit Bar-Or, and Milton C. Weinstein.           Cost-Eectiveness of


    Interferon Beta-1a, Interferon Beta-1b, and Glatiramer Acetate in Newly Diagnosed Non-Primary


    Progressive Multiple Sclerosis.    Value in Health 7, no. 5 (2004): 554-568.


34. Reynolds, Matthew W., Reejis Stephen, Chris Seaman, and Kitty Rajagopalan.             Persistence and


    Adherence to Disease Modifying Drugs among Patients with Multiple Sclerosis.          Current Medical

    Research and Opinion 26, no. 3 (2010): 663-674.


35. Río, J., M. Tintoré, J. Sastre, Garriga, C. Nos, J. Castilló, C. Tur, M. Comabella, and X. Montalban.


    Change in the Clinical Activity of Multiple Sclerosis after Treatment Switch for Suboptimal Response.


    European Journal of Neurology 19, no. 6 (2012): 899-904.


36. Rush, Carolina A., Heather J. MacLean, and Mark S. Freedman.             "Aggressive Multiple Sclerosis:


    Proposed Denition and Treatment Algorithm."        Nature Reviews Neurology 11, no. 7 (2015): 379-389.


                                                      26
37. Scottish Medicines Consortium. Accessed September 3, 2016 at www.scottishmedicines.org.uk%2Fles%


   2Fadvice%2Falemtuzumab_Lemtrada_FINAL_April_2014_amended_24.04.14_02.07.14_for_website


   .pdf&usg=AFQjCNEc-V-sgabtmRkOcwZFzfx9WL8WDQ&sig2=_L8x5z4HJw3IzJ7xRf3KqA



38. Segal, Jodi B., C. Weiss, and Ravi Varadhan. Understanding Heterogeneity of Treatment Eects in


   Pragmatic Trials with an Example of a Large, Simple Trial of a Drug Treatment for Osteoporosis


   (White Paper). Center for Medical Technology and Policy (2012).



39. Soini, Erkki, Christian Asseburg, and Marja-Liisa Sumelahti.       Cost-Utility Analysis Of First-Line


   Disease-Modifying Treatments Versus Best Supportive Care In Finnish Relapsing-Remitting Multiple


   Sclerosis (RRMS) Patients."   Value in Health: the Journal of the International Society for Pharma-

   coeconomics and Outcomes Research 17, no. 7 (2014): A399-A399.


40. Sørensen, Per Soelberg, Antonio Bertolotto, Gilles Edan, Gavin Giovannoni, Ralf Gold, Eva Havrdova,


   Ludwig Kappos, Bernd C. Kieseier, Xavier Montalban, and Tomas Olsson.            Risk Stratication for


   Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy in Patients Treated with Natalizumab.     Multiple Sclerosis

   Journal 18, no. 2 (2012): 143-152.


41. Trapp, Bruce D., and Klaus-Armin Nave.      Multiple Sclerosis:    An Immune or Neurodegenerative


   Disorder?.   Annual Review Neuroscience 31 (2008): 247-269.


42. Treadaway, Katherine, Gary Cutter, Amber Salter, Sharon Lynch, James Simsarian, John Corboy,


   Douglas Jeery    et al. Factors That Inuence Adherence with Disease-Modifying Therapy in MS.

   Journal of Neurology 256, no. 4 (2009): 568-576.


43. UNAIDS. New Formulation of HIV Treatment to Save More Children's Lives  UNICEF and UN-


   AIDS. Accessed September 3, 2016 at http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/presscentre/ pressrelease-


   andstatementarchive/2015/june/20150605_PS_children.



44. Wall Street Journal. Best 10-year Performer: Biogen Idec. Accessed September 3, 2016 at: http://


   www.wsj.com/articles/SB110929411399963912.



45. Zaheer, Fariha, and Joseph R. Berger. Treatment-Related Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopa-


   thy:   Current Understanding and Future Steps.    Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety (2012): 3:

   22739.




                                                 27
Appendix 1: MS Treatments




Sources: Listed in Appendix 2.


                                                                Table 4: Summary of MS Treatments
               40
   Market Share (Percent)
   10       20 0      30




                            2005   2006          2007              2008              2009              2010               2011              2012              2013              2014                2015
                                                                                                       Year
                                                        Aubagio                             Avonex                            Betaseron                            Copaxone
                                                        Lemtrada                            Rebif                             Tecfidera                            Tysabri
   Notes: ABCRE treatments are shown as solid lines and all other treatments are shown as dashed lines. Extavia, Gilenya, Glatopa, Lemtrada, and Plegridy are not shown due to low market shares.
   Sources: See Appendix 2.




                                                     Figure 5: Market Share of MS DMTs, 2005-2015




Appendix 2: Data

Health Impact/Ecacy Data                                         For the ecacy measurement, I mainly use the Tufts Medical Center


Cost-Eectiveness Analysis Registry (CEAR). CEAR includes over 4,800 pharmaceutical cost-utility analyses




                                                                                                  28
in the peer-reviewed medical literature. It is intended to be a comprehensive dataset of all cost-utility articles


analyzed by trained professionals, who rate the quality of the study and provide information about the quality


level and quality relative to the standard of care found in the study. The dataset lists the drug's name or


active ingredient; the drug's disease class, which can be uniquely mapped into my 19 disease classes; and


the year of the study. The dataset includes fteen studies that list the QALY of treatments for all ABCRE


treatments and Tysabri. I take the average across studies for treatments that have multiple studies. For the


oral treatments, I use estimates from Pistoresi (2015) and for Lemtrada, I use an estimate from the Scottish


Medicines Consortium (2014).


   The estimates of standard deviations are taken from estimates in Prosser            et al. (2003) and Pistoresi

(2015).




Adherence Data          Adherence is a measure of whether patients are taking their treatment as prescribed


and with the proper frequency. A patient is generally dened to be adherent if he possesses medication for at


least 80 percent of the time they are active on treatment. I get adherence estimates from published studies


in medical journals. Specically, for all ABCRE treatment, I use adherence estimates from Halpern           et al.

(2011), which estimates adherence rates from 6,680 MS patients from 2000 to 2008 on ABCRE treatments.


For oral and infusion treatments, I use estimates from Dionne           et al.   (2015) which compares adherence


rates for 209 MS patients. These rates are generally consistent with those found in other published studies


including Treadaway (2009), Devonshire       et al. (2011), and Reynolds (2010).



Patient Count Data           I take patient count estimates published estimates from Symphony Health Solu-

     43 Since these data are in revenues, I convert them to patients using cost estimates from Hartung et al.
tions.


(2015). I supplement this data with estimates published from Biogen documents, the producer of Avonex,


Plegridy, Tecdera, and Tysabri, published by the SEC which primarily use IMS data.
                                                                                              44




Appendix 3: Covariance Estimation

I estimate the covariance between treatment impacts using two observational studies of patients who switch


therapies (Gajofatto     et al., 2009 and Rio et al., 2002). The covariance could also be estimated using a

micro-level dataset that tracks a patient's treatment and response to treatment such as the Sylvia Lawry


Centre MS Patient Database.


   I estimate two covariances with this data. First, I estimate the covariance in treatment outcomes between

 43 See   http://symphonyhealth.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Tecdera.inThought.4Mar.pdf.
 44 See   Biogen (2008).



                                                          29
a patient on two dierent interferons. Second, I estimate the covariance in treatment outcomes between a


patient on an interferon and Copaxone. I do not have data on oral treatments so I assume that oral treatments


have the same covariance as an interferon with Copaxone. Since I do not have the patient's treatment impact


in QALYs, I use the covariance between treatment failure as a proxy. I dene treatment failure for the second


treatment as patients free from relapse. Table 5 shows the share of patients from Gajofatto    et al. (2009)

that fall into each combination of treatment pair and treatment result (failure/success). I observe aggregate


counts of patients who fail or not on their rst treatments. However, I do not observe what a patient who


has a success with their rst treatment would do on a second treatment.      As a result I assume that the


probability of success on treatment A given the success of treatment B is proportional to the probability of


failure on treatment A given failure of treatment B.




                                  Table 5: Failure Correlation Calculation



   The resulting covariances are list in Table 6.




                                  Table 6: Failure Correlation Calculation




                                                       30
