                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                LABOR SUPPLY AND THE VALUE OF NON-WORK TIME:
                   EXPERIMENTAL ESTIMATES FROM THE FIELD

                                         Alexandre Mas
                                         Amanda Pallais

                                       Working Paper 23906
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23906


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017




We would like to thank Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Jan Eckhout, Lawrence Katz, Bobby Pakzad-
Hurson, and seminar participants at Brown University and the University of Bonn for comments.
We would also like to thank Jenna Anders, Stephanie Cheng, Kevin DeLuca, Jason Goldrosen,
Disa Hynsjo, and Carl Lieberman for outstanding research assistance. Financial support from
NSF CAREER Grant No. 1454476 is gratefully acknowledged. The project described in this
paper relies on data from a survey administered by the Understanding America Study, which is
maintained by the Center for Economic and Social Research (CESR) at the University of
Southern California. The content of this paper is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the official views of USC or UAS. This project received IRB approval
from Princeton (#0000006906) and Harvard (#15-0673). This study can be found in the AEA
RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0002404).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Supply and the Value of Non-Work Time: Experimental Estimates from the Field
Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais
NBER Working Paper No. 23906
October 2017
JEL No. C93,J22,J64

                                         ABSTRACT

We use a field experiment to estimate the marginal value of non-work time (MVT). During a
national application process for phone survey and data entry positions, we randomly offered
applicants alternative wage-hour bundles. Jobseeker choices over these bundles yield estimates
for the MVT as a function of hours worked. These quantities trace out a labor supply relationship.
As predicted by the conventional model of the allocation of time, the substitution effect is
positive. Individual labor supply is highly elastic at low hours and becomes more inelastic at
higher hours. For unemployed job applicants, the opportunity cost of a full-time job due to lost
leisure, household production, and other non-work activities is approximately 60% of their
estimated market wage. A similar estimate is found when we reproduce elements of this
experiment in a nationally-representative survey.


Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@princeton.edu

Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
apallais@fas.harvard.edu
1     Introduction

The flow value of non-work time relative to a worker’s marginal product is a crucial parameter in many
macroeconomic models, including search models that seek to explain wage dispersion (Hornstein, Krusell,
and Violante, 2011) and the business cycle volatility of unemployment and vacancies (Shimer, 2005; Hage-
dorn and Manovskii, 2008). This parameter, which we denote as z, is typically calibrated, and for predic-
tions of models to match the data it often requires extreme levels. For example, Hornstein, Krusell, and
Violante (2011) show that z has to be very low, even negative, in order for frictional wage dispersion to
match observed wage dispersion. A very high value of z is required to match the business cycle volatility
of unemployment and vacancies in the Mortensen-Pissarides (Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994) search and
matching model (Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008). As noted by Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2013),
understanding how individuals value marginal leisure time is necessary for computing the welfare costs of
business cycles. Despite the relevance of this parameter to models of the wage structure and the business
cycle, there is an active debate about its level, in large part because it is difficult to measure directly.1
    We seek to fill this gap by estimating z using a natural field experiment. During two national application
processes, one to staff a call center and the other to fill data entry positions, we asked workers to choose
between two jobs with different hours per week and randomly-assigned wages. We use observed choices
to estimate the marginal value of time (MVT) at different levels of weekly work hours. These estimates
trace out a labor supply relationship from which we can back out parameters that are central to numerous
applications, including the value of non-work time and labor supply elasticities.
    In the experiment we posted ads on a major national job board for real phone survey and data entry
positions. To isolate a substitution effect and eliminate the role of commuting times the positions were
described as temporary and work from home.2 Interested applicants, the majority of whom were female,
were asked to choose between two positions that differed only in the number of weekly hours of work and
the hourly wage. We use their choices and a simple discrete choice model to estimate the average wage
workers are willing to accept to increase their working time by five hours per week. We use a similar
procedure based on willingness to work overtime at varying overtime premia to estimate the wages workers
are willing to accept to increase hours from 40 to 45 and from 45 to 50 hours per week. To assess generality,
we weight estimates to match the characteristics of hourly workers in the Current Population Survey based
   1 Borgschulte and Martorell (forthcoming) estimate a variant of z using reenlistment decisions of armed service personnel as a

function of the unemployment rate and their sensitivity to bonus payments. Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) argue that
cyclical variation in average hours worked and consumption results in pro-cyclical variation in z, but in their calibration a large
range of levels of z is possible.
   2 These characteristics accurately described the real jobs.




                                                                1
on age, gender, race, and education. We compare our estimates with data from a survey module we designed
for the nationally-representative Understanding America Study (UAS).
    For unemployed job applicants, we find that below 40 work hours MVT is increasing, but gradually. At
15 hours of work, the mean MVT in our sample is 50% of the predicted market wage of jobseekers, and at
35 hours of work it is 86%. Above 40 hours the MVT increases substantially. At 40-45 hours it is 157% and
at 45-50 hours it is 163% of workers’ predicted market wage. Since the collection of MVT values trace out
a labor supply function, we can use the MVT estimates to compute compensated labor supply elasticities.
At low hours of work labor supply is highly elastic. Below 30 hours the elasticity of hours with respect to
the wage is greater than 1. At or above 40 hours it is in the 0.4-0.6 range.
    We use the MVT estimates of unemployed applicants along with their predicted market wage to estimate
the flow value of non-work time relative to their market wage, denoted by e
                                                                          z. For a full-time job, the estimates
                                                                         z = 0.58 (s.e.=0.04). We get
imply a value of non-work time relative to predicted pre-tax earnings of e
similar estimates when we weight the sample to match the age, gender, education and race distribution of
hourly workers in the United States and when we use a hypothetical choice experiment in the nationally-
representative Understanding America Study. Estimated e
                                                      z is moderately lower for unemployed jobseekers
than for employed jobseekers but otherwise fairly stable when comparing across gender, local economic
conditions, and unemployment insurance eligibility.
    We then discuss how e
                        z (based on the market wage) and z (based on marginal product) relate to one an-
other. Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides models imply only a small divergence between wages and marginal
product, suggesting that these quantities will be close (Hall and Mueller, forthcoming). Estimates from
monopsony models imply a larger divergence (Manning, 2011). In either case, the overall body of evidence
suggests that z is in the intermediate to higher range of values used in the search literature and in the middle
of the range of Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016)’s estimates. Because both options presented to
jobseekers required them to incur any fixed cost of employment, the experiment isolates the variable com-
ponent of the opportunity cost that varies with time spent working. This includes substitution away from
leisure, home production and child care.3 It does not incorporate fixed costs like the cost of commuting.
These fixed costs, if quantified, can be added on to our estimate. As we discuss in Section 6, commuting
costs are non-negligible but small. To the extent that few of our job-seekers are receiving unemployment
insurance (UI) benefits, our estimates also do not include reductions in these benefits. While based on their
unemployment duration and state of residence, we estimate that almost three-quarters of unemployed ap-
plicants are potentially eligible for UI, we see little difference in the value of non-work time between these
  3 It   does not include any fixed cost of child care.




                                                          2
workers and applicants we classify as UI-ineligible. This may indicate, as Chodorow-Reich and Karabar-
bounis (2016) note that take-up is low even among eligible workers. For workers receiving benefits, the
value of the reduction of UI can be quite large. For example, with a replacement rate of 0.4 a worker with
UI benefits in our sample could have a value of non-work time relative to their market wage of close to
unity.4
    Our estimates are also useful for value of time measurement that enters into benefit-cost analyses. Value
of time is often explicitly incorporated into analyses of public policies that affect work hours, such as
infrastructure projects. While the market wage is a good approximation to the opportunity cost of employed
workers, for the unemployed the opportunity cost of work is difficult to measure since it reflects activities
that occur outside of the market, such as leisure, home production, and other non-work activities (Harberger,
1971; Bartik, 2012). This value is what we estimate.
    Another noteworthy finding is that the implied labor supply function is only moderately increasing at low
hours of work and becomes increasingly steeper at traditional full-time hours. The intensive margin labor
supply elasticity therefore decreases with hours worked. This suggests labor supply elasticities estimated at
particular hours levels may not generalize to other hours levels. Moreover, the high labor supply elasticity
we estimate at low hours may rationalize the fact that there are many full-time workers in the economy and
many individuals who are out of the labor force, but fewer part-time workers since there is a limited band of
wages where individuals would find it optimal to work part-time.
    Our study is most closely related to survey measures of the reservation wage, such as Feldstein and
Poterba (1984), Holzer (1986), Krueger and Mueller (2016), and Le Barbanchon, Rathelot, and Roulet
(forthcoming).5 The reservation wage is related to the flow value of non-market time, but it may differ if
unemployed workers take into account the continuation value of unemployment (Mortensen, 1987) or if
beliefs about attainable wages are biased (Krueger and Mueller, 2016). In addition, most reservation wage
questions refer to a generic job without specifying the hours of work. Our approach allows us to measure the
value of time at differing levels of hours of work. Since we find that the marginal value of non-work time is
increasing in work hours, the lowest wage required for a worker to accept a 20 hour job will be lower than the
lowest wage required for a worker to accept a 40 hour job. Importantly, our experimental measure is based
on decisions of jobseekers in a natural environment. Our paper also adds to a small literature that uses field
experiments to estimate labor supply relationships. Papers in the literature include Fehr and Goette (2007),
   4 However, the effective UI replacement rate of jobseekers may be lower due to cross-program effects with SNAP and Medicaid

such as those found by Leung and O’Leary (2015).
   5 Le Barbanchon, Rathelot, and Roulet (forthcoming) analyzes reservation wages reported to the public employment service

which affect workers’ job search process.




                                                              3
Goldberg (2016), and Angrist, Caldwell, and Hall (2017). We also add to a larger quasi-experimental labor
supply literature in situations where hours can vary freely, including Camerer et al. (1997), Oettinger (1999),
Farber (2005), Farber (2008), Ashenfelter, Doran, and Schaller (2010), Chen and Sheldon (2015), Farber
(2015), Stafford (2015) and Chen et al. (2017).
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the experimental design, while Section 3
presents our conceptual framework and estimation strategy. Section 4 contains the main results on MVT and
labor supply elasticity, while Section 5 explores heterogeneity in MVT. Finally, Section 6 concludes with a
discussion of our results.



2     Experimental Design

The experimental design is similar to the one detailed in Mas and Pallais (forthcoming), with a number of
elements that differ. Our experiment took place in 2017 during the hiring process to fill telephone interviewer
and data entry positions. We posted advertisements for these real positions on a national U.S. job search
platform in 80 large metro areas. The text of these ads is presented in Appendix Figure 1.6 The ads provided
no information about the number of hours of work or the wage.
     The ad had a link to our website where interested jobseekers could apply for a position. Once applicants
followed the link, they could apply by creating an account and providing their year of birth, race/ethnicity
and gender. The site prominently stated that providing race/ethnicity and gender was optional and that the
questions could be skipped, though the vast majority of applicants responded.7 After registering, applicants
were shown two descriptions of job positions. To eliminate the possibility of income effects, both descrip-
tions stated explicitly that the job was temporary and was expected to last one month. In making the position
temporary we also abstract from any investment rationales for taking a longer hours job in terms of learning
skills that raise future earnings.8 To eliminate the role of commuting the descriptions stated that the job was
work-from-home. All of these statements accurately described the real jobs.9 The two positions differed
only in the number of hours of work and the hourly wage, which were randomly assigned to applicants.10
Individuals were asked to choose between a job that was [X] hours and a job that was [X+5] hours per week,
    6 The desired skills specified were “good communication skills”, “ability to work with others”, and being “used to basic computer

and/or mobile applications.”
    7 By mistake, gender and race were not asked of some applicants. Of those who were asked, 94.7% percent of applicants provided

their race and 95.3% provided their gender. Overall, we have race information for 84.4% of the sample and gender information for
85.0%. Results are similar if we restrict attention to the applicants for whom we collected gender or race.
    8 If the investment rationale is important jobseekers might be willing to accept less money for a longer hours job because they

learn more valuable skills, leading to underestimates of the MVT.
    9 We have made 60 job offers.
   10 As noted in Mas and Pallais (forthcoming), we opted to show only two options to minimize cognitive load for the applicants.




                                                                  4
where X varied from 5 to 35 in 5-hour increments.11 The position descriptions were as follows:


“This is a one-month work-from-home [type] position. ¶ The position is [X] hours per week. ¶ This position
pays [Y] dollars per hour.


“This is a one-month work-from-home [type] position. ¶ The position is [X+5] hours per week. ¶ This
position pays [Z] dollars per hour.



    In this comparison [type] denotes whether the position is for phone survey or data entry work and [Y]
and [Z] are dollar amounts, described in detail below. All individuals were shown either two phone survey
positions or two data entry positions.12
    Each comparison can be summarized by the “effective” hourly wage applicant i receives for working the
5 additional hours in the longer position:

                                                      hi × wih − (hi − 5) × wih−5
                                              eih =                               .                                               (1)
                                                                   5

where hi and wih are the number of hours and hourly wage in the longer job, respectively and wih−5 is
the hourly wage in the shorter job. We randomly select eih ∈ {0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 18, 20, 24, 28}. For the three
lowest hours choices (5 vs. 10, 10 vs. 15, and 15 vs. 20 hours), we let eih also take values of {2,6,10}.
Piloting suggested that individuals’ value of time would be lower at these hours levels and adding these
lower effective wages would lead to less extrapolation.
    The randomly-chosen effective wage determined the wages of the jobs. The higher hourly wage job
always paid $18. This was sometimes the shorter position and sometimes the longer position, depending on
whether the effective wage was above or below $18. The wage of the other job was adjusted so that eih took
the selected value. For example, for eih = 0 in the 25 vs. 30 hour comparison, the 25 and 30 hour jobs pay
the same weekly amount. Thus, the 25 hour job must pay $18 per hour and the 30 hour job must pay $15 per
hour.13 Without income effects, willingness to accept the higher hour position will depend on the effective
wage eih , but not on the wage levels presented, wih and wih−5 .14 Appendix Table 1 shows the wages for each
  11 That  is, the choices were 5 vs. 10, 10 vs. 15, 15 vs. 20, 20 vs. 25, 25 vs. 30, 30 vs. 35, and 35 vs. 40 hours per week.
  12 The  ¶ indicates a line break.
  13 We do not include a $28 effective wage for the 5 vs. 10 hour comparison as this would require the 5 hour job to pay $8, below

the minimum wage in many of the cities in our experiment.
  14 If there are income effects, higher values of w and w
                                                      ih       ih−5 will result in a higher break-even effective wage for working five
more hours.




                                                                  5
effective wage/hours combination. We rounded all wages to the nearest $0.10, so the actual effective wage
shown is not always a perfectly round dollar amount. In our estimation, we use the actual (non-rounded)
effective wage.
    Appendix Figure 2 provides an example of the page with the job descriptions. This page was designed
to ensure that only the hour and wage information would affect workers’ choices. To this end we referred to
jobs only by number to minimize the extent to which job titles would affect workers’ choices.15 To maximize
the fraction of applicants who read both job applications carefully, we forced applicants to physically click
on each position to see the job descriptions. We also required applicants to manually type the number of the
job they preferred to lessen the tendency to simply click through to the next page. We randomized which
job was presented first.
    We told applicants that the type of work in both jobs was the same and asked them which job they
would choose if both were available. We told applicants that if they were hired they would be offered the
position they chose, thereby making this a real decision. However, we also told applicants that they would
be considered for all open positions. This was done to give us flexibility to also offer them more generous
alternatives. We emphasized that their decision would not affect whether they were hired. All of these
statements were truthful. Most workers (73%) who made a job choice completed the application. Our main
analysis uses all choices made, but we show in an appendix table that the results are similar if we restrict
attention to workers who ultimately applied for the jobs.
    We are also interested in how workers value their time above 40 hours per week. The difficulty is that by
the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) hourly workers have to get an overtime premium of at least 1.5 times
their hourly pay for hours above 40. If we were to present the choice of 40 versus 45 hours or 45 versus 50
hours without mentioning overtime, it would be unclear how to interpret the choices since some applicants
might assume there was overtime pay while others would not. Therefore, for randomly-selected applicants
we implemented a second set of treatments where we offered the choice of either (1) a 40 versus 45 hour
position or (2) a 45 or 50 hour position. Here, we randomly varied the overtime premium for hours over 40.
The 40 hour choice read:


“This is a one-month work-from-home [type] position. ¶ The position is 40 hours per week. ¶ This position
pays 18.00 dollars per hour.


  15 Thesenumbers were randomly assigned to jobs. The numbers were also balanced within comparisons, so if some individuals
were given a choice between Position #78 which was 30 hours per week and Position #81 which was 35 hours, other participants
would be faced with a choice between Position #81 which was 30 hours and Position #78 which was 35 hours.




                                                             6
    The 45 and 50 hour position descriptions read:


“This is a one-month work-from-home [type] position. ¶ The position is [45/50] hours per week. ¶ This
position pays 18.00 dollars per hour for the first 40 hours and [EW] dollars per hour for the remaining
[5/10] hours.


    Here, EW is the effective wage since both jobs pay the same hourly wage until the final five hours. In
the 45 versus 50 hour choice, the same overtime wage is utilized in both positions. We randomly select
EW ∈ {27, 29, 31, 33, 35}. Due to the FLSA, $27 was the lowest overtime wage we could offer. A concern
for comparing MVT estimates above and below 40 hours is that perhaps applicant responses differ depending
on whether they are comparing average wages (below 40 hours) or marginal wages (above 40 hours). To
assess this possibility we ran a separate validation study where we offered a 35 versus 40 hour choice
with the same effective wages to different applicants, randomly phrasing the comparison as either (1) two
differing wage rates or (2) the same wage rate up to 35 hours and a separate marginal rate for hours between
35 and 40. As we will show, both methodologies give similar results.16
    Another issue is that for the 40 vs. 45 hour comparison there is significant extrapolation in calculating
the MVT since mean MVT is below $27 and at an effective wage of $27 about three quarters of applicants
choose the 45 hour job. Below we describe our approach to dealing with this extrapolation. Our estimates of
the flow value of non-work time will not utilize MVT estimates above 40, so these issues are only relevant
for evaluating the shape of the labor supply curve.
    As found in Mas and Pallais (forthcoming), despite the fact that we forced applicants to physically click
on the job descriptions and type the number of their preferred job, some applicants were inattentive. On the
page after individuals made their choice, we asked them to report the number of hours they chose. They were
presented with 11 choices (5 through 50 hours in 5 hour increments and “I don’t remember”). Overall, 0.6%
of people said they didn’t remember and 9.0% chose incorrectly, indicating an 10.6% inattention rate.17 We
account for inattention in our estimation as described in Section 3. In practice, this inattention matters little
when estimating the average value of time, but affects estimated dispersion.
  16 An alternative to our approach would be to vary the marginal wage (as in the overtime comparisons) at all hours levels. We
chose not to do this because of the minimum wage constraint. Varying the marginal wage only would not allows us to detect MVT
values below the minimum wage which, depending on the state, are substantially higher than median MVT we estimate at low
hours.
  17 To determine the inattention rate, we add the number of people reporting they did not remember and the fraction choosing

incorrectly multiplied by 10/9. The 10/9 factor is to correct for the fact that 1/10 of the people who were inattentive but didn’t
report not remembering chose correctly by chance.




                                                                7
    Our focus in the paper will be on unemployed jobseekers because for this group there is a natural
interpretation of MVT as the value of non-work time. For employed jobseekers, MVT likely includes not
just leisure and household production but also possibly the wage in other jobs if they have to substitute hours
between jobs. For completeness, we show estimates for the full sample as well.



3    Conceptual and Econometric Framework

Applicants are shown a shorter and a longer job, whose hours and wages are given by {hi − 5, wih−5 } and
{hi , wih }, respectively. We use applicants’ choices over a range of effective wages to determine the average
mean value of time between h − 5 and h weekly hours of work (MV Th ). We estimate z by combining MV Th
estimates over different values of h up to 40 hours per week.
    Applicant i chooses the higher hour package if U(hi wih , hi ) > U((hi − 5)wih−5 , hi − 5). If the individual
is fully attentive, she chooses the longer job if the effective wage (eih , defined in Equation 1) exceeds her
average hourly opportunity cost of working 5 additional hours (MV Tih ), that is, if MV Tih < eih . Assuming
a logistic distribution for MV Tih (an assumption that we can assess visually), we can estimate a logit with
an indicator for choosing the longer position as the dependent variable and the effective wage eih as the
explanatory variable. In this setup, our estimate of MV Th is the estimated intercept divided by the slope
coefficient.
    To account for the fact applicants are inattentive, we estimate a mixture model of the form Pr(hi =
1|eih ) = Pe (1 − α) + (1 − Pe )α = F(be + c; µ, σ )(1 − 2α) + α using maximum likelihood (ML), where
Pr(hi = 1|eih ) is the probability of choosing the longer-hour job and Pe is the probability that an attentive
individual truly prefers the longer-hour job. Here, 2α is the fraction of individuals who are inattentive
(10.6% on average), calculated from whether individuals correctly recalled the number of hours they chose.
Under the assumption that inattentive individuals make their choice at random, α will choose the longer job
and α will choose the shorter job, regardless of the wages presented. (This inattention correction largely
only affects estimated dispersion.) We assume a logistic cdf, though other cdfs provide similar estimates. In
this model, our estimate of MV Th is the intercept divided by the coefficient on the effective wage term.
    We modify this procedure to estimate MVT for the overtime treatments. The FLSA necessitates we offer
high effective wages in these treatments, so estimating the average MVT requires extrapolation. Estimating
the above model, we constrain the intercept, Pr(hi = 1|eih = 0), based on the intercept in the non-overtime
treatments, which allows the non-overtime treatments to inform the extrapolation, dramatically increasing
precision in the 40 vs. 45 hour choice. Our preferred specification uses the estimated intercepts at lower hour




                                                       8
treatments to predict the intercept as a function of h. We then constrain the intercepts in the two overtime
treatments as the predicted intercepts at h = 45 and h = 50. We show estimates under different methods of
picking the intercept constraint (e.g., using the average intercept or the estimated intercept in the 35 vs. 40
hour comparison) and results are very similar. Adding this constraint has very little effect on estimates of
mean MVT for the 45 vs. 50 hour treatment, where there was less extrapolation and imprecision without it.
    MV Tih is the wage that makes individual i indifferent between working hi − 5 and hi hours per week.
Because theoretically work hours are set to equate the wage with the shadow value of time (Becker, 1965;
Gronau, 1977; Heckman, 1974), MV Tih is an approximation to i0 s inverse labor supply function between
hi − 5 and hi hours. Note that applicants cannot choose their exact desired number of hours; they can only
choose hi − 5 or hi hours. If their labor supply function is strictly increasing, at MV Tih dollars per hour, their
inverse labor supply function wi (.) has wi (hi − 5) < MV Tih < wi (hi ). That is, their value of time at hi hours
exceeds their average value of time between hi − 5 and hi hours (MV Tih ) which exceeds their value of time at
hi − 5 hours. At a wage of MV Tih , they would choose to work strictly between hi − 5 and hi hours per week.
Because all jobs were explicitly temporary (1 month long), we assume there are no income effects. Without
income effects, the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure at a given number of
hours does not depend on the consumption level; in this case, MV Tih does not depend on the wage paid up
to hi − 5 hours.
    Note that MV Th is an approximation to the average individual inverse labor supply curve. It gives the
wage the average individual needs to work h (as opposed to h − 5) hours. It is not an approximation to an
aggregate labor supply curve. That is, it is not the wage at which, across the population, hours of work
average h.18
    To form our estimate of the average z, the flow value of non-work time for a full-time 40 hour job, we
utilize the fact that MV Th provides the average value of time between h − 5 and h hours. Our experiment
does not provide the average value of time between 0 and 5 hours since no applicants were given that choice.
We estimate MV T5 using a linear prediction determined by MV T10 and MV T15 . Other estimation methods
give similar results. Then our estimate of the average e
                                                       z is simply
                                          "                                #
                                       1 5(MV T5 + MV T10 + ... + MV T40 )
                                    z=
                                    e                                        .                                            (2)
                                       ŵ             40

Here, ŵ is average predicted pre-tax hourly market wage. This term is calculated using applicant gender,
race, education, and age and data from the 2016 Current Population Survey Merged Outgoing Rotation
 18 To see this, imagine that at a wage of MV T , individuals with MV T >MV T may choose to work only a few hours less than h,
                                               h                       ih    h
whereas individuals with MV Tih <MV Th , may choose to work many more hours. In this case, average hours would exceed h.




                                                              9
Groups (CPS MORGs). Specifically, we predict an applicant’s wages as the average wage of hourly workers
in the CPS living in cities with his or her gender, race, and education, and in his or her 5-year age bin.19
For unemployed applicants we discount the resulting wage by 6%, which is the estimated wage penalty for
employed hourly workers who left or lost their jobs in the last three years in the 2016 CPS Displaced Worker
Supplement.20 Then, ŵ is applicants’ average predicted wage.
      After estimating the model on each treatment sample individually, we combine the parameter estimates
and covariance matrices from all treatments (including overtime treatments) and calculate robust standard
errors on MVT and e
                  z estimates using the delta method.



4      Results

4.1     Descriptive Statistics and Randomization Assessment

The first column of Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our sample. The majority (83%) of our sample
is female. This is in large part because phone survey and data entry workers are primarily women. Applicants
average 34 years old. The plurality of our sample has some college but no degree, while the rest of the sample
is split between those with high school and college degrees. Our sample is also relatively racially diverse.
Most of our sample (59%) is currently unemployed, the majority (64% of those) for under three months.
Based on the length of their unemployment spell and their state of residence, we estimate that 72% of these
individuals are potentially eligible for UI.21
      Table 2 assesses the randomization. For each of the nine different hours choices, we regress six applicant
characteristics on indicators for each effective wage the applicant was randomly assigned. We limit the
sample to applicants who made a job choice. If the randomization was implemented correctly, the effective
wage indicators should not be jointly significant. We consider only the variables that were collected before
   19 When applicants didn’t report one or more of the characteristics used to assign wages, we assigned them the average wage

of CPS respondents with the characteristics they did report, weighted by the distribution of the missing characteristic(s) in the
experiment data. For example, consider a 27 year-old white woman who didn’t report her education. From the overall distribution
of education levels in the data, her predicted wage is (0.02)*(average CPS wage of 25-30 y/o white women with less than HS) +
(0.27)*(average CPS wage of 25-30 y/o white women with a high school degree) + (0.44)*(average CPS wage of 25-30 y/o white
women with some college) + (0.24)*(average CPS wage of 25-30 y/o white women with a college degree) + (0.04)*(average CPS
wage of 25-30 y/o white women with an advanced degree).
   20 Specifically, the sample is all employed hourly workers in the 2016 Displaced Worker Supplement. We regress log wages on a

quadratic in age, education dummies, race/ethnicity dummies, gender dummies, and an indicator for whether the respondent left or
lost his or her job in the previous three years.
   21 We consider individuals as potentially eligible for UI if they have been unemployed for less than their state’s maximum duration

of UI benefits. We know only whether individuals have been unemployed for less than 3 months, 3 to 6 months, or more than 6
months. We consider individuals unemployed 3 to 6 months as ineligible if the maximum benefit duration in their state is less than
4.5 months. Otherwise they are considered UI eligible. UI eligibility is still an approximation since people categorized as eligible
may be ineligible for other reasons, like quitting their previous job or not having a sufficiently long employment history. Of course,
UI-eligible workers may also not take up benefits.




                                                                 10
the jobs were presented: gender, race, and age. The table reports the p-value for each of the 54 regressions.
The effective wage indicators are jointly significant for predicting the demographic characteristic in four
regressions, a number we may reasonably expect to see by chance. Appendix Table 2 replicates this table,
limiting the sample to workers who are unemployed. Observable characteristics look fairly balanced along
this dimension as well, though with one additional demographic characteristic that is jointly significant.
Appendix Table 3 shows that, consistent with random assignment, unemployed workers in each hours choice
have similar demographic characteristics. Appendix Figures 3 and 4 show that neither the probability of
making a choice nor the probability of continuing the application after the choice and entering the remaining
demographic information is related to effective wages.


4.2     Main Treatments

We begin with visual nonparametric and parametric summaries of the data. We construct binned scatterplots
of the inattention-corrected fraction of unemployed applicants who chose longer hours against the effective
wage (eih ) for each hours choice.22 We overlay the scatterplot with the ML fit, which can be interpreted as
a cdf of the MVT distribution since it is monotonic and bounded between 0 and 1. These scatterplots are
shown in Figure 1. Consistent with economic principles, there is a positive relationship between choosing the
higher hours option and the effective wage in all cases. In all cases the logit assumption appears reasonable.
Inattention-uncorrected figures (presented in Appendix Figure 5) look similar. Appendix Figure 6 presents
data from the overtime validation study where we compare choices between 35 and 40 hour jobs when we
show (1) separate hourly wages and (2) the same wage up to 35 hours per week and a higher marginal wage
after 35 hours. As discussed earlier, we do this to check whether the different wage framing in the overtime
study influences the responses. The estimates are quite close and we conclude that responses do not appear
sensitive to framing.
      Table 3 presents estimates of the mean and quantiles of MVT by hour of work for unemployed jobseek-
ers.23 For reference, using the 2016 CPS we predict that the market wage for the average unemployed job
seeker in our sample is $13.93 pre-tax. (The predicted wages for different subgroups are in Appendix Table
7.) At this wage, on a pre-tax basis there is a large amount of worker surplus for the first few hours someone
works. The estimated mean MVT is $4.63 between 5 and 10 hours of work and increases to $8.84 per hour
between 20 and 25 hours of work. MVT increases relatively linearly through the first 40 hours, reaching
  22 At a given hours level h, the inattention-corrected fraction is (Y − α̂)/(1 − 2α̂), where Y is the fraction of applicants who
                                                                       h                        h
chose longer hours when given the choice of h or h − 5 hours. The presented fits are estimated off of the individual-level data, not
these points.
  23 Inattention-uncorrected estimates are in Appendix Table 4, while estimates for the full sample (not limited to unemployed

applicants) are in Appendix Table 5 and estimates limited to unemployed workers who applied for the job are in Appendix Table 6.




                                                                11
about $15 between 30 and 40 hours of work. After 40 hours the slope MVT increases at a higher rate, reach-
ing almost $22 between 40 and 45 hours of work.24 Thus, on average, workers’ MVT equals their average
predicted market wage in the 30 to 40 hours of work per week range. This implies that the average job
                                                                                                  z = 0.58.
applicant in our sample would work full-time at their expected market wage. Overall, we calculate e
Estimates that are weighted to match the age, gender, race, and education of hourly workers in the CPS are
shown in Table 4, again for the unemployed sample.25 Weighting results in very similar values of non-work
time.26
      In the standard formulation of the static labor supply model, hours are set to equate wages with the
MVT. The collection of MVT values as a function of hours therefore traces out a labor supply relationship.
The labor supply function is plotted in Figure 2. The figure shows the estimated values connected by linear
segments. We show the median as well as the 25th and 75th percentiles of the function.27 The labor supply
function is moderately upward sloping and becomes steeper around 40 hours of work.
      Figure 3 plots the implied labor supply elasticity by hours worked. To compute the elasticity we first
estimate a smoothed labor supply relationship by fitting a quartic polynomial to the MVT points shown in
Figure 2. Elasticities are then read off of the smoothed relationship. Labor supply is highly elastic at low
hours levels, exceeding 1 until 25 to 30 hours of work. At that point they drop, reaching 0.5 to 0.6 after 40
hours per week. Table 5 shows the elasticities implied by the quartic model and several other smoothing
models, while Figure 4 shows the individual MVT points with the quartic fit. Depending on the model,
elasticities after 40 hours are in the 0.4 to 0.6 range. Appendix Figure 7 shows that the labor supply function
looks similar when not limited to unemployed applicants, while Appendix Table 10 shows that elasticities
look similar as well.



5      Heterogeneity in Valuations

Figure 1 and Table 3 show that there is substantial heterogeneity in MVT. The 25th percentile of MVT is
below $2 per hour until about 30 hours per week. On the other hand, at the lowest hours choices the 75th
percentile MVT is close to double the median, and it increases to $33 per hour by 40 to 45 hours per week.
    24 Appendix Table 8 shows the overtime estimates are robust to different intercept constraints.
    25 Specifically,
                  we weight the full sample to match the observable characteristics of hourly workers in the CPS and then limit the
sample to unemployed workers.
  26 Appendix Table 9 shows descriptive statistics for the weighted samples, compared to the unweighted experiment and CPS

samples.
  27 Note that to interpret these as labor supply functions for a given individual, we need to make the assumption that individuals

have non-crossing inverse labor supply functions. That is for all individuals i, j and hours levels h, and h0 if MV Tih > MV T jh , then
MV Tih0 > MV T jh0 .




                                                                  12
    We have explored whether any of this heterogeneity is explained by individual characteristics. Table
6 shows estimates of e
                     z by gender, employment status, and potential UI eligibility. For each subgroup,
                                            z, we also calculate separate predicted wages by subgroup,
we estimate the MVT separately. To estimate e
estimating each individual’s predicted wage as described above and averaging them within the subgroup.
    Our estimate of e
                    z is slightly, but insignificantly larger for women (e                     z = 0.59).28
                                                                         z=0.64) than for men (e
Estimated e                                  z = 0.66) than unemployed (e
          z is somewhat larger for employed (e                          z = 0.58) jobseekers, though this
difference is not statistically significant at conventional levels (p=0.14). It is unsurprising that employed
jobseekers have a higher estimated value of time, since their alternative to working in the job we advertise is
possibly more hours in another job. As we have discussed, a cleaner estimate of the flow value of non-work
time is from the unemployed sample since for this group the alternative is truly not working. Among the
unemployed, estimated e
                      z is similar among those who are potentially eligible for UI benefits and those who
are not. This may indicate low take-up of UI among those we classify as UI-eligible.
    In Table 7 we examine how MVT varies with the predicted market wage of jobseekers, and how e
                                                                                               z varies
with labor market conditions. Here, again we limit the sample to unemployed applicants. To gain power, we
stack the data for all the (non-overtime) hours choices and estimate a model where the dependent variable
is choosing the longer hours job. The independent variables are an indicator for every hours choice and the
interaction of the effective wage with each hours choice dummy. We also include terms for the individual’s
predicted wage and the interaction of predicted wage and effective wage. This allows an individual’s pre-
dicted wage to affect both the intercept and the slope of the ML fit, but to affect the different hours choices
in the same way.
    In the first panel of Table 7 we report the MVT for a jobseeker with a mean predicted market wage
among unemployed applicants ($13.93 per hour) and the MVT for a predicted wage that is one standard
deviation ($3.82) higher than the mean, and one standard deviation lower. MVT significantly increases
with the predicted wage, but not one-for-one. A two standard deviation increase in predicted wage ($7.64)
increases the average MVT by $2.10 per hour (p=0.06).
    The second two panels show how e
                                   z varies with the MSA unemployment rate and the deviation of this
rate from its historical mean. We use data from the BLS’s Local Area Unemployment Statistics program
to calculate the unemployment rate of the MSA in the month of the job posting (April, May, or June 2017)
and the difference between this rate and its 10-year average. Then, separately, we estimate how MVT varies
   28 This comparison only includes men and women applying for phone survey and data entry jobs (primarily female positions)

and thus may not be representative of men’s e  z more generally. Nevertheless, in the nationally-representative UAS, we also estimate
slightly, but insignificantly larger e
                                     z’s for women (e
                                                    z=0.62) than men (e z=0.60). For comparisons by gender we combine employed
and unemployed jobseekers to maximize statistical power. Separate estimates by gender of the mean and quantiles of MVT for
each hours choice are in Appendix Table 11.




                                                                 13
with these two variables as we did for predicted wages. In presenting e
                                                                      z’s for areas with higher and lower
unemployment rates, we allow predicted wages to vary with the unemployment rate, though in practice, this
does not matter much.29 We do not find that e
                                            z varies significantly with either measure of local economic
conditions, though we do not have power to rule out reasonable variation with economic conditions.
    We can use variation in MVT to assess the likely variation in e
                                                                  z under the assumption that individual
labor supply curves do not cross: that is, if MV Tih > MV T jh then MV Tih0 > MV T jh0 for all individuals i and
j and hours levels h and h0 . Estimating the quantiles of z presents challenges because we don’t have external
information on the market wage of jobseekers by MVT quantile. If we also assume the market wage for
the quantiles is the same as the mean, the 25th and 75th percentiles of z are 0.16 and 0.99, respectively.
However, given the finding that MVT is increasing in the market wage, the spread of the e
                                                                                        z-quantiles is likely
exaggerated. Since low MVT people have a lower market wage, their value of e
                                                                           z is going to be higher than
when using the mean wage.
    We utilize the Understanding America Survey (UAS) to explore the external validity of our results. The
UAS is a nationally-representative survey in which a panel of randomly-selected individuals responds to
web-based surveys.30 We asked hourly workers:
    Imagine that you are applying for a new job in the same line of work as your [main, last] job and you
have been offered two positions. Both positions are the same as your [main, last] job and to each other in
all ways including benefits, other than the work schedule and how much they pay. Assume you can take no
other jobs. ¶ Please read the descriptions of the positions below. ¶ Position 1) This position is X+10 hours
per week and has a fixed Monday-Friday daytime schedule. The position pays $Y per hour. ¶ Position 2)
This position is X hours per week and has a fixed Monday-Friday daytime schedule. The position pays $Z
per hour. ¶ Which position would you choose?
    Here, “X” is 10, 20, or 30 hours per week and “Y” – the hourly wage in the longer job – is a worker’s
current hourly wage. The hourly wage in the shorter job, “Z”, is a random multiple of the worker’s current
hourly wage: [65%, 80%, 90%, 95%, 98%, 100%, 102%, 105%, 110%, 120%, 135%]. We use these wages
to calculate effective wages using Equation (1). [Main, last] is “main” for employed workers and “last” for
unemployed workers.31 Each employed or unemployed participant answered all four hypotheticals. The
   29 We regress predicted wages on the local unemployment rate (or the unemployment rate relative to trend) and predict wages for

areas with rates one standard deviation above and below the mean.
   30 The UAS is run out of the University of Southern California and established and directed by Arie Kapteyn. It is closely related

in design to the Rand American Life Panel. As is the case for most surveys, because of non-response the UAS is not technically
representative, rather it is weighted to be representative. Importantly though, it covers all occupations rather than just the two we
use for our field study. Appendix A contains additional details on the sample selection for the UAS analysis.
   31 To measure inattention, we gave individuals a choice between two 40 hour-per-week jobs, one of which paid more than the

other. Our inattention rate is double the fraction of people who chose the lower-paying job. Half of inattentive individuals who
choose at random will choose the lower-paying job by chance.




                                                                 14
order of the questions was randomized as was which job was Position 1.
                                           z = 0.61 (s.e.=0.03). This value is very similar to the full sample
    Table 6 shows that the UAS estimate is e
                                                    z = 0.63).32
z that combines employed and unemployed applicants (e
e



6    Discussion and Conclusion

It is known that a significant component of time in unemployment is spent on leisure and home production
(Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis, 2013). Our estimates suggest that, clearly, this use of time is valued.
To compare our estimates to assumed or calibrated quantities for the value of non-work time used in the
search literature, we need to account for possible wedges between wage and marginal product, taxes, and
fixed costs of employment. We discuss these issues below.
    Wages versus Marginal Product
    Since marginal product likely exceeds or equals the wage, estimates of z based on marginal product will
likely be weakly smaller than those based on the wage. Estimates of the elasticity of labor supply to the
firm provide guidance on the degree of this divergence. In the dynamic monopsony framework the percent
difference between marginal product and the wage (“the rate of exploitation”) equals the inverse of the
elasticity of labor supply to the firm (Robinson, 1969). Assuming an elasticity of around 4, which is in the
range of estimates reported in Manning (2011) and implies that employers have significant market power,
                                                                                 1
the marginal product will be 25% higher than the wage. Therefore z will be (1 − 1.25 )=20% lower than
z. Calibrations of Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides models yield a substantially smaller divergence between
e
wages and marginal product. Hall and Milgrom (2008) calculate a ratio of the wage to marginal product of
0.985 (see also Hall and Mueller, forthcoming), implying a value of z based on marginal product that is very
close to the one we estimate.
    Taxes
    Estimates of z are often based on the after-tax marginal product (Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis,
2016) whereas the estimate of e
                              z we have reported is not. Applying an effective tax rate of 0.2 increases z by
   1
( 0.8 − 1)=25%.
    Fixed Costs of Employment
    Estimates of the opportunity cost of work will be higher if one were to add in fixed costs such as the
cost of commuting. Estimates of the valuation of travel time are reviewed in Small (2012). A reasonable
approximation is that commute time is valued at half the gross wage. The average worker spends approxi-
   32 UAS estimates are virtually unchanged if we weight the UAS sample to match the observable characteristics of the applicants

in the experiment.




                                                               15
mately one hour a day commuting. With these estimates we would add 0.06 to the estimated value of z. To
the extent that individuals in our sample are not collecting UI benefits, our estimates also do not fully cap-
ture the reduction in UI benefits that accompanies working. A conservative estimate of the UI replacement
rate is 0.3, though only a small fraction of jobseekers are on UI at any point in time. A fixed cost that is
more difficult to quantify is any fixed component to child care, such as time spent searching for child care
providers.
    Taking into account the above differences, z based on after-tax marginal product will be quite close to
our estimate e
             z=0.58 since the conversion from wage to marginal product assuming the monopsony case is
effectively canceled out by making the denominator an after-tax quantity. Accounting for commuting times,
z will be only moderately higher. It will be substantially higher for UI recipients or if we assume a smaller
wedge between the wage and marginal product. Therefore, our estimate is in the intermediate to upper end
of the literature which, as discussed, largely comes from calibrations. Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis
(2016) report a range of assumed estimates of 0.45-0.5 prior to the Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) study
and 0.73-0.92 after.33 In their calibration, they report z in the range of 0.47-0.75 based on post-tax marginal
product. Our estimate of the value of non-work time relative to after-tax marginal product of z = 0.60 falls
in the middle of this range and provides support for their utility function calibration approach that is the
basis for estimating the cyclicality of the value of time.
    The fact that labor supply is highly elastic at low hours of work is not incompatible with the labor
literature that estimates relatively inelastic labor supply at the intensive margin. Our sample is comprised
primarily of women, who tend to have higher labor supply elasticities. Additionally, the less elastic part
of the labor supply relationship corresponds to the range of hours where most people work. Since most
workers are working close to full-time, any local variation in the wage will show only moderate variation in
hours since workers tend to be located in the more inelastic region of the labor supply function.
    The shape of the labor supply function we estimate can potentially rationalize the distribution of hours
in the economy. In the U.S. labor market there are many full-time workers, many individuals who are out
of the labor force entirely, and fewer who choose part-time work. This distribution can be explained by the
labor supply relationship we estimate, the key feature being that it goes from more elastic to more inelastic.
There are relatively few part-time workers because part-time work lies on the elastic part of the labor supply
curve, implying a limited wage range where a worker would find it optimal to work intermediate hours.
Small positive deviations in the wage push workers to full-time work, and small negative deviations push
  33 Among the papers that calibrate or assume z values are Mortensen and Nagypal (2007), Costain and Reiter (2008), Bils, Chang,

and Kim (2012), Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008), Hall and Mueller (forthcoming), Hall and Milgrom (2008), Hornstein, Krusell,
and Violante (2011), and Shimer (2005).




                                                               16
them out of the labor force.
   The estimated value of z can also be applied to benefit-cost analyses that involve valuation of time for
unemployed workers. To do this, an analyst could compute the predicted market wage of individuals in the
study, given their characteristics, and the relevant opportunity cost of a full-time job would be 60% of that
value.




                                                     17
References
Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis, “Time Use During the Great Recession,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1664–1696.

Angrist, Joshua D., Sydnee Caldwell, and Jonathan V. Hall, “Uber vs. Taxi: A Driver’s Eye View,” July
 2017. Working Paper.

Ashenfelter, Orley, Kirk Doran, and Bruce Schaller, “A Shred of Credible Evidence on the Long-run
  Elasticity of Labour Supply,” Economica, 2010, 77 (308), 637–650.

Bartik, Timothy J., “Including Jobs in Benefit-Cost Analysis,” Annual Review of Resource Economics,
  2012, 4 (1), 55–73.

Becker, Gary S., “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 1965, pp. 493–517.

Bils, Mark, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim, “Comparative Advantage and Unemployment,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59 (2), 150–165.

Borgschulte, Mark and Paco Martorell, “Paying to Avoid Recession: Using Reenlistment to Estimate the
  Cost of Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler, “Labor Supply of New
  York City Cab Drivers: One Day at a Time,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 407–441.

Chen, M. Keith and Michael Sheldon, “Dynamic Pricing in a Labor Market: Surge Pricing and Flexible
 Work on the Uber Platform,” 2015. Working Paper.

  , Judith A. Chevalier, Peter E. Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen, “The Value of Flexible Work: Evidence from
  Uber Drivers,” March 2017. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23296.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Loukas Karabarbounis, “The Cyclicality of the Opportunity Cost of Em-
 ployment,” Journal of Political Economy, December 2016, 124 (6), 1563–1618.

Costain, James S. and Michael Reiter, “Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance, and the Calibration
  of Matching Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2008, 32 (4), 1120–1155.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution
  of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (5), 1001–1044.

Farber, Henry, “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York City Cab Drivers,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 46–82.

  , “Reference Dependent Preferences and Labor Supply: The Case of New York City Taxi Drivers,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, June 2008, 98 (3), 1069–1082.

  , “Why you Can’t Find a Taxi in the Rain and Other Labor Supply Lessons from Cab Drivers,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, July 2015, 130 (4), 1975–2026.

Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Goette, “Do Workers Work More if Wages are High? Evidence from a Random-
  ized Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, March 2007, 97 (1), 298–317.

Feldstein, Martin and James Poterba, “Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 1984, 23 (1-2), 141–167.



                                                 18
Goldberg, Jessica, “Kwacha Gonna Do? Experimental Evidence about Labor Supply in Rural Malawi,”
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2016, 8 (1), 129–149.

Gronau, Reuben, “Leisure, Home Production, and Work–the Theory of the Allocation of Time Revisited,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1977, 85 (6), 1099–1123.

Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
 Vacancies Revisited,” American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1692–1706.

Hall, Robert E. and Andreas I. Mueller, “Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior: the Importance of
 Non-Wage Job Values,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

   and Paul R. Milgrom, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage Bargain,” American
  Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1653–74.

Harberger, Arnold C., “On Measuring the Social Opportunity Cost of Labour,” International Labour Re-
 view, 1971, 103 (6), 559–579.

Heckman, James, “Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 1974, 42 (2), 679–
 694.

Holzer, Harry J., “Reservation Wages and their Labor Market Effects for Black and White Male Youth,”
 Journal of Human Resources, 1986, pp. 157–177.

Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Frictional Wage Dispersion in Search
 Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” American Economic Review, December 2011, 101 (7), 2873–2898.

Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas I. Mueller, “A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation Wages,” Amer-
 ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2016, 8 (1), 142–179.

Le Barbanchon, Thomas, Roland Rathelot, and Alexandra Roulet, “Unemployment Insurance and
  Reservation Wages: Evidence from Administrative Data,” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Leung, Pauline and Christopher J. O’Leary, “Should UI Eligibility Be Expanded to Low-Earning Work-
  ers? Evidence on Employment, Transfer Receipt, and Income from Administrative Data,” 2015. Upjohn
  Institute Working Paper 15-236.

Manning, Alan, “Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 2011, 4,
 973–1041.

Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, “Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements,” American Economic
 Review, forthcoming.

Mortensen, Dale T., “Job Search and Labor Market Analysis,” in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds.,
 Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 2, Elsevier, 1987, chapter 15, pp. 849–919.

   and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Job creation and job destruction in the theory of unemployment,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (3), 397–415.

  and Eva Nagypal, “More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
  2007, 10 (3), 327–347.

Oettinger, Gerald S., “An Empirical Analysis of the Daily Labor Supply of Stadium Vendors,” Journal of
 Political Economy, April 1999, 107 (2), 360–392.



                                                 19
Robinson, Joan, The Economics of Imperfect Competition, Springer, 1969.

Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 25–49.

Small, Kenneth A., “Valuation of Travel Time,” Economics of Transportation, 2012, 1 (1), 2–14.

Stafford, Tess M., “What Do Fishermen Tell Us That Taxi Drivers Do Not? An Empirical Investigation of
  Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, July 2015, 33 (3), 683–710.




                                                  20
                                                                 Figure 1. Marginal Value of Time
                                                                                Unemployed Applicants
                                                5 vs. 10 Hours                               10 vs. 15 Hours                               15 vs. 20 Hours
                            1




                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                              1
                            .5




                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                              .5
Share Choosing Longer Job
                            0




                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                              0
                                          0       10        20        30               0        10        20        30              0         10       20        30

                                               20 vs. 25 Hours                               25 vs. 30 Hours                               30 vs. 35 Hours
                            1




                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                              .5
                            .5




                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                              0
                            0




                                                                                 0
                                          0       10        20        30               0        10        20        30               0        10       20        30

                                               35 vs. 40 Hours                   1           40 vs. 45 Hours                               45 vs. 50 Hours




                                                                                                                              1
                            1




                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                              .5
                            .5
                            0




                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                              0
                                          0       10        20        30               0        10        20        30              0         10       20        30

                                                                                           Effective Wage
                            Notes: Applicants chose between two jobs with different hours per week and hourly wages. Each panel shows results from a different choice.
                            The points show the inattention-corrected fraction of applicants who chose the longer job at each effective wage (calculated as described in
                            the text). Due to the inattention correction, these 'shares' can be below zero or above one. The maximum likelihood fit is estimated off the
                            individual-level data, correcting for applicant inattention as described in the text.




                                                                     Figure 2. Labor Supply Function
                                                                                      Unemployed Applicants
                                     40
     Marginal Value of Time (Dollars)
    0      10      20       30




                                                 10                           20                    30                                   40                            50
                                                                                            Hours per Week

                                                            25th Percentile                    50th Percentile                     75th Percentile
                                          Notes: The figure shows the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile marginal value of time estimates from each hours choice in the
                                          experiment. Estimates are connected with linear segments. Only unemployed applicants are included.




                                                                                                     21
                                                               Figure 3. Labor Supply Elasticity
                                               Unemployed Applicants; MVT Predicted from a Quartic Fit

              3
Labor Supply Elasticity
   1          0 2




                                   10                              20                         30                                    40                               50
                                                                                        Hours per Week
                                   Notes: A quartic function was fit to the labor supply curve in Figure 2. The figure shows the labor supply elasticities calculated from
                                   the mean value of time as predicted from this function.




                                                     Figure 4. Smoothed Labor Supply Curve
                                                                    Unemployed Applicants; Quartic Fit
               25
Marginal Value of Time (Dollars)
     5      10 0    15    20




                                    0                        10                        20          30                                      40                        50
                                                                                       Hours per Week
                                   Notes: The figure plots the mean MVT for unemployed applicants in each hours choice. The points are overlaid by a quartic
                                   polynomial estimated off of these points.




                                                                                              22
                                                        Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

                                                         Experiment                                               CPS
                                                All            Unemployed Applicants                  All           Phone Survey and Data
                                                                                                                       Entry Workers
Female                                         83%                         83%                       51%                      67%

Currently Employed                             41%                          0%                       95%                      100%
  Full-time                                    14%                          0%                       79%                       81%
  Part-time                                    28%                          0%                       16%                       19%
Unemployed                                     59%                         100%                       5%                        0%
  Unemployed for < 3 Months                    37%                         64%
  Unemployed for 3-6 Months                     7%                         13%
  Unemployed for > 6 Months                    14%                         23%

Age
  Average Age                                  33.6                        32.7                      39.8                     37.0
  < 30 years old                               46%                         49%                       30%                      37%
  30-40 years old                              30%                         30%                       22%                      24%
  > 40 years old                               24%                         21%                       48%                      39%

Education
  Less than High School                         2%                          2%                       14%                       6%
  High School                                  27%                         30%                       27%                      30%
  Some College                                 44%                         44%                       19%                      29%
  College Degree                               24%                         21%                       29%                      31%
  Advanced Degree                               4%                          2%                       10%                       4%

Race
  White                                        45%                         44%                       61%                      57%
  Black                                        34%                         34%                       13%                      16%
  Hispanic                                     11%                         12%                       18%                      19%
  Other                                         9%                         10%                       9%                       8%

Observations                                   2,658                      1,152                      248,596                  3,542
Notes: The first column of data presents descriptive statistics on the entire experiment sample, while the second column focuses on
unemployed applicants. The third column presents statistics on respondents ages 16 to 64 in the 2016 CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups (MORGs), while the final column includes only CPS respondents in phone survey occupations (telemarketers, bill and account
collectors, customer service representatives, and interviewers, except eligibility and loan) and data entry keyers, where observations on
workers in phone survey and data entry occupations are weighted by the prevalence of each position in the experiment.




                                                                      23
                                                     Table 2. Randomization Assessment
                                      p-Values from Regressions of Covariates on Effective Wage Dummies

                                         5 vs. 10    10 vs. 15   15 vs. 20     20 vs. 25   25 vs. 30   30 vs. 35   35 vs. 40   40 vs. 45   45 vs. 50

Age                                        0.79        0.83        0.95          0.51        0.72        0.78        0.19        0.69        0.47

Female                                     0.94        0.11        0.14          0.85        0.50        0.21        0.58        0.70        0.43

White                                      0.51        0.61        0.98          0.83        0.95        0.53        0.84        0.02        0.95

Black                                      0.75        0.77        0.62          0.91        0.37        0.01        0.42        0.28        0.47

Hispanic                                   0.30        0.89        0.72          0.83        0.03        0.77        0.14        0.38        0.18

Other Race                                 0.15        0.44        0.79          0.40        0.78        0.21        0.54        0.01        0.84

Applicants in Treatment                      304          305         323         292        305        319           272        272        266
Notes: Each cell reports the p-value of an F-statistic from a separate regression of the demographic characteristic indicated by the row on
effective wage dummies for individuals presented with the hours choice indicated by the column. This table includes all applicants who chose one
of the jobs presented to them.




                                                                          24
                                          Table 3. Marginal Value of Time
                                              Unemployed Applicants

                                                                        Quantiles
                           Mean         Standard              25th        50th           75th                N
                                        Deviation
5 vs. 10 Hours             $4.63          $5.54               $1.27         $4.63        $7.99              117
                           (0.95)         (1.33)              (1.24)        (0.95)       (1.25)

10 vs. 15 Hours            $5.24          $6.43               $1.34         $5.24        $9.14              124
                           (1.05)         (1.58)              (1.50)        (1.05)       (1.35)

15 vs. 20 Hours            $7.03         $12.65               -$0.63        $7.03       $14.70              128
                           (1.77)        (3.53)               (3.24)        (1.77)      (2.21)

20 vs. 25 Hours            $8.84         $14.59               -$0.01        $8.84       $17.68              153
                           (1.72)        (3.36)               (2.88)        (1.72)      (2.43)

25 vs. 30 Hours            $7.92         $12.89               $0.11         $7.92       $15.74              135
                           (1.85)        (2.81)               (2.97)        (1.85)      (1.95)

30 vs. 35 Hours           $14.56          $9.60               $8.74       $14.56        $20.38              133
                          (1.40)          (1.82)              (1.71)      (1.40)        (1.85)

35 vs. 40 Hours           $11.99          $9.59               $6.18       $11.99        $17.80              112
                          (1.53)          (2.29)              (2.23)      (1.53)        (1.88)

40 vs. 45 Hours           $21.87         $18.75            $10.51         $21.87        $33.23              121
                          (1.75)         (1.50)            (0.84)         (1.75)        (2.66)

45 vs. 50 Hours           $22.73         $17.69            $12.01         $22.73        $33.45              129
                          (1.57)         (1.22)            (0.83)         (1.57)        (2.31)

Implied 𝑧𝑧̃                 0.58                                            0.58                            902
                           (0.04)                                          (0.04)
Notes: The table provides statistics on workers' marginal value of time in each hours range. Estimates are limited
to applicants who are unemployed and are derived from an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood model
described in the text. Robust standard errors calculated using the delta method are in parentheses. The implied 𝑧𝑧̃
estimate is based on hours up to 40.




                                                         25
                                                          Table 4. Marginal Value of Time: Robustness to Reweighting
                                                                            Unemployed Applicants

                                 A. Weights using Pre-Experiment Characteristics                                        B. Weights using All Characteristics
                                                           Quantiles                                                                         Quantiles
                     Mean       Standard         25th        50th         75th           N             Mean      Standard        25th          50th          75th         N
                                Deviation                                                                        Deviation
5 vs 10 Hours        $6.00       $4.09          $3.52        $6.00        $8.47          94            $5.21      $3.84          $2.88        $5.21        $7.54          94
                     (1.29)      (1.11)         (1.52)       (1.29)       (1.38)                       (1.09)     (0.88)         (1.31)       (1.09)       (1.10)

10 vs 15 Hours       $6.65       $3.50          $4.53        $6.65        $8.77          99            $7.33      $3.46          $5.23        $7.33        $9.43          99
                     (1.15)      (1.24)         (1.20)       (1.15)       (1.53)                       (1.01)     (0.81)         (1.13)       (1.01)       (1.12)

15 vs 20 Hours       $5.29       $26.09        -$10.53       $5.29        $21.10        108            $6.06      $20.75         -$6.51       $6.06        $18.63        108
                     (6.07)      (23.10)       (18.46)       (6.07)       (11.16)                      (4.42)     (17.47)        (13.50)      (4.42)       (8.99)

20 vs 25 Hours       $8.25       $17.47         -$2.34       $8.25        $18.84        125            $10.33     $24.04         -$4.23       $10.33       $24.90        125
                     (3.40)      (7.42)         (6.46)       (3.40)       (4.68)                       (4.41)     (13.01)        (9.67)       (4.41)       (8.35)

25 vs 30 Hours       $8.84       $10.27         $2.61        $8.84        $15.06        110            $10.68     $9.37          $5.00        $10.68       $16.35        110
                     (2.15)      (3.22)         (3.33)       (2.15)       (2.40)                       (1.87)     (2.81)         (2.88)       (1.87)       (2.11)

30 vs 35 Hours      $16.71       $6.15          $12.98       $16.71       $20.44        102            $16.99     $6.99          $12.76       $16.99       $21.23        102
                    (1.86)       (2.02)         (1.92)       (1.86)       (2.49)                       (2.44)     (2.36)         (1.94)       (2.44)       (3.50)

35 vs 40 Hours      $14.20       $5.46          $10.89       $14.20       $17.50         88            $14.53     $5.94          $10.93       $14.53       $18.12         88
                    (1.67)       (1.24)         (1.75)       (1.67)       (1.90)                       (1.93)     (1.37)         (2.09)       (1.93)       (2.12)

40 vs 45 Hours      $20.01       $14.63         $11.15       $20.01       $28.88         97            $21.61     $14.54         $12.79       $21.61       $30.42         97
                    (1.96)       (1.43)         (1.09)       (1.96)       (2.82)                       (2.17)     (1.46)         (1.28)       (2.17)       (3.05)

45 vs 50 Hours      $22.11       $14.67         $13.22       $22.11       $30.99         99            $23.35     $13.99         $14.87       $23.35       $31.83         99
                    (2.06)       (1.36)         (1.23)       (2.06)       (2.88)                       (2.21)     (1.32)         (1.41)       (2.21)       (3.01)

Implied 𝑧𝑧̃            0.57                                     0.57                     726              0.62                                   0.62                     726
                      (0.07)                                   (0.07)                                    (0.07)                                 (0.07)
Notes: Weights are calculated using the DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) method, matching the covariate distribution of hourly workers ages 16-64 in the 2016 CPS Merged
Outgoing Rotation Groups (CPS MORGs). We weight the whole experimental sample to match the 2016 CPS MORGs and then limit observations to unemployed workers. Panel A
uses only characteristics collected before the job options were presented to create weights. Specifically, it uses race dummies, a female dummy, age, and age*race, age*female,
and female*race interaction terms. Panel B adds educational attainment categories, which were collected after individuals made a choice. Sample weights are capped at a
maximum of 10 standard deviations above the sample mean weight. This restriction affects 1 observation in Panel A and 5 observations in Panel B. Estimates are based on an
inattention-corrected maximum likelihood model described in the text. Robust standard errors calculated using the delta method are in parentheses.




                                                                                                  26
                      Table 5. Labor Supply Elasticities
                          Unemployed Applicants

                Raw Points        Quadratic         Quartic        Spline
10 Hours          4.02              6.08             1.60           1.24

15 Hours           1.14              2.03             2.44          1.16

20 Hours           1.10              1.18             1.86          1.12

25 Hours           -1.84             0.87             1.05          1.10

30 Hours           0.28              0.72             0.70          1.08

35 Hours           -0.74             0.64             0.57          1.07

40 Hours           0.21              0.60             0.55          0.53

45 Hours           2.88              0.57             0.61          0.40

RMSE                                   2.24             2.68          2.38
Notes: The columns show estimates of labor supply elasticities at different
hours per week. Points in the first column are calculated from the mean
MVT at each hours choice from the experiment (e.g., the 25 hours
estimate is created from the MVTs at 20-25 hours and 25-30 hours). The
remaining columns fit a curve to the MVT points and use this curve to
calculate labor supply elasticities. The fitted curves use a quadratic,
quartic, and spline with a knot at 40 hours per week, respectively. The final
row shows the root mean squared error for each of the fits. Only
unemployed applicants are included.




                                                           27
                                                                  Table 6. Estimates of 𝑧𝑧̃

                                             Employment Status                       Gender                          UI Eligibility             UAS
                       All Applicants      Employed Unemployed                  Women       Men              Eligible for Ineligible for       Hourly
                                                                                                              Benefits         Benefits        Workers

Estimate of 𝑧𝑧̃             0.63              0.66              0.58              0.64              0.59        0.56              0.61           0.61
                           (0.03)            (0.04)            (0.04)            (0.04)            (0.06)      (0.05)            (0.10)         (0.03)

Difference                                             0.09                                0.05                         -0.04
                                                      (0.06)                              (0.07)                        (0.12)

Observations                  2,120               660          902              1,494          315               644             251            2354
Notes: Each cell reports the 𝑧𝑧̃ calculated for the subgroup indicated by the column. The "UI Eligibility" columns are limited to unemployed applicants. In
all columns except that with Understanding America Study (UAS) results, sample sizes show total numbers of applicants in the subgroup who are
included in the 𝑧𝑧̃ calculation. In the UAS, survey respondents were each asked to make multiple hypothetical choices; the sample size shows the total
number of choices used to estimate 𝑧𝑧̃ , made by 785 survey respondents. Robust standard errors calculated using the delta method are in parentheses.
In the UAS results, standard errors are clustered by person.




                                                                                28
                         Table 7. Heterogeneity by Predicted Market Wage and Local Labor Market Conditions
                                                       Unemployed Applicants

                                        Mean                   Mean + 1 SD                Mean - 1 SD           Difference Between
                                                                                                               Value at (Mean + 1 SD)
                                                                                                                 and (Mean - 1 SD)

                                                                        A. Predicted Wage
                                                             Mean ($13.93), Standard Deviation ($3.82)
Mean Value of Time                      $7.99                    $9.06                     $6.96                       $2.10*
                                        (0.59)                   (0.80)                    (0.82)                      (1.12)

                                                                   B. Local Unemployment Rate
                                                             Mean (4.43%), Standard Deviation (0.81%)
Implied 𝑧𝑧̃                              0.57                     0.59                      0.56                        0.03
                                        (0.04)                   (0.05)                    (0.06)                      (0.08)

                                                       C. Local Unemployment Relative to 10-Year Historical Mean
                                                                Mean (-2.64%), Standard Deviation (1.11%)
Implied 𝑧𝑧̃                                0.57                       0.58                     0.57                      0.00
                                          (0.04)                     (0.05)                   (0.07)                    (0.08)
Notes: The table shows results obtained by fitting a stacked maximum likelihood model with additional covariates as described in the
text. Each panel presents the mean value of time or implied 𝑧𝑧̃ associated with the mean value, mean value plus one standard deviation,
and mean value minus one standard deviation of the covariate (predicted wage, local unemployment rate, or local unemployment rate
relative to the 10-year historical mean). Local unemployment rates from the BLS's Local Area Unemployment Statistics program are at
the MSA-level and are unadjusted in Panel B and seasonally adjusted in Panel C. Panel C uses monthly unemployment rates from April
2007 to March 2017 to calculate the historical mean. Robust standard errors calculated using the delta method are in parentheses.
Standard errors in Panels B and C are clustered by MSA.




                                                                           29
Appendix A. UAS Survey Details

The Understanding American Study (UAS) Survey 79 was distributed by the University of Southern Cali-
fornia Center for Economic and Social Research (CESR) to 5,812 people in their nationally-representative
panel of respondents who speak English and had completed a background survey. The survey was in the
field from December 15, 2016 until February 7, 2017, and 74% of the invited panel participants completed
the survey. Respondents were compensated $3 for the survey, which averaged 4 minutes.
    Respondents were asked for their labor force status and were then routed to corresponding sections of
the survey. All respondents were asked the easiest way to report their earnings (hourly, weekly, etc.) at their
main or last job, and how much they typically earn(ed) at their main or last job in that pay period.
    Employed and unemployed respondents then saw a series of vignettes that paired two hypothetical jobs
which differed only in the number of hours per week and their wages. (See the text for details.) Before
proceeding to the next vignette, respondents chose the job that they would prefer. The (randomized) wages
in these vignettes were percentage multiples of their current or previous wage, entered earlier in the survey.
    Respondents were also asked to choose between two jobs which required the same number of hours per
week but offered different wages. The inattention rate used in the regressions for UAS respondents is double
the fraction of individuals choosing the lower-paying option.
    The remainder of the survey asked about respondents’ marital status, parental status, and any part-
ner’s/spouse’s labor supply behavior.
    The estimate for e
                     z presented in the text is based on a sample of respondents who are in the labor force
and reported their pay hourly. This includes 2,354 choices made by 785 people. The average wage presented
uses this sample excluding wages above $99.99/hour. The exclusion affects 78 people (another 3 did not
report wages).




                                                      30
                         Appendix Figure 1. Job Advertisement

  [center] [Phone Survey Associate / Data Entry Associate] ([city, state])



  [center] is currently recruiting [phone survey interviewers / data entry associates].

  This is not a sales or telemarketing position.

  Please follow the link [link] to apply to this opportunity. We do not accept
  applications through email.

  Essential Functions
  [ Make phone calls in order to implement phone surveys / Accurately and quickly
  perform data entry tasks ]

  Desired Skills
  Good communication skills
  Ability to work with others
  Used to basic computer and/or mobile applications


      Principals only. Recruiters, please don’t contact this job poster.
      do NOT contact us with unsolicited services or offers



  compensation: Hourly
  employment type: employee’s choice




Notes: The name of the center is redacted.




                                             31
                           Appendix Figure 2. Job Description




Notes: Here, the name of the center is redacted.




                                            32
                                         Appendix Figure 3. Probability of Choosing
                                             a Job Option by Effective Wage
                                                              All Experiment Applicants
          1
          .75
          .5
Coefficient
          .25
          0
          -.25
          -.5




                                                                                                                                                   nt
                 20




                                                                      00

                                                                             00

                                                                                    90

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                  80

                                                                                                         10

                                                                                                               30

                                                                                                                      80

                                                                                                                             00

                                                                                                                                    00

                                                                                                                                           00
                       40

                             10

                                    00

                                           40

                                                  80

                                                         10

                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                   a
              0.




                                                                      0.

                                                                            2.

                                                                                   5.

                                                                                         6.

                                                                                                9.

                                                                                                       0.

                                                                                                              4.

                                                                                                                     7.

                                                                                                                           8.

                                                                                                                                  9.

                                                                                                                                         3.
                       .

                              .

                                     .

                                            .

                                                   .

                                                          .

                                                                 .




                                                                                                                                                st
                    $0

                           $2

                                  $4

                                         $4

                                                $7

                                                       $8

                                                              $8
              -$




                                                                     $1

                                                                           $1

                                                                                 $1

                                                                                        $1

                                                                                              $1

                                                                                                     $2

                                                                                                            $2

                                                                                                                   $2

                                                                                                                          $2

                                                                                                                                $2

                                                                                                                                       $3

                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                          Effective Wage
                   Notes: The figure plots the coefficients from a regression of an indicator for choosing one of the two job options on (non-rounded)
                   effective wage dummies. Applicants are included if they were presented with the job options. The omitted category is an $18
                   effective wage. Vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals.




                            Appendix Figure 4. Probability of Submitting Subsequent
                                 Demographic Information by Effective Wage
                                                              All Experiment Applicants
          1
          .75
          .5
Coefficient
          .25
          0
          -.25
          -.5




                         t
                      20




                      00

                      00

                      90

                      20

                      80

                      10

                      30

                      80

                      00

                      00

                      00
                        0

                        0

                        0

                        0

                        0

                        0

                        0




                     an
                     .4

                     .1

                     .0

                     .4

                     .8

                     .1

                     .4
                   0.




                    0.

                    2.

                    5.

                    6.

                    9.

                    0.

                    4.

                    7.

                    8.

                    9.

                    3.

                   st
                  $0

                  $2

                  $4

                  $4

                  $7

                  $8

                  $8
                 -$




                $1

                $1

                $1

                $1

                $1

                $2

                $2

                $2

                $2

                $2

                $3

                on
              C




                                                                          Effective Wage
                   Notes: The figure plots the coefficients from a regression of an indicator for submitting the demographic information after the job
                   choice on (non-rounded) effective wage dummies. Applicants are included if they were presented with the job options. The omitted
                   category is an $18 effective wage. Vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                              33
                                              Appendix Figure 5. Marginal Value of Time
                                                 Unemployed Applicants; Uncorrected for Inattention
                                         5 vs. 10 Hours                                 10 vs. 15 Hours                                 15 vs. 20 Hours
                            1




                                                                           1




                                                                                                                           1
                            .5




                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                           .5
Share Choosing Longer Job
                            0




                                                                           0




                                                                                                                           0
                                  0         10        20        30                0        10         20        30               0         10        20        30

                                         20 vs. 25 Hours                                25 vs. 30 Hours                                 30 vs. 35 Hours
                            1




                                                                           1




                                                                                                                           1
                            .5




                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                           .5
                            0




                                                                           0




                                                                                                                           0
                                  0         10        20        30                0        10         20        30               0         10        20        30

                                         35 vs. 40 Hours                                40 vs. 45 Hours                                 45 vs. 50 Hours
                            1




                                                                           1




                                                                                                                           1
                            .5




                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                           .5
                            0




                                                                           0




                                                                                                                           0
                                  0         10        20        30                0        10         20        30               0         10        20        30

                                                                                      Effective Wage
                            Notes: Applicants chose between two jobs with different hours per week and hourly wages. Each panel shows results from a different choice.
                            The points show the raw fraction of applicants who chose the longer job at each effective wage. The maximum likelihood fit is estimated off
                            the individual-level data as described in the text, without correcting for inattention.




                                        Appendix Figure 6. Validation of Overtime Framing
                                                                                       35 vs. 40 Hours
                              1
    Share Choosing Longer Job
       .2   .4    .6    .8  0




                                   0                                 5                         10                                    15                              20
                                                                                        Effective Wage

                                                                 Traditional Framing                           Overtime Framing
                                   Notes: The figure shows the results from the overtime validation treatment described in the text. In the “traditional framing,” the
                                   35 and 40 hour jobs had two separate wage rates. In the “overtime framing,” the 35 and 40 hour jobs both paid the same wage
                                   up to 35 hours per week. The 40 hour job paid a separate wage for the last five hours (hours over 35 hours per week). All
                                   experimental applicants in the overtime validation treatment are included, regardless of their employment status.




                                                                                                34
                                                    Appendix Figure 7. Labor Supply Function
                                                                             All Experiment Applicants

                                40
Marginal Value of Time (Dollars)
      10      20
               0       30




                                           10                           20                    30                                  40                           50
                                                                                      Hours per Week

                                                       25th Percentile                   50th Percentile                    75th Percentile
                                     Notes: The figure shows the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile marginal value of time estimates from each hours choice in the
                                     experiment. Estimates are connected with linear segments. Experimental applicants are included regardless of employment status.




                                                                                             35
                                                                   Appendix Table 1. Hourly Wages by Effective Wage

                     5 vs. 10 Hours          10 vs. 15 Hours         15 vs. 20 Hours         20 vs. 25 Hours          25 vs. 30 Hours         30 vs. 35 Hours        35 vs. 40 Hours
Effective Wage     5 Hours 10 Hours       10 Hours 15 Hours       15 Hours 20 Hours        20 Hours 25 Hours        25 Hours 30 Hours       30 Hours 35 Hours       35 Hours 40 Hours
$0.00               18.00       9.00        18.00     12.00         18.00      13.50         18.00     14.40         18.00      15.00         18.00      15.40       18.00    15.80
$2.00               18.00      10.00        18.00     12.70         18.00      14.00         18.00     14.80
$4.00               18.00      11.00        18.00     13.30         18.00      14.50         18.00     15.20         18.00      15.70         18.00      16.00       18.00    16.30
$6.00               18.00      12.00        18.00     14.00         18.00      15.00         18.00     15.60
$8.00               18.00      13.00        18.00     14.70         18.00      15.50         18.00     16.00         18.00      16.30         18.00      16.60       18.00     16.80
$10.00              18.00      14.00        18.00     15.30         18.00      16.00         18.00     16.40
$12.00              18.00      15.00        18.00     16.00         18.00      16.50         18.00     16.80         18.00      17.00         18.00       17.10      18.00    17.30
$16.00              18.00      17.00        18.00     17.30         18.00      17.50         18.00     17.60         18.00      17.70         18.00       17.70      18.00    17.80
$18.00              18.00      18.00        18.00     18.00         18.00      18.00         18.00     18.00         18.00      18.00         18.00       18.00      18.00    18.00
$20.00              16.00      18.00        17.00     18.00         17.30      18.00         17.50     18.00         17.60      18.00         17.70      18.00       17.70    18.00
$24.00              12.00      18.00        15.00     18.00         16.00      18.00         16.50     18.00         16.80      18.00         17.00      18.00       17.10    18.00
$28.00                                      13.00     18.00         14.70      18.00         15.50     18.00         16.00      18.00         16.30      18.00       16.60    18.00
Notes: For each applicant, we randomly selected an hours choice and an effective wage. Each row displays the hourly wages associated with a given effective wage.




                                                                                           36
                                     Appendix Table 2. Randomization Assessment: Unemployed Applicants
                                        p-Values from Regressions of Covariates on Wage Gap Dummies

                                         5 vs. 10   10 vs. 15   15 vs. 20     20 vs. 25   25 vs. 30   30 vs. 35   35 vs. 40   40 vs. 45   45 vs. 50

Age                                        0.96        0.65       0.24          0.94        0.85        0.98        0.01        0.73        0.79

Female                                     0.69        0.11       0.78          0.65        0.38        0.01        0.58        0.82        0.47

White                                      0.35        0.19       0.72          0.67        0.91        0.26        0.43        0.08        0.75

Black                                      0.85        0.39       0.51          0.90        0.23        0.00        0.20        0.71        0.17

Hispanic                                   0.45        0.82       0.62          0.47        0.25        0.41        0.59        0.86        0.04

Other Race                                 0.15        0.69       0.08          0.75        0.58        0.49        0.78        0.02        0.88

Applicants in Treatment                      117          124         128         153        135        133           112        121        129
Notes: Each cell reports the p-value of an F-statistic from a separate regression of the demographic characteristic indicated by the row on
effective wage dummies for individuals presented with the hours choice indicated by the column. This table includes only unemployed applicants
who chose one of the two jobs presented to them.




                                                                         37
                                                       Appendix Table 3. Descriptive Statistics by Hours Choice
                                                                      Unemployed Applicants

                                               5 vs. 10   10 vs. 15   15 vs. 20   20 vs. 25   25 vs. 30   30 vs. 35   35 vs. 40   40 vs. 45   45 vs. 50   p-value of
                                                                                                                                                          difference

Age                                             31.9        31.8        32.2        33.2        31.9        32.7        31.0        33.9        35.3        0.097

Number Reporting Age                             116        121         126         150         134         131         108         120         128         1,134

Female                                         86.7%       80.8%       84.8%       76.9%       85.3%       81.8%       84.8%       83.8%       84.1%        0.658

Number Reporting Gender                          98         104         112         130         116         110          92          99         107          968

Race/Ethnicity
  White                                        42.9%       53.8%       47.8%       43.1%       37.4%       41.7%       45.4%       49.0%       38.6%        0.311

  Black                                        33.7%       28.8%       28.7%       36.2%       36.5%       38.0%       34.0%       31.4%       42.6%        0.483

  Hispanic                                     12.2%        9.6%       14.8%       11.5%       16.5%       13.0%       12.4%        6.9%        6.9%        0.353

  Other Race                                   11.2%        7.7%        8.7%        9.2%        9.6%        7.4%        8.2%       12.7%       11.9%        0.905

Number Reporting Race/Ethnicity                  98         104         115         130         115         108          97         102         101          970

Education
  Less than High School                         4.3%        2.4%       3.1%        2.6%        3.0%        0.8%        1.8%        2.5%        0.8%         0.700

  High School                                  29.1%       39.5%       28.9%       27.5%       32.6%       30.1%       33.0%       32.2%       21.7%        0.190

  Some College                                 42.7%       33.9%       45.3%       45.1%       53.3%       46.6%       38.4%       45.5%       45.7%        0.143

  College Degree                               23.1%       23.4%       21.1%       23.5%       8.9%        18.0%       23.2%       18.2%       26.4%        0.027

  Advanced Degree                               0.9%        0.8%       1.6%        1.3%        2.2%        4.5%        3.6%        1.7%        5.4%         0.148

  Number Reporting Education                     117        124         128         153         135         133         112         121         129         1,152

Total Applicants in Regression Sample           117         124       128        153         135        133         112         121        129            1,152
Notes: The first nine columns of data show the mean of the demographic characteristic indicated by the row for applicants in the hours choice indicated by the
column. The final column shows the p-value from a test that the means across hours choices are equal. The table also provides the number of applicants who
reported each piece of demographic information.




                                                                                  38
                                    Appendix Table 4. Marginal Value of Time
                                Unemployed Applicants; Uncorrected for Inattention

                                                                         Quantiles
                           Mean         Standard              25th         50th           75th     N
                                        Deviation
5 vs 10 Hours              $4.80          $6.76               $0.70        $4.80          $8.89    117
                           (0.96)         (1.29)              (1.35)       (0.96)         (1.11)

10 vs 15 Hours             $5.27          $9.15               -$0.28       $5.27          $10.81   124
                           (1.22)         (2.18)              (2.08)       (1.22)         (1.46)

15 vs 20 Hours             $7.00          $15.53              -$2.41       $7.00          $16.41   128
                           (1.91)         (4.03)              (3.74)       (1.91)         (2.30)

20 vs 25 Hours             $8.95          $17.07              -$1.39       $8.95          $19.29   153
                           (1.74)         (3.67)              (3.15)       (1.74)         (2.46)

25 vs 30 Hours             $7.97          $14.92              -$1.08       $7.97          $17.01   135
                           (1.84)         (3.08)              (3.15)       (1.84)         (1.96)

30 vs 35 Hours             $14.68         $11.33              $7.82       $14.68          $21.55   133
                           (1.34)         (1.90)              (1.70)      (1.34)          (1.82)

35 vs 40 Hours             $12.00         $11.82              $4.84       $12.00          $19.16   112
                           (1.50)         (2.38)              (2.22)      (1.50)          (1.93)

40 vs 45 Hours             $21.89         $21.36              $8.94       $21.89          $34.83   121
                           (1.70)         (1.66)              (0.69)      (1.70)          (2.71)

45 vs 50 Hours             $22.69         $19.97            $10.59        $22.69          $34.80   129
                           (1.54)         (1.35)            (0.72)        (1.54)          (2.36)

Implied 𝑧𝑧̃                  0.58                                            0.58                  902
                            (0.04)                                          (0.04)
Notes: This table replicates Table 3, where the data are not corrected for inattention.




                                                         39
                                    Appendix Table 5. Marginal Value of Time
                                          All Experiment Applicants

                                                                       Quantiles
                           Mean        Standard              25th        50th           75th               N
                                       Deviation
5 vs. 10 Hours             $5.37         $8.37               $0.30       $5.37         $10.44             304
                           (0.78)        (1.53)              (1.23)      (0.78)        (1.20)

10 vs. 15 Hours            $6.58         $10.87              -$0.01      $6.58         $13.16             305
                           (1.03)        (1.64)              (1.64)      (1.03)        (1.19)

15 vs. 20 Hours            $8.56         $11.12              $1.82       $8.56         $15.30             323
                           (0.97)        (1.79)              (1.59)      (0.97)        (1.30)

20 vs. 25 Hours            $9.88         $13.00              $2.01       $9.88         $17.76             292
                           (1.15)        (2.01)              (1.81)      (1.15)        (1.51)

25 vs. 30 Hours           $11.23         $14.00              $2.75       $11.23        $19.71             305
                          (1.21)         (2.12)              (2.01)      (1.21)        (1.48)

30 vs. 35 Hours           $16.40         $9.79            $10.47         $16.40        $22.33             319
                          (0.89)         (1.51)           (1.36)         (0.89)        (1.18)

35 vs. 40 Hours           $13.21         $13.85              $4.82       $13.21        $21.60             272
                          (1.22)         (2.41)              (1.97)      (1.22)        (1.84)

40 vs. 45 Hours           $21.19         $16.15           $11.41         $21.19        $30.98             272
                          (1.03)         (0.78)           (0.55)         (1.03)        (1.51)

45 vs. 50 Hours           $25.50         $16.85           $15.29         $25.50        $35.71             266
                          (1.13)         (0.74)           (0.67)         (1.13)        (1.58)

Implied 𝑧𝑧̃                   0.63                                           0.63                        2,120
                             (0.03)                                         (0.03)
Notes: This table replicates Table 3, where all experiment applicants are included regardless of employment status.




                                                        40
                                  Appendix Table 6. Marginal Value of Time
                             Unemployed Applicants who Completed the Application

                                                                       Quantiles
                           Mean        Standard              25th        50th           75th               N
                                       Deviation
5 vs. 10 Hours             $4.53         $5.72               $1.07       $4.53         $8.00              113
                           (0.99)        (1.39)              (1.29)      (0.99)        (1.31)

10 vs. 15 Hours            $5.25         $6.48               $1.32       $5.25         $9.18              123
                           (1.06)        (1.61)              (1.51)      (1.06)        (1.37)

15 vs. 20 Hours            $7.03         $12.64              -$0.62      $7.03         $14.69             128
                           (1.77)        (3.52)              (3.24)      (1.77)        (2.21)

20 vs. 25 Hours            $8.72         $14.63              -$0.14      $8.72         $17.59             150
                           (1.75)        (3.43)              (2.96)      (1.75)        (2.45)

25 vs. 30 Hours            $7.98         $13.19              -$0.01      $7.98         $15.97             131
                           (1.92)        (2.95)              (3.11)      (1.92)        (2.02)

30 vs. 35 Hours           $14.64         $9.77               $8.72      $14.64         $20.56             131
                          (1.43)         (1.88)              (1.73)     (1.43)         (1.92)

35 vs. 40 Hours           $11.99         $9.57               $6.19      $11.99         $17.79             112
                          (1.53)         (2.29)              (2.23)     (1.53)         (1.88)

40 vs. 45 Hours           $21.25         $18.08           $10.29        $21.25         $32.20             118
                          (1.71)         (1.46)           (0.83)        (1.71)         (2.60)

45 vs. 50 Hours           $22.60         $17.34           $12.09        $22.60         $33.11             128
                          (1.55)         (1.19)           (0.83)        (1.55)         (2.27)

Implied 𝑧𝑧̃                   0.57                                       0.57                              888
                             (0.04)                                     (0.04)
Notes: This table replicates Table 3, where only unemployed applicants who finished the application are included.




                                                        41
                                                   Appendix Table 7. Predicted Wages by Subgroup

                                  Employment Status              Gender                       Weighting Scheme                       UI Eligibility
                     All       Unemployed Employed            Women   Men              Pre-Experiment         All            Eligible for Ineligible for
                                                                                       Characteristics   Characteristics      Benefits        Benefits

Predicted Wage     $14.86         $13.93        $16.14         $14.42     $16.75           $15.55             $15.01           $13.68        $14.53

Observations        2,120             902             660           1,494        315           726                726               644      251
Notes: Predicted wages are created as described in the text. The "Weighting Scheme" and "UI Eligibility" columns are limited to unemployed applicants.
Applicants are categorized as eligible or ineligible for UI based only on state and unemployment duration as described in the text.




                                                                          42
                                             Appendix Table 8. Overtime Marginal Value of Time: Robustness to Constraints
                                                                       Unemployed Applicants

                                                                 A. 40 vs. 45 Hours                                               B. 45 vs. 50 Hours
                                                                                      Quantiles                                                     Quantiles
                                           Mean       Standard           25th           50th      75th         Mean      Standard          25th       50th          75th
                                                      Deviation                                                          Deviation
Intercept Constrained Using
  Linear Extrapolation from               $21.87       $18.75           $10.51         $21.87     $33.23      $22.73       $17.69         $12.01      $22.73       $33.45
  Non-Overtime Hours Choices              (1.76)       (1.51)           (0.84)         (1.76)     (2.67)      (1.57)       (1.22)         (0.83)      (1.57)       (2.32)

 Quadratic Extrapolation from             $27.31        $5.38           $24.05         $27.31     $30.57      $27.77       $5.47          $24.45      $27.77       $31.08
 Non-Overtime Hours Choices               (0.88)        (0.17)          (0.78)         (0.88)     (0.99)      (0.73)       (0.14)         (0.64)      (0.73)       (0.82)

 Linear Extrapolation from
 Non-Overtime Hours Choices:              $22.15       $18.11           $11.18         $22.15     $33.13      $22.44       $18.35         $11.32      $22.44       $33.56
 Both Choices Use Same Intercept          (1.73)       (1.41)           (0.87)         (1.73)     (2.58)      (1.61)       (1.32)         (0.81)      (1.61)       (2.41)

 Average Intercept from                   $19.62       $23.83           $5.18          $19.62     $34.06      $19.89       $24.17          $5.25      $19.89       $34.54
 Non-Overtime Hours Choice                (1.97)       (2.40)           (0.52)         (1.97)     (3.43)      (1.86)       (2.27)          (0.49)     (1.86)       (3.24)

 Intercept from 35 vs. 40 Choice          $22.28       $17.82           $11.48         $22.28     $33.08      $22.57       $18.05         $11.64      $22.57       $33.51
                                          (1.71)       (1.37)           (0.88)         (1.71)     (2.54)      (1.59)       (1.27)         (0.82)      (1.59)       (2.36)

No Intercept Constraint                     $42.87       -$26.97        $59.21       $42.87      $26.53         $24.76       $12.99         $16.89     $24.76       $32.63
                                            (15.61)      (33.40)        (35.64)      (15.61)      (6.02)        (3.60)       (7.88)          (8.16)     (3.60)       (2.19)
Notes: The table shows the estimated mean and quantiles of MVT for the overtime treatments using different constraints on the "intercept": the fraction choosing the
longer job at a $0 effective wage. In the first five methods, the constraints are calculated using the estimated intercepts from the non-overtime treatments. The first is
the preferred method used in the text, where estimated intercepts from the non-overtime hours choices are regressed on the average hours in the choice and this
function is used to predict the intercept in the 40 vs. 45 and 45 vs. 50 hours treatments. The second uses the same method, where the function used to predict the
intercepts is a quadratic function of hours. The third uses the same linear extrapolation as the first but constrains the intercepts in both overtime choices to the
predicted intercept at 45 hours per week. The fourth uses the average intercept from the non-overtime hours choices. The fifth uses the estimated intercept in the 35
vs. 40 hours choice. The last row of data shows results without intercept constraints. Estimates are limited to applicants who are unemployed and are derived from an
inattention-corrected maximum likelihood model. Robust standard errors calculated using the delta method are in parentheses. There are 121 observations in Panel A
and 129 observations in Panel B.




                                                                                        43
                         Appendix Table 9. Descriptive Statistics using Sample Weights
                                           Unemployed Applicants

                                      CPS                                Experiment
                                   Hourly          Unweighted     Weighted Using Pre-    Weighted Using All
                                   Workers                           Experiment           Demographics
                                                                    Demographics
Female                               50%               83%                50%                   53%

Age                                  38.0              32.7               36.2                 34.9

Race
 White                               58%               44%                60%                   64%
 Black                               14%               34%                15%                   14%
 Hispanic                            21%               12%                18%                   16%
 Other Race                           8%               10%                 7%                   7%

Education
 Less than High School               12%                2%                 2%                   13%
 High School                         34%               30%                31%                   34%
 Some College                        23%               44%                44%                   25%
 College Degree                      27%               21%                20%                   26%
 More than College                    4%                2%                 3%                   3%

Observations                          92,378           1,152                922                    922
Notes: The first column of data shows descriptive statistics for hourly workers ages 16-64 in the 2016 CPS
Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups. The second, third, and fourth columns of data show descriptive
characteristics for unemployed applicants in our experiment, with different weights. Pre-experiment
demographics are collected before the job options are presented. These weights are constructed using race
categories, a female dummy, age, and age*race, age*female, and female*race interaction terms. The weights
in the final column are generated using these characteristics and educational attainment categories. Sample
weights are capped at a maximum of 10 standard deviations above the sample mean weight. This restriction
affects 1 observation in the third column of data and 5 in the fourth.




                                                       44
                  Appendix Table 10. Labor Supply Elasticities
                          All Experiment Applicants

                            Raw Points    Quadratic      Quartic       Spline
10 Hours                      2.46          4.34          2.57          1.67

15 Hours                       1.27          2.03            1.39       1.45

20 Hours                       1.74          1.31            1.23       1.34

25 Hours                       1.57          1.00            1.25       1.27

30 Hours                       0.45          0.83            1.19       1.22

35 Hours                       -0.66         0.74            0.93       1.19

40 Hours                       0.27          0.68            0.62       0.54

45 Hours                       0.60          0.64            0.42       0.40

RMSE                                          1.96         2.13          1.63
Notes: This table replicates Table 5, where the sample is not limited to
unemployed applicants.




                                                        45
                                                              Appendix Table 11. Marginal Value of Time by Gender
                                                                           All Experiment Applicants

                                                      A. Women                                                                          B. Men
                                                            Quantiles                                                                         Quantiles
                        Mean       Standard         25th       50th           75th          N            Mean      Standard         25th        50th      75th     N
                                   Deviation                                                                       Deviation

5 vs 10 Hours           $5.03        $9.93         -$0.99       $5.03        $11.05        226           $5.43       $3.23          $3.48        $5.43    $7.39    38
                        (1.11)       (1.81)        (1.76)       (1.11)       (1.33)                      (1.19)      (1.26)         (1.38)       (1.19)   (1.44)

10 vs 15 Hours          $6.25       $11.47         -$0.70       $6.25        $13.20        208           $8.49       $6.64          $4.47        $8.49    $12.51   43
                        (1.36)      (2.14)         (2.23)       (1.36)       (1.45)                      (1.85)      (2.42)         (2.35)       (1.85)   (2.36)

15 vs 20 Hours          $7.78       $11.33         $0.92        $7.78        $14.65        241           $9.65       $15.16         $0.46        $9.65    $18.83   46
                        (1.21)      (2.14)         (2.07)       (1.21)       (1.42)                      (3.05)      (8.18)         (5.49)       (3.05)   (6.14)

20 vs 25 Hours          $9.81       $11.11         $3.08        $9.81        $16.54        194          $13.29      $21.31          $0.38       $13.29    $26.20   56
                        (1.25)      (1.88)         (1.78)       (1.25)       (1.60)                     (3.76)      (10.12)         (7.01)      (3.76)    (7.38)

25 vs 30 Hours          $11.83      $12.51         $4.25        $11.83       $19.41        211          $13.73      $14.84          $4.74       $13.73    $22.73   45
                        (1.32)      (2.06)         (2.06)       (1.32)       (1.54)                     (3.15)      (6.26)          (4.42)      (3.15)    (5.40)

30 vs 35 Hours          $16.37      $10.35         $10.10       $16.37       $22.64        222          $15.73       $3.96         $13.33       $15.73    $18.14   51
                        (1.13)      (1.90)         (1.76)       (1.13)       (1.45)                     (1.19)       (1.73)        (1.73)       (1.19)    (1.43)

35 vs 40 Hours          $13.11      $15.30         $3.84        $13.11       $22.38        192          $10.66       $11.41         $3.75       $10.66    $17.58   36
                        (1.57)      (3.21)         (2.59)       (1.57)       (2.41)                     (3.06)       (4.85)         (5.02)      (3.06)    (3.27)

40 vs 45 Hours          $21.98      $15.41         $12.65       $21.98       $31.32        203          $14.71       $14.91         $5.67       $14.71    $23.74   31
                        (1.17)      (0.82)         (0.67)       (1.17)       (1.67)                     (2.86)       (2.90)         (1.10)      (2.86)    (4.62)

45 vs 50 Hours          $26.75      $15.27         $17.50       $26.75       $36.01        177          $20.01       $20.51         $7.58       $20.01    $32.44   38
                        (1.31)      (0.75)         (0.86)       (1.31)       (1.76)                     (3.01)       (3.09)         (1.14)      (3.01)    (4.89)

Implied 𝑧𝑧̃                0.64                                    0.64                     1,494          0.59                                   0.59             315
                          (0.04)                                  (0.04)                                  (0.06)                                 (0.06)
Notes: This table replicates Table 3, where applicants are included regardless of their employment status and results are shown separately by gender.




                                                                                                 46
