                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ALL TOGETHER NOW:
       LEVERAGING FIRMS TO INCREASE WORKER PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

                                        Nathaniel Hilger

                                      Working Paper 23905
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23905


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017




The views expressed in this paper are my own and do not reflect the views of Stripe. The research
for this manuscript was conducted while I was on the faculty at Brown University. I would like to
thank Andrew Johnston for providing many insightful comments. I am also grateful for feedback
from Raj Chetty, John Cochrane, Robert Fairlie, Matthew Gentzkow, David Grusky, Eric
Hanushek, Guido Imbens, Arash Nekoei, Paul Novosad, John Pencavel, Petra Persson, Isaac
Sorkin, Michael Strain, and Danny Yagan. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Nathaniel Hilger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
All Together Now: Leveraging Firms to Increase Worker Productivity Growth
Nathaniel Hilger
NBER Working Paper No. 23905
October 2017
JEL No. J38,J62,J68

                                         ABSTRACT

I describe a new policy that endows firms with limited-duration, virtual shares in their own
workers’ future realized earnings growth. The policy seeks to leverage employers to address a
key challenge of the modern world: increasing worker skills well into adulthood. I label the
policy “generalized experience rating” (GER) because it builds on the more narrow experience
rating long embodied in the US unemployment insurance system. GER can be interpreted as a
Pigouvian tax, and as a mandate alleviating an adverse selection problem. I discuss many design
issues and potential unintended consequences. I conclude the policy may warrant further research.


Nathaniel Hilger
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
nhilger@stripe.com
1 Introduction

The past 40 years have not been kind to the US economy. Major problems include slower
growth in educational attainment (Goldin and Katz, 2010), slower productivity growth
(Byrne et al., 2016), relative earnings stagnation for lower-skilled workers (Goldin and
Katz, 2010; Piketty et al., 2016), declining labor force participation (Juhn and Potter,
2006), and declining upward mobility (Hauser et al., 2000; Chetty et al., 2016; Hilger,
2016a). In this paper, I describe a new policy tool that may help to address these problems
by democratizing worker skill-accumulation and career advancement. The policy arises out
of “experience rating,” a unique feature of the U.S. Unemployment Insurance (UI) system
since 1935. Experience rating levies a higher tax on firms that lay off more workers for
longer periods of time. I explore the idea of replacing traditional experience rating with
a “generalized” experience rating (GER) scheme that taxes employers for worker earnings
declines, and rewards employers for worker earnings gains. These worker earnings changes
could stem from layoff as in traditional experience rating, but could also stem from skill
growth, promotions, job search improvements, and many other factors both inside and
outside the current employer.
     One rationale for GER is similar to that for traditional experience rating. Just as
unemployment has fiscal externalities on the UI system, worker earnings changes have fiscal
externalities on the progressive tax-expenditure system more broadly (Prante and Hodge,
2013; Center for Labor Market Studies, 2014).1 And just as unemployment responds
to experience rating (Topel, 1984; Card and Levine, 1994; Anderson and Meyer, 1994),

 1
     The tax-expenditure system, as opposed to the tax-benefit system, incorporates social expenditures that
      are not valued by individual recipients such as costs of incarceration and law enforcement.




                                                      1
employer-facilitated worker skill growth and career advancement may respond to GER
(Abramitzky and Lavy, 2014; Davis and Henrekson, 2005). GER also addresses two other
potential sources of under-investment in worker skill and career advancement: high costs of
investment undertaken by individual workers in isolation, and individual behavioral biases
against trading short-term sacrifice for uncertain long-term gains.2
     The key feature of GER is a government cash transfer to or from employers that equals
a share S of their workers’ future realized earnings gains over some period of time T ,
weighting earnings gains across these T subsequent periods by ρ1 , ρ2 , ..., ρT where typically
PT
     j=0   ρj = 1. This transfer is equivalent to endowing firms with virtual equity shares
in their workers’ future earnings growth. These equity shares are “virtual” because they
need not be financed directly out of workers’ earnings, as they would under a true equity
contract. To illustrate, suppose S = 0.2, T = 5, and all weight is placed on the initial
earnings gain in the year following the base year. Figure I presents GER transfers to a
hypothetical firm for base years 2007 through 2011 under this “subsequent-year” weighting
scheme. For the base year of 2007, the subsequent year earnings change is $4,000, and the
firm therefore receives 20% of $4,000 or $800 over each of the next five years. For the base
year of 2008, the subsequent year earnings change is -$2,000, so the firm therefore pays
$400 over each of the next five years. These transfers encourage the hypothetical firm to
invest in worker training and career advancement services in each year that raise the future
output of its workers, even if workers at this firm tend exhibit high turnover rates.
     By rewarding results rather than inputs, GER may create a new market in which firms
provide high-quality, low-cost job training, job search, and job placement programs to their


 2
     Another approach more exactly analogous to traditional experience rating would be to tax firms accord-
      ing to changes in workers’ net future contributions to the overall tax-expenditure system. While many
      of the implications of this approach are similar, I focus on earnings because changes in workers’ net
      future contributions to the tax-benefit system are currently more difficult for policymakers to measure
      (e.g., see discussions in Prante and Hodge 2013; Center for Labor Market Studies 2014).




                                                       2
workers, or else shop and negotiate for better external programs on behalf of their workers.
Firms would be motivated to facilitate completion of these programs with tools such as
improved coordination, automatic enrollment, matching investments, and social pressure.
New business ventures could gather and generate information about the effectiveness of
different training and career advancement tools for different types of workers, and then sell
this information to employers in the form of consulting and implementation services. The
beneficial effects of employers’ “workplace wellness” programs on employer health costs and
worker health, and the ecosystem of research and consulting devoted to improving these
programs, provides one example of this dynamic (Baicker et al., 2010).
  GER transfers act as a Pigouvian subsidy for firm production technologies that are
relatively more intensive in worker training and career advancement. Firms providing
more “dead end” jobs pay a tax, and firms providing more “career ladder” jobs receive a
subsidy. By tying this subsidy to workers’ future earnings, GER also solves a moral hazard
problem that prevents firms from reaching their full potential as facilitators of worker
productivity growth. The problem is that firms have incentives to provide workers with
postponed, prolonged, and lower-quality job training in order to save on costs and prevent
turnover (e.g., Hart et al., 1997), and to obstruct worker attempts at external job search
and placement. Consistent with these incentives, the most common form of employer
training assistance takes the form of tuition credits for voluntary, independent enrollment
without any attempt at coordination or guidance, which only become available after a
substantial probation period (Cappelli, 2004). The most obvious way workers could solve
this problem privately is by selling a share of their own future earnings to their current
employers. However, this market solution is unlikely to work due to the same problems with
adverse selection that preclude a private market for unemployment insurance (Hendren,
2015). GER addresses this adverse selection problem by mandating that all firms purchase




                                             3
virtual shares of workers’ future earnings, thereby attenuating firms’ moral hazard problem
in training provision and allowing firms to realize their large potential as facilitators of
worker skill growth and career advancement.
  As with any new policy, GER raises many important concerns about unintended conse-
quences. Depending on how it is implemented, GER may amplify employment volatility,
and may generate perverse employer incentives to backload worker earnings and hours,
to waste resources on identifying workers with higher ex ante predicted earnings growth,
to dilute worker earnings into a larger number of hours, and to reduce opportunities and
earnings for historically disadvantaged groups—among other issues. In each case, I find
that market forces, worker preferences, and simple extensions to basic GER policies may
contain these social costs, suggesting these concerns need not outweigh GER’s large poten-
tial benefits on purely theoretical grounds. Further research on GER, and possibly even
experimentation, may therefore prove worthwhile.
  The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic mechanics of GER policies.
Section 3 argues that GER policies are not radical or utopian, and in fact build on long-
standing precedents to fill an important void in US workforce development in a distinctly
American way. Section 4 describes the large potential advantages employers could leverage
to help workers increase skills growth and career advancement, both directly and as a spur
to innovation in these areas. In Section 4, I describe the market failures that GER serves
to address, which include externalities, moral hazard, and adverse selection. Section 5
discusses many important policy design issues and potential unintended consequences of
GER. Section 6 concludes.




                                             4
2 Mechanics of GER

Consider a worker who invests in a training program that costs Cworker in year t0 , raising
her productivity from PL to PL + ∆P and raising her earnings from EL to EL + ∆E.3 This
investment yields a permanent, annual dividend of ∆E.4 If a worker remains employed
for, say, Tlife, t0 additional years after period t0 , and we ignore discounting, she receives a
total present value earnings gain of


                               Rworker = Tlife, t0 × ∆E − Cworker .                                     (1)


     Now consider a firm that invests in the same job training program for a worker at cost
Cfirm at time t0 , again raising the worker’s productivity from PL to PL + ∆P . This
investment yields an annual dividend of ∆P − ∆Ẽ for the duration of the worker’s tenure
at that firm as of time t0 , or Tduration, t0 ≤ Tlife, t0 . Note that ∆Ẽ need not equal ∆E,
because earnings may adjust to compensate the employer for more or less of the training
cost Cfirm . The return to the firm is

                                                         h           i
                         Rfirm = Tduration, t0 × ∆P − ∆Ẽ − Cfirm .                                     (2)


     This return is larger if post-training worker tenure is longer, and if workers capture
a smaller share of productivity gains in the form of earnings gains due to various labor
market frictions (e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke, 1998, 1999). As I discuss below, it is likely
that Cfirm < Cworker for many reasons and that, despite this efficiency advantage, firms

 3
   All earnings are assumed to be deflated with a Price Index that is most relevant to worker expenditures,
    not the price index most relevant to firm owners, i.e., the firm’s output price. An implication of using
    a CPI is that GER will pro-cyclically punish firms that reduce workers’ earnings in response to an
    adverse product demand shock, just as traditional experience rating punishes firms that reduce some
    workers’ earnings to zero with layoffs in response to an adverse demand shock.
 4
   I ignore time discounting throughout this section for simplicity.




                                                     5
are likely to provide less than socially efficient levels of job training and search assistance
to workers as a benefit paid for out of earnings. Putting aside cost differences, the benefits
to firms of investing in workers tend to be smaller than the benefits to workers of investing
in themselves, i.e., Rworker >> Rfirm . This old observation led Becker to conclude that
workers would probably have to finance the vast majority of investment in “general” skills
out of foregone earnings (Pigou, 1912; Becker, 1962).
     In the current US policy environment, workers acting on their own without employer
assistance are likely to under-invest in general skills and career advancement due to tax-
benefit progressivity, high costs of investment undertaken in isolation by individual work-
ers, and behavioral biases against making short-term sacrifice in exchange for uncertain,
long-term rewards.5 GER policies provide a way to compensate firms for investing in
workers—even when post-training worker tenure is short and workers capture a large share
of productivity gains. GER provides this compensation in a way that rewards better worker
outcomes and therefore encourages effective, efficient training.
     GER policies involve an income sharing parameter S ∈ (0, 1), a time horizon T > 1,
                                                  PT
and a set of weights ρj for j ∈ [1, T ] with         j=1   ρj = 1 that dictate the relative importance
of more proximate earnings changes. As before, the firm chooses whether to make an
investment increasing the worker’s productivity from PL to PL + ∆P and earnings from
Ê to Ê + ∆Ê, and the worker stays at the firm through year Tduration, t0 before leaving
for a job with a different employer. Note that ∆Ê can differ from both ∆E and ∆Ẽ as
earnings may adjust to the GER policy.6 Each year of the worker’s tenure, the firm and
the worker can take actions, either together or separately, that may increase the worker’s
productivity. These actions may include job training, allocation of tasks, and job search
assistance to increase job match quality. GER mandates that the firm receive a transfer

 5
     I discuss these market failures addressed by GER below in Section 5.
 6
     I discuss this endogenous earnings response below in Section 6.




                                                     6
from the government equal to share S of any earnings gains or losses accruing to the
worker over T years following each year of this tenure, both internally at the hiring firm
and externally after a worker departs.7
     In our simple framework of a discrete, fixed, annual investment in workers, a firm would
receive a GER transfer for investments made during year t0 amounting to T × S × ∆Ê.
The firm would receive this return on each year’s investment up through the final year of a
worker’s tenure, ttenure . Returns accruing to a firm for investment in any particular year
t become
                                                         
                   GER
                  Rfirm = Tduration,t × ∆P − ∆Ê − Cfirm + T × S × ∆Ê.                        (3)

                        GER
This return under GER, Rfirm , can be much larger than the return accruing to employ-
ers without GER, Rfirm . GER therefore can induce some share of firms to undertake
investment in workers that would not have done so otherwise, and may also induce a
shift in market and employment shares toward firms adopting more worker-enhancing pro-
duction technologies. Prior researchers have established a similar point more formally in
documenting how traditional experience rating reduces firm incentives to undertake lay-
offs (e.g., Feldstein, 1978), in keeping with the original goals of experience rating (Becker,
1972).
     In this simplified example, earnings growth over the next year reflects a fixed, permanent
effect of any training that occurred in the prior year. In reality, training may have time-
varying effects on earnings. In this case, GER payments could be gradually transferred to
a firm employing a worker in a base period t0 over T years as future earnings are realized,
                                       PT                       
resulting in a total transfer of T ×      j=0 ρj S × Êtj+1 − Êtj . If the weights ρj decline over

time but remain above zero, for example, they imply greater accountability of employers


 7
     GER payments should apply both to within-firm and between-firm earnings gains. See explanation
      below in Section 6.




                                                  7
for worker earnings changes realized more proximately in the future. Figure II illustrates
GER transfers to a firm under a “uniform” weighting scheme in which ρj = 1/T .
     Why does GER align incentives for more efficient investment in workers? Below I argue
informally that workers struggle to observe the quality of a firm’s training decisions, and
this information problem makes it hard for workers to compensate employers for training
out of foregone earnings. To illustrate, consider a firm choosing not only whether to invest
in training, but also how much to invest. Suppose workers cannot observe this choice.
Also assume a competitive labor market such that earnings always equal productivity,
hence ∆P = ∆Ê. Without GER, employers cannot commit to provide any training and
hence are unable to compensate workers in the form of training rather than cash, even
if the employer has access to highly productive training technologies.8 With GER in
place, equation 3 implies the employer will invest in training up to the point at which
              ∂∆Ê
S×T ×          ∂C
                     = 1 even if workers decline to receive any compensation in the form of
training. Under a benchmark “moderate” GER policy with S = 0.2 and T = 5, this
                          ∂∆Ê
condition becomes          ∂C
                                 = 1. In other words, the firm will voluntarily provide training
up to the point at which $1 of investment in training increases future annual earnings
by $1. Because firms still only receive a small share of the social returns to training,
they may still under-invest relative to a social optimum. However, below I discuss many
ways that firms can essentially pay workers’ fixed costs of investment, and may therefore
crowd in substantial additional investment by workers. These fixed costs may include,
for example, re-arranging work schedules to accommodate training, gathering information


 8
     Employers could provide training if they faced a strong reputational penalty from short-changing workers
      on training that had been paid for up front out of earnings. The strength of reputational effects is an
      empirical question. Note this mechanism presumes a high degree of worker sophistication and access to
      information which is not readily available to workers apart from anecdotes of friends or, more recently,
      employer review websites like GlassDoor. Unfortunately, employer reviews are only weakly informative
      for large firms with heterogeneous managers and work environments, and large firms employ most
      workers.




                                                       8
about training programs, searching for new jobs in broad employer networks, and many
other tactics.
  Importantly, note that GER need not be financed out of earnings and hence need not
augment the earnings insurance already implicit in the progressive tax-benefit system.
Debates over GER can proceed independently of debates over the optimal degree of earnings
insurance or tax-benefit progressivity. GER could be financed, for example, out of general
tax revenue. I discuss financing options for GER in more detail in Section 6.
  A concrete example can illustrate the magnitudes at stake for GER. Traditional expe-
rience rating tax contributions as a percent of total wages have been about 0.5-1.5% over
the 1960-2008 period (Vroman and Woodbury, 2014). GER transfers are likely to be in the
same ballpark. Assume a GER policy with S = 0.2 and T = 5, and consider a firm that
invests in workforce development over the course of one year to an extent that increases its
workers’ future earnings by 1%. An increase of 1% in future earnings would be equivalent
to something like one tenth of a year in college, or less, given prevailing Mincerian returns
to college over 10% (e.g., Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, 2013). This firm would receive an
annual transfer of 1% of its total wage bill (= 0.2×1%×5), which is similar in magnitude to
tax rates under traditional experience rating. Further suppose workers earn $30,000/year
upon hiring. Then 1% of earnings yields the firm $300.
  Prior work suggests that $300 is large compared to costs of effective interventions. Bet-
tinger and Baker (2014) and Carrell and Sacerdote (2016) both find that coaching students
through the financial aid and college application process dramatically increases college en-
rollment of young adults at costs below $300 per student. A transfer of $300 is is also
substantial compared to costs of community college, and Jepsen et al. (2014) find large
earnings gains to associates degrees and diplomas, especially in certain fields that employ-




                                             9
                                                                                         9
ers could easily steer workers towards to maximize earnings growth.                          These findings
suggest that investing in programs that help workers find and complete high-return exter-
nal degrees could increase employer profit under GER, even if firms only recover a small
share of potential earnings gains (S = 0.2) for a limited number of years (T = 5). Em-
ployer assistance may also crowd-in private investment from workers, much like matching
contributions crowd in greater saving (Duflo et al., 2006).
     Impacts of GER on aggregate worker productivity growth would be governed by at least
three key empirical questions. One question concerns the elasticity of employer investment
in workers with respect to GER parameters such as S, T , and weights ρj . Another question
concerns potential costs of GER due to strategic behavior and various sources of DWL.
Below I discuss some of the limited existing evidence that bears on these questions.



3 Precedents for GER

GER builds on traditional experience rating, a unique US policy that enjoys longstand-
ing, bipartisan support. Prior work documents that firms respond strongly to experience
rating by stabilizing employment (Feldstein, 1978; Topel, 1984; Card and Levine, 1994;
Anderson and Meyer, 1994). Just as experience rating reduces deadweight loss from UI
by discouraging taxpayer-subsidized "unemployment holidays,” GER reduces DWL from
overall tax-benefit progressivity by discouraging taxpayer-subsidized “underemployment”
in the sense of under-developed skills and career ambitions. And just as experience rat-
ing seeks to encourage adoption of business practices that stabilize employment and to
re-allocate from higher-layoff firms to lower-layoff firms (Becker, 1972), GER seeks to en-
 9
     Under an assumption of constant returns to scale and 10% earnings gains per year of college attainment
      and ignoring the value of students’ time, the skill-production technology embodied in community
      colleges generates a 1% earnings gain at a cost of something like $900, or total private cost to students
      of $340, based on annual total and private costs for a year of community college of $9,000 and $3,400,
      respectively (Johnson, 2014).




                                                       10
courage adoption of business practices that develop workers’ potential and to re-allocate
resources toward firms adopting more worker-enhancing production technologies.
  GER also builds on traditional policies that encourage firms to invest in physical capital.
Prior work has shown that firms alter their investments in physical capital in response to
incentives such as "bonus depreciation" (e.g., Zwick and Mahon, 2017). Whereas physi-
cal capital does not leave firms, human capital rapidly and unilaterally does leave firms,
and this inefficiently reduces incentives for firms to facilitate investment in human cap-
ital relative to physical capital. GER would address this imbalance and leverage firms’
sophisticated investment apparatus to increase human as well as physical capital.
  Many other countries in Europe and Asia subsidize worker training to a greater extent
than the US (e.g., Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce, 1990). The typ-
ical policy levies a tax on firms in the range of 1-2% of payroll that subsidizes approved
or publicly-provided worker training programs. These policies often require a substantial
bureaucracy to evaluate, approve, and monitor specific training programs, much like the
US Department of Education’s role in determining eligibility of colleges for Title IV fed-
eral student aid programs. In some cases, governments directly administer public training
programs much like state governments in the US administer public colleges. GER would
provide the US with a more efficient approach to workforce development due to its em-
phasis on actual earnings gains rather than training inputs, just like traditional experience
rating—a unique American institution—has provided the US with a more efficient ap-
proach to UI. GER requires a smaller and less intrusive public bureaucracy, and therefore
may offer a better "fit" with American political institutions. GER implies a smaller bu-
reaucracy because it aligns incentives in a way that avoids any need for public evaluation,
approval, and monitoring of specific training programs. GER also prevents firms from
collaborating on earnings to exploit GER by generating conflicting incentives for “sending”




                                             11
and “receiving” firms in any worker job switch. These self-enforcement features of GER
are reminiscent of value-added taxation.
  GER can also be understood as the reciprocal of equity compensation for workers. Firms
often pay some workers with equity in order to address moral hazard problems that may
threaten to limit workers’ productive effort. Reciprocally, GER sells virtual equity in
workers to firms in order to address similar moral hazard problems that threaten to limit
employers’ effort toward increasing workers’ human capital. I describe these moral hazard
problems in more detail below.
  GER is also similar to tax subsidies that encourage firms to facilitate worker financial
investment for retirement through saving instruments such as 401ks. This policy rewards
firms for setting up investment options for workers, without any additional reward for ac-
tually increasing worker savings. This is analogous to the OECD approach to subsidizing
worker training, which also does not link subsidies to actual earnings gains realized by
workers. Congress acknowledged this problem when it passed the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) to impose standards on the retirement plan invest-
ment options that firms provide to their workers. These regulations, however, have left
ample room for firms to offer substandard investment options. Examples include the focus
on high-fee mutual funds rather than low-fee index funds (e.g., Elton et al., 2006) and
a focus on high-risk “company stock” rather than low-risk diversified portfolios (Benartzi
et al., 2007). Firms have also traditionally failed to address workers’ plausible behavioral
biases against saving and away from optimal portfolio allocations, by for example offering
automatic rather than voluntary enrollment (Carroll et al., 2009; Chetty et al., 2013), de-
fault investment in best-practice portfolios with a large share of equity that shifts gradually
into bonds over the lifecycle (Brown et al., 2007), or by using tactics intended to overcome
workers’ problems with self control and commitment (Thaler and Benartzi, 2004). Over-




                                              12
all, regulations have not caused firms to act in a proactive fashion to ensure workers’ real
retirement security.10 GER overcomes these problems for saving in the form of human
capital, rather than financial capital, by directly subsidizing earnings growth rather than
training inputs.
     GER also acts as a classic Pigouvian tax, much like Pigouvian taxes on pollution. The
reason is that workers are likely to under-invest in human capital for reasons discussed
below. This under-investment implies that firms adopting more worker-enhancing produc-
tion technologies generate positive externalities by moving workers’ human capital closer
to its socially optimal level. GER therefore brings private net benefits of worker training
closer to social net benefits, increasing economic efficiency.
     Finally, GER is related to “value-added” policies that reward teachers and schools for
gains in student test scores (e.g., Kane and Staiger, 2005). Prior work has found that
VA-based incentive systems can potentially increase mean teacher quality even when VA
measures contain substantial noise (Kane and Staiger, 2005; Chetty et al., 2014). GER may
be a promising application of value-added methods because earnings are a better proxy
for welfare than test scores, and earnings can typically be observed both before and after
a particular employer hires a worker. Test scores, in contrast, have no intrinsic value, and
it is not possible to observe more meaningful, longer-term outcomes before children reach
early adulthood. On the other hand, earnings raise additional problems for reasons that I
discuss in Section 6. Statistical techniques that have proven useful in the VA literature on
teachers could also potentially be modified to improve GER (e.g., Chetty et al., 2014).




10
     Surprisingly, the evidence that existing institutions have resulted in severe, widespread under-saving is
      rather weak (e.g., Scholz et al., 2006).




                                                      13
4 The Untapped Potential of Employers

In this section I discuss evidence that bears on two of the empirical parameters governing
effectiveness of GER: the capacity of employers to facilitate worker productivity growth,
and the responsiveness of employer investments in workers to GER parameters such as
S and T . While direct evidence is not available, there are several reasons to think these
parameters may be substantial.
     Firms can and do undertake many kinds of activities that benefit worker skill and career
growth. Firms can choose levels of formal training, on-the-job training, job task assign-
ments, job search assistance, job security, and many other services and activities.11 Returns
to these activities may vary dramatically across firms and workers. GER embraces this
variation by letting firms and workers decide how best to increase worker earnings, and
rewarding actions based on demonstrated success.
     In providing all of these services that benefit workers, employers have four comparative
advantages over workers, and over most other social organizations such as schools, churches,
or worker training agencies: coordination, expertise, scale, and complementarities. These
advantages tend to increase in firm size.
     1. Coordination. Individuals struggle to balance college with family and job responsibil-
ities, and this tension likely prevents workers from initiating and completing other training
programs throughout their career (Johnson and Rochkind, 2009). Firms are well-suited
to address this problem because they already employ the majority of most workers’ time
on a day-to-day basis. For example, firms could integrate external course schedules and
academic calendars into job scheduling and task management software. Firms could also


11
     For example, Becker (1972) documents that firms adopting limited private unemployment insurance
      before the New Deal increased rotation of workers across many types of jobs, thereby assuring that all
      workers would remain productive in the event of demand reductions affecting any particular job task
      and reducing the need for layoffs.




                                                      14
negotiate with colleges and other training programs for greater availability of night and
weekend courses.
  2. Expertise. Firm human resource departments could act as depositories of learning and
expertise in training programs and career advancement. Identifying high-quality, low-cost
training programs has proven to be a difficult problem for professional labor economists,
not to mention individual workers. Likewise, job search poses difficult problems of infor-
mation acquisition, duration, and negotiation that most individual workers may struggle
to address. In contrast, firms can assess quality of external training programs, evaluate re-
turns to different college majors or vocational programs, commission experiments to obtain
greater insight into which programs work best for which workers, and procure services of
external consulting agencies that specialize in worker training program evaluation. Firms
also may recognize the kinds of skills they value in workers, and which are most in need of
improvement among new and potential hires. Obama White House (2014), for example,
concludes that training programs have been shown to increase workers’ earnings most ro-
bustly when designed in close collaboration with employers. The Registered Apprenticeship
program, discussed below, illustrates this point.
  3. Scale. In leveraging their expertise, firms can exploit returns to scale that are not
available to individual workers. Firms can set up large-scale internal training programs,
and firms can use their bargaining power to negotiate with external training programs for
lower prices and higher quality. Firms can also cultivate and maintain larger and more
dispersed employment networks around the country, and actively “pitch” their workers to
other firms on the basis of internal information about worker performance and potential.
  4. Complementarities. Firms already provide many types of worker training internally,
and GER would encourage firms to formalize these programs for broader recognition in the
labor market. For example, companies that teach workers how to use certain machines or




                                             15
software programs could provide verifiable skill assessments and credentials to workers, and
could subject internal training programs to independent auditing for quality assurance.
     Some firms may simply help workers identify and complete valuable external training
programs, but other employers could also build internal training programs. Prior work
suggests much potential for valuable on-the-job training programs remains unrealized for
reasons that GER can partly address. One piece of evidence supporting this view comes
from work on the Registered Apprenticeship program, which has existed in the U.S. since
1937. Mathematica (2012) estimates large positive effects of these apprenticeships on earn-
ings, yielding high private and social rates of return despite the program’s substantial costs.
Apprenticeships tightly integrate training with work, ease the coordination burden and
leverage employer knowledge of how best to train workers in productive skills. But surveys
show that over half of employers sponsoring apprenticeships worry trained workers may
be “poached” by other firms before training costs can be recouped (Lerman et al., 2009).
This is remarkable because only a tiny share of firms sponsor apprentices, and presum-
ably these firms face unusually weak poaching threats.12 Positive causal effects on worker
earnings have also been documented for many other job training programs, especially those
involving close collaboration with employers (Heckman et al., 1999; LaLonde, 2003; Obama
White House, 2014; Card et al., 2010).13 Other work documents substantial positive im-
pacts on productivity of “innovative” HR practices that increase worker training alongside
other complementary policies, but that nonetheless diffuse slowly across firms due to high
transition costs (Ichniowski et al., 1997). This literature justifies optimism that motivated
employers could successfully advance workers’ careers through well-chosen investments.
     A significant, permanent GER program could also give rise to important general equi-


12
     See Hoffman and Burks (2017a) for a recent example of empirical research documenting this problem.
13
     Unfortunately, many of the studies discussed in these review articles do not contain enough information
      about program costs to estimate rates of return.




                                                      16
librium effects. GER could give birth to a new ecosystem of evaluation and innovation
in training and career advancement programs. New firms could emerge that conducted
experiments in training program effectiveness, consulted with employers on providing the
highest-return investments in workers, tailored training programs to individual workers
based on worker preferences and abilities, and cultivated credible, far-flung job networks
connecting labor markets over space. Walmart could encourage workers to undertake
training in computer programming or accounting, graphic or user interface design, or basic
literacy and numeracy, depending on the aptitudes and preferences of each worker. Job
search and placement, like skill development, would also benefit from employer cooperation.
For example, under GER employers may require—not only encourage, but require—that
all workers maintain resumes and LinkedIn profiles, and help workers to practice job in-
terview skills. All of these activities would be viewed with hostility by employers in the
absence of GER. Finally, a valuable market may also develop for internal training program
accreditation, so that firms can “sell” their workers to other employers at higher earnings.



5 GER as Efficient Response to Market Failure

Four factors suppress investments in skill and career advancement below their socially
optimal level: tax-benefit progressivity, complexity, individual behavioral biases, and bor-
rowing constraints.
  Tax-benefit progressivity, other things equal, reduces incentives to invest in skill and pur-
sue an ambitious, full-time career. Existing evidence suggests that educational and occupa-
tional choices, for example, may be quite sensitive to tax-benefit progressivity (Abramitzky
and Lavy, 2014; Davis and Henrekson, 2005). The tax-expenditure system in the US, as
in other OECD countries, is quite progressive. Annual net fiscal contributions amount to
something like 30-50% of earnings gains associated with higher educational attainment, and



                                              17
something 10% of all income gains with much larger externalities at top incomes (Prante
and Hodge, 2013; Center for Labor Market Studies, 2014).14
     Second, individuals seeking to invest in education and training on their own face high
costs relative to firms due to their limited expertise, small scale, inability to coordinate
training with job assignments, and inability to credibly formalize their private learning
from independent study. These high costs are consistent with a literature documenting
that many individuals struggle to make optimal decisions in markets for complex prod-
ucts.15 To give just one example, Jepsen et al. (2014) find that labor market returns vary
enormously among men and women, between associate’s degrees, diplomas, and certifi-
cates, and between different fields within each of these credentials, in the Kentucky labor
market of the 2000s. There is little hope that individual workers in Kentucky will sign up
for JSTOR and read this paper. However, there is some hope that Kentucky employers—
especially large employers—will process this kind of evidence, or else consult other websites
or research companies to do it for them. Labor economists could play a productive role in
brokering this new market for information.
     Third, individuals may face not only high costs of navigating these markets in isolation,
but also behavioral biases that push against making short-term sacrifices in exchange for
longer-term gains.16 If workers are not entirely sophisticated about acknowledging these
biases, they may fail to demand the kinds of defaults, commitment devices, and coaching

14
   Some of these fiscal externalities observed in cross-sectional data are mechanically related to tax formulas
    and therefore causal, while others such as incarceration and benefit take-up need not be causal. Hendren
    (2016) discusses causal impacts of various policies on individuals’ total net fiscal contributions.
15
   Prior work documents naive or ad hoc consumer choice in markets for financial assets (Hastings et al.,
    2013), schools for children (Hastings and Weinstein, 2008), college applications (Hoxby and Avery,
    2013; Hoxby and Turner, 2012; Bulman, 2015), and health insurance plans (Ketcham et al., 2012). In
    all these cases, many consumers select lower-quality products at higher prices due in part to a lack of
    clear, accurate, and credible information. Competition need not eliminate these problems (e.g., Gabaix
    and Laibson, 2006; Duarte and Hastings, 2012).
16
   These biases include limited self-control and time-inconsistency (e.g., Bryan et al., 2010), over-confidence
    (Hoffman and Burks, 2017b), framing effects (Busse et al., 2015), and many others (Kahneman, 2013).
    The economic importance of these biases across different markets is not yet well-understood.




                                                     18
that can alleviate them.
  Finally, workers—especially lower-income workers—may struggle to finance training out
of foregone earnings or borrowing due to non-collateralizability of human capital (Becker,
1967).
  The idea that firms may be well-situated to address these problems and assist workers
with human capital accumulation raises a question. Why don’t workers just pay firms
to facilitate greater general training and career advancement out of earnings, much like
workers already pay firms to provide other benefits such as health insurance? If workers
tend to leave the firm too quickly after training for the firm to recoup costs, or if assistance
takes the form of placement in better jobs with other employers, this should simply increase
the amount of earnings workers need to forego. Borrowing constraints are not a satisfying
explanation, especially above the lowest income levels.
  One plausible answer is that workers cannot trust firms to provide these more directed
kinds of assistance due to asymmetric information. Training programs are complex services
with long-term, hard-to-verify impacts on workers’ labor market outcomes. Individuals
typically interact with specific types of training programs only one time or very infrequently
during their lives. Therefore, individuals may be unable to assess training program quality
in a sophisticated way. In cases where individuals have trouble evaluating service quality
and reputation effects are weak, service providers may wind up selling inefficient quantities
and qualities of the service to consumers. For example, firms facilitating training for
workers may delay and prolong this training in order to increase retention, or narrowly tailor
such training to the short-term interests of the employer. Competition among employers
need not eliminate this problem (Hart et al., 1997; Hilger, 2016b).
  One indication that this moral hazard problem may be large is that most firms special-
izing in human capital production, i.e., schools and colleges, have adopted non-profit and




                                              19
public organizational forms throughout US history. In these organizations, leaders are not
accountable to shareholders seeking to maximize profit even at the expense of students.
Instead, leaders are accountable to boards of directors seeking to represent the mission
statement of the school (non-profit), or accountable to elected public representatives (pub-
lic). Another striking feature of many schools is their historical dependence on alumni
donations and tax payments for support. This funding model simulates a partial equity
stake of schools in their students much like GER, and helps to align incentives toward effi-
cient, productive training. Consistent with this interpretation, the recent onset of for-profit
colleges has raised concerns about excessive costs, deceptive marketing, and low quality in
pursuit of profits at the expense of students (e.g., Cellini and Turner, 2016).
  Unlike schools and colleges, most employers do not specialize in training. Instead, em-
ployers specialize in production of other goods and services for which moral hazard is not
an overriding concern. These employers therefore typically choose for-profit organizational
forms. This for-profit structure may perversely encourage firms—much more than schools
and colleges—to provide worker training that is delayed, slow, cheap, and ineffective. These
concerns constrain the market for firm-provided and firm-guided training as a worker ben-
efit financed out of earnings. Indeed, most firms that provide general training do so in the
form of tuition reimbursement designed for take-up by a small set of sophisticated workers,
rather than leveraging firms’ multiple advantages to help all workers advance their careers
beyond their tenure at the firm (Cappelli, 2004). Some employers also provide subsidies
to attend a particular college with which they have negotiated a private contract, poten-
tially incorporating price discounts and changes in product quality. All of these caveats
threaten to reduce the value of employer-provided training to workers, and hence reduce
the quantity of worker training provided in equilibrium to inefficiently low levels.
  In theory, workers could partly alleviate this moral hazard problem by selling a share




                                              20
of their future earnings to firms, just like firms partly alleviate moral hazard among top
employees by providing compensation in the form of stock or bonuses linked to the firm’s
stock price. This is equivalent to a private market for earnings insurance. Unfortunately,
it is almost certain that private information and adverse selection preclude such a market.
Hendren (2015) has shown that, under reasonable assumptions, workers have sufficient
private information about future layoffs to undermine private markets in unemployment
insurance, consistent with the failure of these markets to develop before the New Deal
mandated participation (Nelson, 1969). If workers possess substantial private information
about future layoff probabilities, workers surely also possess substantial private information
about future earnings changes more generally, especially given that workers exert relatively
less control over future layoff than they do over many other determinants of earnings.
This private information precludes a private market for earnings insurance, and hence
also precludes a market-based solution to the moral hazard problem in employer-provided
training. The classic solution to adverse selection in private markets is a government
mandate. That is exactly what GER achieves by endowing all firms with virtual shares of
their workers’ future earnings changes.



6 Policy Design Issues

In this section I discuss several critical policy design and implementation issues that bear on
the third key parameter governing effectiveness of GER: the extent of strategic behavior
and DWL. The many adjustments to basic GER policies discussed here raise concerns
about policy complexity, but do not seem obviously insurmountable. It is therefore an
empirical question whether these challenges generate large social costs compared to GER’s
potential social benefits. I discuss the following problems in order:




                                              21
  1. Will GER exacerbate downturns?

  2. Firm size and high-earning workers

  3. Within-firm vs. between-firm earnings changes

  4. Strategic backloading of compensation

  5. Annual earnings vs. hourly wages

  6. Selection and capitalization

  7. Is GER regressive?

  8. Parenthood, schooling, and apprenticeships

  9. Financing GER

 10. Alternatives to unweighted mean earnings

 11. Multiple employers


6.1 Will GER exacerbate downturns?

Both traditional and generalized experience rating may exacerbate economic downturns.
This is because experience rating increases tax rates on firms that experience adverse
demand shocks and pass these shocks on to workers in the form of layoffs and earnings
reductions. Important recent work by Johnston (2017) finds that traditional experience
rating taxes do reduce hiring in a subset of firms experiencing very large downturns in
Florida, i.e. firms at the 89th percentile of firm layoff rates. The pattern of results suggests
a key role for binding credit constraints on hiring faced by some firms at some times.
These estimates provide upper bounds on costs of demand shock amplification in the



                                              22
economy more generally, especially at larger firms where credit constraints are presumably
less binding. But these costs do warrant great caution in experimenting with GER. One
approach to alleviate these costs suggested by Johnston would be to implement “experience
rating savings accounts” that require firms to save positive GER transfers up to some
threshold sufficient to finance GER payments during a downturn, with only “surplus” GER
receipts being paid in cash (e.g., Feldstein and Altman, 2007). This would assure that
firms have ample funds to pay higher GER taxes in case of layoff without having to make
sharp cuts in subsequent hiring.


6.2 Firm size and high-earning workers

Two simple, practical restrictions on GER would likely be that it only be applied to larger
firms with many employees, and that it only be applied to workers earning below a certain
amount. This prevents small firms from bearing too much risk or spending their limited
resources on amateur attempts to optimize worker training, and it prevents firms from
manipulating the policy in collusion with small numbers of very highly-paid workers. Very
highly paid workers also tend to have more complex compensation packages that are more
difficult for policymakers to observe in a reliable fashion. Many existing social policies
in the US and other OECD countries similarly exclude small firms and very highly-paid
workers in practice.


6.3 Within-firm vs between-firm earnings gains

Above, I assume GER transfers accrue for earnings changes both within and between
firms. There are two reasons why GER transfers should be tied to all earnings changes.
To see this, suppose GER transfers only depended on between-firm earnings changes. Two
problems arise.



                                            23
  First, consider a firm that would otherwise pay workers $20,000 in their first year and
$30,000 in their second year. This firm would have an incentive to split into two firms,
with one firm employing workers in their first year, and another firm employer workers in
their second year. This strategy represents pure DWL and seems difficult to prevent. It
would require regulators to define “employer change” rigorously and monitor attempts at
evasion and avoidance.
  The second problem is that firms now have an incentive to reduce earnings of workers
who appear likely to leave for a different employer in the near future, thereby generating
spurious earnings growth when the new employer hires the worker at earnings more in line
with skills. To this end, firms would waste resources assessing which workers were likely
to leave the firm, and then potentially lower these workers’ earnings and undermine their
job search to prolong the pre-departure window of suppressed earnings. This form of GER
would thereby amplify pre-existing worker incentives to conceal their job search process,
rather than collaborating with employers on career advancement.
  In contrast, GER that depends on both internal and external earnings changes does not
create these perverse incentives. Internal GER does create perverse incentives to backload
earnings, hours, and responsibilities, but I argue below that strong market forces tend to
constrain these behaviors and minimize associated DWL.


6.4 Strategic backloading of compensation

GER generates incentives for firms to backload worker compensation to generate spurious
earnings gains without increasing actual skill growth. For example, instead of paying a
worker $40,000/year indefinitely, a firm could pay a worker $35,000 in year 1, $45,000 in
year 2, and $40,000 thereafter. If S = 0.2 and T = 5, the firm would receive a GER transfer
of $10,000 as a reward for the initial earnings gain, and would have to pay a GER bill of




                                            24
$5,000 for subsequent earnings decline, leaving the firm with an additional $5,000. The
firm could share part of this transfer with the worker to compensate for backloading $5,000
of compensation by one year. This kind of behavior does not increase worker productivity
and represents pure DWL.
     Three forces constrain earnings backloading. First, workers may be laid off from, or
wish to leave, any given employer at any point in time, and this reduces the expected
value of a firm’s promise of future compensation. Annual job separation rates are 40% in
recent years, implying that on average workers value a dollar backloaded by one year at
60 cents.17 Second, workers further reduce the value of this backloaded dollar because it
entails additional risk. Existing estimates of risk-aversion suggest this would reduce the
value of backloaded earnings by an additional 10% to, say, 54 cents.18 Third, workers
value future earnings less than current earnings even without uncertainty. Evidence on
individual discount rates suggest this will tend to reduce the value of future earnings by an
additional 10-30% per year of delay, reducing a value of a dollar backloaded by one year
from 54 cents to something like 36-49 cents (e.g., Hausman, 1979; Warner and Pleeter,
2001; Andreoni and Sprenger, 2012).
     Putting these three forces together, employers would have to pay workers something
like $2 for each $1 of pay backloaded for one additional year. This means the firm in
the above example with S = 0.2 and T = 5 would have to spend all of its additional
GER transfers—and possibly more—on increasing the worker’s compensation just to leave
both the worker and the firm indifferent. This new compensation sequence would be,
approximately, $35,000 in year 1, $50,000 in year 2, and $40,000 thereafter, with the larger
earnings gain in year 1 being mostly offset by the larger earnings losses in year 2.

17
   Firms could eliminate this uncertainty by promising to restore any unreceived backloaded earnings as
    severance pay at time of separation. This approach would require severance pay to decrease in job
    tenure. The complexity of this pay package may alienate workers, as I discuss further below.
18
   This calculation is an approximation based on assuming constant relative risk aversion of 2.




                                                  25
     In practice, other factors further reduce the value of this option to workers and firms
and make it unlikely to emerge in equilibrium. Long-term delays in pay will not be feasible
due to high worker discount rates. However, as the above example makes clear, short-
term backloading entails substantial pay cuts to offset early artificial earnings gains (e.g.,
earnings decline from year 2 to year 3). Workers may find this pay cut alienating, and
this further reduces the value of backloaded compensation profiles. Second, as discussed in
Section 2 GER may be designed to depend on earnings changes in each of the subsequent
T years of earnings following a base year, rather than just the next-year earnings change
after the base year scaled up by T . This form of GER would further reduce the value of
earnings backloading.19 For example, if GER weighted earnings changes equally across T
years following a base year, GER payments from the above backloading strategy would be
almost completely eliminated.20 It therefore appears unlikely that moderate, well-designed
GER policies would induce widespread backloading of compensation.


6.5 Annual earnings vs. hourly wages

Over 40% of American workers are salaried and therefore do not generate meaningful data
on hours worked.21 For these workers, GER must be linked to changes in total earnings.
This creates an incentive for firms to generate earnings gains by backloading worker hours
and responsibilities. To see this, consider a salaried worker who, in the absence of GER,
would work approximately 40 hours/week at a salary of $40,000, without any skill gains.
This implies the firm values this worker’s contribution at around $20/hour. Under GER,

19
   A comparison of Figures I and I illustrates this point.
20
   Consider the backloaded pay sequence $35,000 in year 1, $45,000 in year 2, and $40,000 thereafter. With
    equal weights on annual earnings changes for T years following a base year, the first year earnings gain
    yields GER payments with NPV approaching $1,000, and the second year earnings decline yields GER
    liabilities with NPV approaching $1,000, resulting in zero net GER gains from the strategy.
21
   Figure taken from https://www.bls.gov/opub/reports/minimum-wage/2015/home.htm, accessed on
    5/9/17.




                                                    26
the firm may therefore hire this worker on a full-time basis to do only 35 hours/week in
practice at a salary of $35,000 in the first year, and then "promote" this worker to a full-time
job requiring 45 hours/week hours/week in practice at a salary of $45,000. This amounts
to backloading hours rather than wages. As in the case of backloading pay, workers prefer
not to postpone hours worked, and it is similarly unlikely that GER transfers will be large
enough to allow firms to compensate workers for this less-preferred career profile.
     For hourly workers, GER could in theory depend on growth in workers’ hourly wages,
rather than total earnings. While this has substantial appeal due to the tighter link between
hourly wages and worker productivity, it turns out to be infeasible. To see this, consider
a worker who would be paid $10/hour for 40 hours/week for two years in the absence of
GER. Under GER, the firm would have an incentive to alter this worker’s reported hours
of work to generate spurious wage growth over this two year period. For example, the firm
could pay the worker the same annual earnings of $20,000 for the same 40 hours/week of
work, but report 50 hours/week in the first year and 40 hours/week in the second year,
generating the appearance of a large hourly wage increase from $8/hour to $10/hour, once
again generating a GER payment that the firm could share with the worker.22 This is
much more feasible than annual earnings or hours backloading, because real compensation
or hours worked do not change in any way, obviating any need to compensate workers.
One obstacle to this strategy is that public policies already enforce accurate reporting of
work hours and hourly wages, including programs such as minimum wages, overtime pay
regulations, IRS rules related to employer benefit eligibility, and unemployment insurance
eligibility. However, these policies all create incentives to under-report of hours and over -
report hourly wages. Enforcement agents are able to detect under-reported hours at over-
reported hourly wages, because such behavior generates implicit unreported earnings for


22
     For simplicity, I ignore overtime and other laws that affect costs of altering worker hours.




                                                       27
workers. For example, if a firm claims that workers only provide 30 hours/week at a
reported hourly wage of $10 but workers actually provide 40 hours/week, workers can file
complaints claiming additional backpay at a rate of $10/hour. In contrast, GER creates
incentives for employers to over-report hours and under -report hourly wages, i.e. “dilute”
earnings into more hours at lower wages. In this case, workers who “out” the firm have no
claim to backpay, and it seems difficult for enforcement agents to prove that workers are
in fact not providing labor that employers claim they are providing. For example, firms
could simply claim that workers are being compensated for remaining “on call” in case a
sudden need for work arises. Such claims seem almost impossible to falsify.
     Due to this problem of earnings “dilution,” GER must depend on earnings even in the
case of hourly workers. This creates the same incentive to backload hours as discussed
above for salaried workeres, and once again this behavior would be constrained by worker
preferences against backloaded hours in a competitive labor market. Another implication
is that employers stand to gain in GER transfers when their part-time employees leave
to obtain full-time jobs, even if skills and hence hourly wages do not increase for these
workers. Likewise employers stand to lose if full-time employees leave to obtain part-time
jobs. This suggests employers may seek out part-time employees interested in switching
to full-time work, and avoid hiring full-time workers interested in switching to part-time
work. I discuss this implication more below in Sub-Section 6.6 on selection.
     An important case of pervasive, part-time employment is college students, and earnings-
based GER would have interesting implications for this labor market.23 Consider a GER
program with S = 0.2 and T = 5. Consider an 18-year old full-time college student.
Suppose this student is guaranteed to graduate from college and begin work at age 22.
Employer 1 could offer to “hire” this student for “40 hours” of labor at a wage of $0 during

23
     Similar issues arise for unemployed workers, newly-released prisoners, and other workers with zero or
      very low earnings.




                                                     28
ages 18-22. The student need not do any actual work for the employer over this time. At
age 22, the student then accepts a job with Employer 2 and earns an average salary of
$50,000/year over the next five years. Employer 1 receives GER transfers from this strategy
worth approximately $50,000 (= $50, 000/year × 5 years × 0.2). However, if labor markets
are competitive, Employer 1 will obviously not be able to keep all of this transfer. In fact, if
Employer 1 does not provide any value to the student, then the student will shop around for
other employers until she finds one willing to “hire” her for an up-front, one-time payment
of $50,000. For college students in particular, GER based on earnings may therefore create
a new market for student “sponsorship” services that facilitate efficient completion of full-
time schooling. These services could include, for example, coaching, tutoring, counseling,
and flexible work opportunities for students who want additional financial resources.24 It
must be acknowledged that implications of GER in this type of labor market are difficult
to fully envision.
     These considerations raise a concern that firms will expend resources identifying students
who appear likely to achieve very high earnings in the future. Risk-adjustment of GER
payments as discussed below becomes particularly important in this environment. For
young adults, it would be natural for this risk-adjustment to incorporate parental income
or parental education, much like financial aid applications. This would prevent firms from
increasing GER transfers by sponsoring more students from high-SES backgrounds who
are likely to achieve high income in the future whether or not they receive any support
services.




24
     Growing evidence suggests these kinds of services can increase college enrollment and persistence dramat-
      ically, and that program design and targeting both matter (e.g., Carrell and Sacerdote, 2016; Bettinger
      and Baker, 2014).




                                                      29
6.6 Selection and capitalization

GER may cause firms to invest in identifying and hiring workers with high ex ante predicted
earnings growth, rather than invest in workers to increase their earnings growth. These
additional resources devoted to selecting different workers represent DWL. However, the
market will act to constrain this behavior by capitalizing workers’ predicted earnings growth
into current earnings, to the extent that information about a worker became publicly
available to competing employers.
     To see this, consider a worker who earns $40,000 in period 1 but is predicted by all
employers to earn $50,000 in all future periods, even if no additional training takes place.
With GER parameters S = 0.2 and T = 5, firms should be willing to pay up to an
additional $10,000 (= 0.2 × $10, 000 × 5) to hire this worker in period 1—the full value of
the anticipated GER transfer. However, if this happened it would raise earnings in period
1 to $50,000, eliminating the GER transfer this premium was supposed to capitalize and
yielding a loss for the firm. Therefore, it must be the case that earnings in period 1 go
up, but not by the full amount of GER transfers predicted based on pre-GER earnings
growth. It turns out that earnings in the first period increase by an amount equal to
 S·T
1+S·T
          of pre-GER earnings growth.25 In this example, capitalization reduces the change in
                             0.2·5
earnings by 50% (=          1+0.2·5
                                    ),   meaning earnings in period 1 increase to $45,000, decreasing
realized earnings growth from $10,000 to $5,000. This formula amounts to an upper bound
on capitalization because firms only realize a worker’s predicted future earnings changes
with uncertainty due to worker turnover, and because the worker need not bear the full
incidence of the transfer.
     Once the labor market adjusts to GER and begins capitalizing information about workers
25
     Denote period 1 earnings after introduction of GER as ỹ1 , and period 1 earnings before introduction of
      GER as y1 . Then maximum capitalization is defined as ỹ1 − y1 = S · T · (y2 − ỹ1 ). Rearranging yields
                                          S·T
      the stated result that ỹ1 − y1 = 1−S·T  (y2 − y1 ). Capitalization of earnings changes that occur further
      in the future will be less complete, because it is less certain to occur under a worker’s current employer.




                                                        30
into their current earnings, it will become more difficult for employers to "pick winners"
when hiring workers, much as it is already difficult for employers to "pick winners" in
the stock or real estate market. There is therefore room for optimism that most firms will
respond to GER by increasing skill growth and career advancement of workers they already
hire, rather than trying to outsmart the labor market and hire workers pre-destined for
high idiosyncratic earnings growth.
     Of course, some firms may specialize in labor market arbitrage, much like some firms
specialize in stock market and real estate arbitrage. And capitalization will be incomplete
because earnings growth is harder to arbitrage than stock and real estate price growth.26
Therefore employers may justifiably seek out underpriced high-growth workers. Given that
firms already search for “bargains” in the labor market, it is not clear that searching for
underpriced high-growth workers will require substantial additional resources, especially
given that many advantageous hard-to-observe worker characteristics (e.g., tenacity, am-
bition) also likely predict high earnings growth. One troubling possibility is that workers
with lower unpriced predicted earnings growth may have trouble finding work. Fortunately,
GER provides a built-in response to this problem, because severely under-utilized workers
represent the most obvious arbitrage opportunities for potential employers. In particular,
GER seems more advantageous for these workers than traditional experience rating, which
creates downside risk without any offsetting upside risk.
     The extent of capitalization, the amount of effort firms devote to selecting high-growth
workers, and the resulting impacts on worker earnings and employment are important
empirical questions for assessing both equity and efficiency of GER.




26
     For example, it is difficult to "sit on" undervalued workers for speculative purposes in the way that
      investors often "sit on" stocks and real estate. Likewise, it is difficult to implement the kinds of
      high-frequency and high-volume trading strategies that underlie much capital market arbitrage.




                                                     31
6.7 Is GER regressive?

Even if capitalization works well, GER may reduce equity if disadvantaged groups have
lower ex ante predicted earnings growth, and if GER does not compensate for this effect
by inducing greater skill and earnings growth for these groups. It is in fact the case that
disadvantaged groups currently experience smaller earnings gains. Table I shows mean
earnings changes in the NLSY79, pooling years 1982-2012, cohorts born 1957-65, and ages
26-65. Mean annual earnings changes have been larger for whites than blacks, men than
women, and more educated than less educated workers.
     One tool to address this problem would be to "risk-adjust" GER based on observable
worker characteristics such as age, gender, and educational attainment. GER transfers
would then depend on worker earnings growth conditional on these observed character-
istics. Table II explores the potential for this risk-adjustment to improve distributional
effects of GER across socioeconomic and demographic groups. All columns represent coef-
ficients from regressions of earnings changes on background characteristics, conditional on
a full set of year by age dummies. Columns (1)-(3) show regressions of earnings changes on
parental education groups, race, and cognitive skill, respectively. All of these variables pre-
dict earnings changes in ways consistent with GER exacerbating inequality across groups
defined by class, race, and cognitive ability, by capitalizing these predicted earnings changes
into current earnings. However, columns (4)-(7) explores the impact of risk-adjusting GER
by sex and educational attainment, in addition to year and age. The results show that
this very simple risk-adjustment policy eliminates 60-80% of predicted earnings differences
across parental education, race, and cognitive skill groups, and these remaining differences
imply relatively small regressive transfers between groups.27 Risk-adjustment on the bases
27
     At most something like half of these differences could be transferred to workers by capitalization under
      the kinds of moderate GER schemes discussed here (e.g., S = 0.2 and T = 5). Table II implies that,
      under risk-adjustment by age, sex, and educational attainment, children of college-educated parents
      receive at most under $200 in additional GER transfers per year compared to workers with high-school




                                                      32
of year, age, sex, and educational attainment does not appear obviously politically infeasi-
ble. Below, I discuss extensions to basic GER that provide additional incentives for firms
to hire and assist lower-skilled workers, and show these policies are highly affordable.
  In short, simple and uncontroversial risk-adjustment of GER transfers could address a
large share of equity concerns.


6.8 Parenthood, schooling, and apprenticeships

GER transfers would have to be adjusted to avoid punishing firms that hire workers with
children, or planning to have children, or who are pregnant with children. One option would
be to exempt workers who have new children (both mothers and fathers) from all GER
transfer calculations for a certain period of time, after which their GER base earnings can
be re-set to continue encouraging skill development. Another option would be to impute
GER transfers following childbirth as the average GER transfer for other workers at the
firm.
  Likewise, GER policies would need to be adjusted to avoid punishing firms that hire
workers who subsequently return to full-time or even part-time schooling. Jepsen et al.
(2014) find that students receiving associate’s degrees and diplomas in community college
starting around age 30 exhibit very large earnings and employment declines for two years
before earnings surpass their pre-college levels. Likewise, many college graduates work for
several years before returning to graduate school when earnings decline dramatically.
  GER should not simply exempt these workers or reset their base earnings once they
leave school. This would eliminate incentives for employers to help workers transition into
high-quality external training programs. A better approach would be to make use of full-


   leaver parents, while white workers would receive at most $100 of additional GER transfers per year
   compared to black workers. Even these conservative upper bounds are tiny fractions of the prevailing
   earnings gap between these groups.




                                                 33
time and part-time enrollment status indicators. Governments already track these data
to determine eligibility for policies including financial aid, health insurance, and survivor’s
insurance. GER could impute earnings at pre-college levels while students are enrolled
and progressing toward a degree at Title IV postsecondary institutions, or could impute
earnings using some weighted combination of actual earnings and pre-college earnings.
Then post-college earnings would count as normal in GER against the pre-college base.
This approach encourages employers to help workers interested in college attend high-value
college programs that facilitate degree completion. It even encourages employers to place
laid-off workers directly into worthwhile college programs if no comparably high-paying
jobs are available.
  What about workers who transition into intensive on-the-job training programs such
as apprenticeships? For example, firms may hire workers for six months to assess their
suitability for an apprenticeship program, and then invite them to participate at the cost
of temporarily lower earnings, followed by higher productivity and earnings after program
completion. GER would punish the firm for this decrease in earnings. However, two
considerations make this less pathological than the college enrollment problem. First, GER
encourages firms to start workers on training programs as quickly as possible in order to
avoid many periods of high earnings followed by the short period of lower earnings. Second,
firms in this case stand to gain from the worker’s higher future earnings, even if the worker
is “poached.” These gains in can easily outweigh losses, even for workers with many pre-
training periods of high earnings at the training employer.
  Finally, GER may penalize employers whose workers switch from more lucrative private
sector work into less lucrative (but necessarily less productive) non-profit or public sector
work. For example, Goldman Sachs and McKinsey hire many young college graduates at
high earnings who later move on to lower-paid careers in research, teaching, and policy-




                                              34
making. GER would punish firms for adopting this kind of employment strategy. However,
in practice this concern is unlikely to be important because GER payments would phase
out for the kinds of highly-paid workers employed by these firms. GER base earnings could
also be re-set for workers who switch sectors.
  Once again, modest extensions to GER could address concerns about punishing employ-
ers whose workers transition into parenthood, schooling, or lower-paid sectors of the labor
market.


6.9 Financing GER

GER could be fully financed out of workers’ earnings, in which case it would create a new
earnings insurance program. This approach has the benefit of being budget-neutral from
the government’s perspective. However, it may be desirable to separate GER from the
separate issue of optimal social insurance against earnings losses, and finance GER out of
general tax revenue instead. In this case the overall cost to the government would likely
be small for several reasons.
  First, total average annual earnings gains each year are small. Table I shows that
aggregate earnings changes for the NLSY79 cohorts born 1957-65 have averaged 3% of
earnings. A GER program with S = 0.2 and T = 5 without any risk-adjustment or
bencharking would therefore increase the fiscal burden by something like 3% of aggregate
earnings, or 1.8% of GDP if earnings represent 60% of national income. Capitalization of
anticipated GER payments into current earnings would reduce measured earnings growth
and fiscal impacts. Behavioral responses that increase earnings growth (as intended) would
increase the fiscal burden of GER, but reduce the fiscal burden of other social programs tied
to earnings and employment (again, as intended). However, if GER indexed payments to
average worker earnings growth above or below average earnings growth of similar workers,




                                             35
the policy would be almost mechanically budget neutral, and would consist entirely of
transfers from lower-training firms to higher-training firms. This indexing should take place
based on aggregate earnings growth, rather than earnings growth indexed by industry or
occupation, in order to reallocate resources toward more worker-enhancing sectors of the
economy.


6.10 Alternatives to unweighted mean earnings growth

So far I have specified GER in terms of the unweighted mean earnings growth of workers
at each firm. However, GER could also depend on other statistics characterizing worker
earnings growth. GER transfers could be weighted more toward "max" future earnings
gains, which may lead firms to encourage workers to pursue high-risk, high-return careers
in entrepreneurship. GER transfers could also be weighted more toward "min" future
earnings gains, which would lead firms to carefully prevent workers from experiencing the
worst future labor market outcomes such as unemployment or incarceration.
  GER could also depend on weighted mean earnings growth. For example, weights could
be larger for earnings gains achieved by lower-SES workers, and smaller for earnings losses
suffered by lower-SES workers. This type of GER scheme would encourage firms to hire and
cultivate lower-income workers, and to take risks on hiring workers with spotty employment
histories.
  The fiscal burden of these more complex schemes is harder to predict, but likely to
remain small. For example, consider a GER program that encourages firms to “take risks”
on lower-skilled workers by setting S = 0.3 for earnings gains and S = 0.1 for earnings
losses for the 17% of workers without high school degrees in the NLSY79 over the 1982-
2012 period. Table III displays the mean conditional earnings gains and losses of this
lower-skilled subgroup. These figures suggest that the GER policy described here would




                                             36
generate transfers with NPV of $2,380 to employers for each lower-educated worker year.
The realized GER transfer is likely to be smaller as labor markets capitalize some of these
transfers into current worker earnings. Even without capitalization, this policy could be
financed with a tax equivalent to 1.7% of all earnings or 1% of GDP. Again, GER may
increase productivity and hence impose a larger direct fiscal burden, but in this case GER
also partly pays for itself through positive fiscal externalities on other government taxes
and expenditures.


6.11 Multiple employers

Many workers will accumulate more than one previous employer in any significant period
of time, and other workers will work for multiple employers simultaneously. Identical issues
arise in traditional experience rating, and have been addressed in different ways by different
states (Vroman and Woodbury, 2014, footnote 3). The simplest rule would be a pro rata-
type allocation. Essentially, workers can have up to one full-time employer at any time.
If two firms each account for half of a worker’s earnings over a particular base period,
then those employers each get half of the GER transfers generated by that worker over the
relevant time window. In some cases this may yield perverse outcomes, for example if one
employer clearly invested much more heavily in the worker than the other contemporaneous
employer. As these issues do not appear critical and can lean on build on existing UI law,
I leave more detailed discussion of this issue to future work.



7 Conclusion

In this paper I have outlined a new policy proposal seeking to alleviate constraints on worker
skill to the US economy. The policy endows firms with virtual equity in the future earnings




                                             37
changes of their workers, thereby amplifying employer incentives to increase worker skills
and job match quality. I refer to the policy as “generalized experience rating” because it
generalizes traditional experience rating in the UI system to all changes in worker earnings,
as opposed to only those changes in worker earnings due to involuntary layoff. GER
provides a subsidy to employer-facilitated training and career advancement that acts as a
corrective to skill-suppressing effects of tax-benefit progressivity, high costs of investments
undertaken by individuals in isolation, and individual behavioral biases. GER can also
be interpreted as a mandate addressing an adverse selection problem that precludes a
well-functioning private market for equity in worker earnings.
  By alleviating the firms’ moral hazard problem, GER allows firms to leverage economies
of scale, expertise, coordination, and complementarities to realize their large potential as
catalysts of worker skill growth and career advancement. GER offers important advantages
over alternative forms of training subsidies, including a reduced administrative burden for
governments, self-enforcement features reminiscent of value-added taxation, and greater
incentives for innovation in training and job search technologies. By sparking innovation
and technology adoption, GER may help to restore faster growth, lower inequality, and
greater mobility to the modern US economy.




                                              38
References
Abramitzky, R. and V. Lavy (2014): “How Responsive Is Investment in Schooling to
 Changes in Redistributive Policies and in Returns?” Econometrica, 82, 1241–1272.
Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1998): “Why Do Firms Train? Theory and Evi-
 dence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 79–119.
——— (1999): “The Structure of Wages and Investment in General Training,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 107, 539–572.
Anderson, P. M. and B. D. Meyer (1994): “The Effects of Unemployment Insurance
 Taxes and Benefits on Layoffs Using Firm and Individual Data,” Working Paper 4960,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, dOI: 10.3386/w4960.
Andreoni, J. and C. Sprenger (2012): “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
 Budgets,” American Economic Review, 102, 3333–3356.
Baicker, K., D. Cutler, and Z. Song (2010): “Workplace Wellness Programs Can
 Generate Savings,” Health Affairs, 29, 304–311.
Becker, G. S. (1962): “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 70, 9–49.
——— (1967): Human capital and the personal distribution of income;: An analytical
 approach (Woytinsky Lecture), Institute of Public Administration.
Becker, J. M. (1972): Experience Rating in Umployment Insurance: An Experiment in
 Competitive Socialism, The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Benartzi, S., R. Thaler, S. Utkus, and C. Sunstein (2007): “The Law and Eco-
 nomics of Company Stock in 401(k) Plans,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 50,
 45–79.
Bettinger, E. P. and R. B. Baker (2014): “The Effects of Student Coaching: An
 Evaluation of a Randomized Experiment in Student Advising,” Educational Evaluation
 and Policy Analysis, 36, 3–19.
Brown, J. R., N. Liang, and S. Weisbenner (2007): “Individual account investment
 options and portfolio choice: Behavioral lessons from 401(k) plans,” Journal of Public
 Economics, 91, 1992–2013.
Bryan, G., D. Karlan, and S. Nelson (2010): “Commitment Devices,” Annual Review
 of Economics, 2, 671–698.
Bulman, G. (2015): “The Effect of Access to College Assessments on Enrollment and
 Attainment,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 1–36.



                                          39
Busse, M. R., D. G. Pope, J. C. Pope, and J. Silva-Risso (2015): “The Psychological
 Effect of Weather on Car Purchases,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 371–414.

Byrne, D. M., J. G. Fernald, and M. B. Reinsdorf (2016): “Does the United
 States have a productivity slowdown or a measurement problem?” Brookings Papers on
 Economic Activity, Spring, 109–182.

Cappelli, P. (2004): “Why do employers pay for college?” Journal of Econometrics, 121,
 213–241.

Card, D., J. Kluve, and A. Weber (2010): “Active Labour Market Policy Evaluations:
 A Meta-Analysis*,” The Economic Journal, 120, F452–F477.

Card, D. and P. B. Levine (1994): “Unemployment insurance taxes and the cyclical
 and seasonal properties of unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics, 53, 1–29.

Carrell, S. and B. Sacerdote (2016): “Why Do College Interventions Work?” Work-
 ing Paper.

Carroll, G. D., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009):
 “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124,
 1639–1674.

Cellini, S. R. and N. Turner (2016): “Gainfully Employed? Assessing the Employment
 and Earnings of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data,” Working Paper
 22287, National Bureau of Economic Research, dOI: 10.3386/w22287.

Center for Labor Market Studies (2014): “Net Annual Fiscal Contributions of US
 Adults Aged 18-64 by Education Attainment, 2009-2012: The Fiscal Advantages of High
 School and College Graduates in the Nation and the 15 Largest States,” Tech. rep.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, S. Leth-Peterson, T. H. Nielsen, and T. Olsen
 (2013): “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts:
 Evidence from Denmark,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 0–83.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014): “Measuring the Impacts
 of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates,” American Economic
 Review, 104, 2593–2632.

Chetty, R., D. Grusky, M. Hell, N. Hendren, R. Manduca, and J. Narang
 (2016): “The Fading American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility Since 1940,”
 Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce (1990): “Americas
 Choice: High Skills or Low Wages,” Tech. rep., National Center on Education and the
 Economy.



                                          40
Davis, S. J. and M. Henrekson (2005): “Tax Effects on Work Activity , Industry Mix
 and Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from Rich-Country Comparisons,” NBER Working
 Paper 10509.

Duarte, F. and J. S. Hastings (2012): “Fettered Consumers and Sophisticated Firms:
 Evidence from Mexico’s Privatized Social Security Market,” Working Paper 18582, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research, dOI: 10.3386/w18582.

Duflo, E., W. Gale, J. Liebman, P. Orszag, and E. Saez (2006): “Saving Incentives
 for Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R
 Block,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 1311–1346.

Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2006): “The adequacy of investment
  choices offered by 401(k) plans,” Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1299–1314.

Feldstein, M. (1978): “The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on Temporary Layoff
  Unemployment,” The American Economic Review, 68, 834–846.

Feldstein, M. and D. Altman (2007): “Unemployment Insurance Savings Accounts,”
  Tax Policy and the Economy, 21.

Gabaix, X. and D. Laibson (2006): “Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and in-
 formation suppression in competitive markets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 505–540.

Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2010): The Race between Education and Technology, Cam-
 bridge, Mass.: Belknap Press.

Hart, O., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1997): “The Proper Scope of Government:
 Theory and an Application to Prisons,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1127–
 1161.

Hastings, J. S., A. Hortacsu, and C. Syverson (2013): “Sales Force and Competi-
 tion in Financial Product Markets: The Case Of Mexicos Social Security Privatization,”
 Working Paper 18881, National Bureau of Economic Research, dOI: 10.3386/w18881.

Hastings, J. S. and J. M. Weinstein (2008): “Information, School Choice, and Aca-
 demic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 1373–1414.

Hauser, R. M., J. R. Warren, M.-H. Huang, and W. Y. Carter (2000): “Occu-
 pational status, education, and social mobility in the meritocracy,” in Meritocracy and
 economic inequality, ed. by K. J. Arrow, S. Bowles, and S. Durlauf, Princeton, N.J.:
 Princeton University Press, 179–229.




                                          41
Hausman, J. A. (1979): “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
 Energy-Using Durables,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 33–54.

Heckman, J. J., R. J. Lalonde, and J. A. Smith (1999): “The Economics and Econo-
 metrics of Active Labor Market Programs,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. C.
 A. a. D. Card, Elsevier, vol. 3, Part A, 1865–2097, dOI: 10.1016/S1573-4463(99)03012-6.

Hendren, N. (2015): “Knowledge of future job loss and implications for unemployment
 insurance,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

——— (2016): “The Policy Elasticity,” Tax Policy and the Economy, 30, 51–89.

Hilger, N. G. (2016a): “The Great Escape: Intergenerational Mobility in the United
  States Since 1940,” Working Paper 21217, National Bureau of Economic Research.

——— (2016b): “Why Dont People Trust Experts?” The Journal of Law and Economics,
 59, 293–311.

Hoffman, M. and S. V. Burks (2017a): “Training Contracts, Employee Turnover, and
 the Returns from Firm-sponsored General Training,” Working Paper 23247, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, dOI: 10.3386/w23247.

——— (2017b): “Worker Overconfidence: Field Evidence and Implications for Employee
 Turnover and Returns from Training,” Working Paper 23240, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research, dOI: 10.3386/w23240.

Hoxby, C. and S. Turner (2012): “Expanding College Opportunities for High-Achieving
 , Low Income Students,” SIEPR Discussion Paper No. 12-014.

Hoxby, C. M. and C. Avery (2013): “The missing" one-offs": The hidden supply of
 high-achieving, low income students,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring.

Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw, and G. Prennushi (1997): “The Effects of Human Re-
  source Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,” The
  American Economic Review, 87, 291–313.

Jepsen, C., K. Troske, and P. Coomes (2014): “The Labor-Market Returns to Com-
  munity College Degrees, Diplomas, and Certificates,” Journal of Labor Economics, 32,
  95–121.

Johnson, J. and J. Rochkind (2009): “With Their Whole Lives Ahead of Them: Myths
  and Realities about Why So Many Students Fail to Finish College.” Public Agenda.

Johnson, N. (2014): “College Costs and Prices: Some Key Facts for Policymakers.”
  Lumina Foundation for Education.




                                          42
Johnston, A. C. (2017): “UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE TAXES AND LABOR DE-
  MAND: QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM ADMINISTRATIVE DATA,”
  Working Paper.
Juhn, C. and S. Potter (2006): “Changes in Labor Force Participation in the United
  States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 27–46.
Kahneman, D. (2013): Thinking Fast and Slow, New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, and
 Giroux.
Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2005): “Using Imperfect Information to Identify Ef-
 fective Teachers,” .
Ketcham, J. D., C. Lucarelli, E. J. Miravete, and M. C. Roebuck (2012):
 “Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D,” American Economic
 Review, 102, 2639–2673.
LaLonde, R. J. (2003): “Employment and Training Programs,” in Means-tested transfer
  programs in the United States, ed. by R. Moffitt, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
  517–585.
Lerman, R., L. Eyster, and K. Chambers (2009): “The Benefits and Challenges of
  Registered Apprenticeship: The Sponsors’ Perspective,” Urban Institute.
Mathematica (2012): “An Effectiveness Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analysis of Regis-
 tered Apprenticeship in 10 States,” .
Nelson, D. (1969): Unemployment insurance; the American experience, 1915-1935, Uni-
 versity of Wisconsin Press, google-Books-ID: MJGaAAAAIAAJ.
Obama White House (2014): “What Works In Job Training: A Synthesis of the Evi-
 dence,” Tech. rep.
Oreopoulos, P. and U. Petronijevic (2013): “making college worth it: a review of
 research on the returns to higher education,” NBER Working Paper 19053.
Pigou, A. C. A. C. (1912): Wealth and welfare, London, Macmillan and co., limited.
Piketty, T., E. Saez, and G. Zucman (2016): “Distributional National Accounts:
  Methods and Estimates for the United States,” Working Paper 22945, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Prante, G. and S. A. Hodge (2013): “The Distribution of Tax and Spending Policies
 in the United States,” Tech. Rep. 211, Tax Foundation, Washington D.C.
Scholz, J. K., A. Seshadri, and S. Khitatrakun (2006): “Are Americans Saving
  Optimally for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 114.



                                           43
Thaler, R. and S. Benartzi (2004): “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Eco-
 nomics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, S164–S187.

Topel, R. H. (1984): “Experience Rating of Unemployment Insurance and the Incidence
 of Unemployment,” The Journal of Law & Economics, 27, 61–90.

Vroman, W. and S. A. Woodbury (2014): “Financing Unemployment Insurance,”
 National Tax Journal, 67, 253–68.

Warner, J. T. and S. Pleeter (2001): “The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from
 Military Downsizing Programs,” The American Economic Review, 91, 33–53.

Zwick, E. and J. Mahon (2017): “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior,”
 American Economic Review, 107, 217–248.




                                        44
45
                                Table I: Earnings Changes by Subgroup, All and Stable Hours
     Notes: Table presents moments characterizing the distribution of earnings changes for each subgroup over the
     1982-2012 period, based on the NLSY79. Sample weights used in all calculations.
                 Table II: Effects of SES Variables on Earnings Changes
Notes: Table presents regressions of individual worker earnings changes on various SES
variables. Regressions pool 1982-2012 in the NLSY79 and cluster at the individual level.
Sample weights used in all calculations. Earnings deflated with CPI-U into 2016 dollars.




                                           46
47
                               Table III: Earnings Changes by Subgroup, Positive and Negative
     Notes: Table presents moments characterizing the distribution of earnings changes for each subgroup over the
     1982-2012 period, based on the NLSY79. Sample weights used in all calculations.
           Year                     2007        2008          2009      2010      2011      2012
           Earnings                $20,000    $24,000        $22,000   $28,000   $28,000   $28,000
           Change                              $4,000        -$2,000   $6,000      $0        $0



                                                $800          $800      $800      $800      $800
           GER Transfers to Firm




                                                             -$400     -$400     -$400      -$400    …

                                                                       $1,200    $1,200    $1,200    …

                                                                                   $0        $0      …   $0   $0
                                       S = 0.2
                                       T=5
                                       ρ1=1, ρk=0 if k ≠ 1                                   $0      …   $0   $0




  Figure I: Illustration of GER Transfers to a Firm Under Subsequent-Year Weighting
Notes: Figure illustrates hypothetical GER transfers to a particular firm under subsequent-
year weighting over a period of time.




                                                               48
          Year                     2007          2008      2009      2010      2011      2012
          Earnings                $20,000    $24,000      $22,000   $28,000   $28,000   $28,000
          Change                                 $4,000   -$2,000   $6,000      $0        $0



                                                 $800     -$400     $1,200      $0        $0
          GER Transfers to Firm




                                                          -$400     $1,200      $0        $0      …

                                                                    $1,200      $0        $0      …   $0

                                                                                $0        $0      …   $0   $0
                                      S = 0.2
                                      T=5
                                      ρk = 1/T                                            $0      …   $0   $0




      Figure II: Illustration of GER Transfers to a Firm Under Uniform Weighting
Notes: Figure illustrates hypothetical GER transfers to a particular firm under uniform
weighting over a period of time.




                                                            49
