NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE THERE TOO MANY FARMS IN THE WORLD? LABOR-MARKET TRANSACTION
COSTS, MACHINE CAPACITIES AND OPTIMAL FARM SIZE
Andrew D. Foster
Mark R. Rosenzweig
Working Paper 23909
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23909

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

This research supported in part through NIH Grant P2C HD041020. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Andrew D. Foster and Mark R. Rosenzweig. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are There Too Many Farms in the World? Labor-Market Transaction Costs, Machine Capacities
and Optimal Farm Size
Andrew D. Foster and Mark R. Rosenzweig
NBER Working Paper No. 23909
October 2017
JEL No. O13
ABSTRACT
This paper seeks to explain the U-shaped relationship between farm productivity and farm scale the initial fall in productivity as farm size increases from its lowest levels and the continuous
upward trajectory as scale increases after a threshold - observed across the world and in lowincome countries. We show that the existence of labor-market transaction costs can explain why
the smallest farms are most efficient, slightly larger farms least efficient and larger farms as
efficient as the smallest farms. We show that to explain the rising upper tail of the U
characteristic of high-income countries requires there be economies of scale in the ability of
machines to accomplish tasks at lower costs at greater operational scales. Using data from the
India ICRISAT VLS panel survey we find evidence consistent with these conditions, suggesting
that there are too many farms, at scales insufficient to exploit locally-available equipmentcapacity scale-economies.

Andrew D. Foster
Department of Economics and Community Health
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
afoster@brown.edu
Mark R. Rosenzweig
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
mark.rosenzweig@yale.edu

This paper revisits the issue of the relationship between operation scale and productivity in
agriculture. The research is motivated by three stylized facts characterizing world agriculture. First,
farming in low-income countries is small scale while farming in developed countries is large scale.
Figure 1 displays the proportions of operational holdings of farms that are below 10 acres across a
sample of developed and developing countries for which reliable data are available on the size
distribution of farms. As can be seen, only 10% or less of farms are below 10 acres in the United
States and Canada, while for the three most populous low-income countries - China, India, and
Indonesia - at least 80% of farms are below 10 acres. In major economies in Africa too, as seen in
the figure, only a small proportion of farms are above 10 acres. Note that these figures may
underestimate the extent of small-scale farming is in such countries to the extent that the
landholdings of a farm are fragmented into spatially-separated plots.
The second stylized fact is that the productivity of developed-country agriculture is
substantially higher than it is in low-income countries. For example, as shown in Figure 2, soybean
yields are four time higher in the United States, where farm scale is high, than they are in Indonesia,
India and the Philippines, where farms are small, and three times higher in Canada. This figure also
illustrates, however, why output per acre is insufficient to gage productivity - China appears to be an
outlier in that its yields are twice as high as those in the other three low-income countries in the
figure, despite its similarity in operational scale. However, this is misleading, as the fertilizer-intensity
in China, as seen in Figure 3, is 2.7 to 3.5 times higher than that in Indonesia, India, and the
Philippines and 5 times higher than that in the United States.1 Assessing productivity requires
attention to input use and its cost.
An implication of any positive causal relationship between production scale and agricultural
productivity implied by the differences in scale and productivity across countries is that there are too
many farms in the world, especially in low-income countries. It implies that enlarging the size of
farms via consolidation would increase overall agricultural output, with an accompanying substantial
reduction in the amount of employment in agriculture. Another implication is that the large amount
of labor devoted to farming observed in low-income countries should not solely be interpreted as a
symptom of underdevelopment and poverty but also in part a cause. Understanding the role of scale
economies in agriculture thus has major implications for not only the global supply of food but also
1

The evidence suggests that fertilizer is over-used in China, with the marginal return on a dollar of
fertilizer less than 7 cents (Huang et al., 2008). The reasons for the high fertilizer intensity in China are the
large fertilizer subsidies and governmental resource assessments based on crop yields rather than net returns.
1

for how best to improve overall per-capita incomes in countries where incomes are especially low.
Of course, differences between developed-country and developing-country agriculture are
due to more than scale. The best evidence on scale relevant for a low-income country would come
from a single country, based on farms in the same institutional environment, the same markets and
facing the same technology frontier. When farm scale and farm productivity are examined within a
country, however, we get the third stylized fact: there is an almost universal inverse relationship
between farm or plot size and productivity within developing countries, over the span of plot and
farm sizes observed in those countries, while increasing returns to scale are observed among the
larger farms in developed countries (e.g. Paul et al., 2004).
Most of the literature documenting the inverse relationship in low-income countries is based
on data from Asia and Latin America (e.g, Schultz, 1964; Hayami and Otsuka, 1993; Binswanger et
al., 1995; Hazell, 2011; Vollrath, 2007; Kagin et al., 2015). Recent studies of newly-available
representative survey data from a number of African countries, used to describe the African
landholding distributions in Figure 1, confirm that this inverse relationship also exists there (Larson
et al., 2013; Carletto et al., 2013). Figure 4 provides a typical pattern, based on one of these data sets,
the Nigeria General Household Panel of 2015-16, which describes a representative sample of rural
households for whom there are accurate (GPS) measures of farm size. Based on per-acre yields, the
very smallest farms are substantially more productive. And, as noted, the span of farm sizes is quite
limited. The existing descriptive evidence on scale and farm productivity from data describing
farming in low-income countries thus does not support the notion there are too many farms.
There is a large literature focused on low-income countries that has also attempted to
address the puzzle of why the smallest farms are most productive, without little consensus. There is
general agreement that the inverse relationship is not spurious - specifically, not due to a correlation
of land quality and farm size (e.g., Carter, 1984; Bhalla and Roy, 1988; Benjamin, 1995; Barrett et al.,
2010) and/or measurement error that is correlated with scale (e.g., Ali and Deininger, 2014; Larson
et al., 2013; Carletto et al., 2013). However, a general shortcoming of this literature is that it may be
addressing the wrong puzzle. Given the global pattern of farm productivity, the puzzle that requires
explanation is why there is a U-shape relationship between farm productivity and scale - why the
smallest farms, which dominate low-income countries, are more productive than somewhat less
small farms there and why in the developed world the large-scale farms are not only more
productive on average, but productivity increases with scale.
Seen from this global perspective, some of explanations for the inverse relationship observed
2

in low-income countries are at best incomplete. For example, the idea that farms exclusively
managed and worked on by owner-operators and their families, which characterizes the smallest
farms, have an advantage, because of superior incentives, lower supervision costs, and lower unitlabor costs (Yotopoulos and Lau, 1973; Carter and Wiebe, 1990; Binswanger-Mkhize, et al., 2009;
Hazel et al., 2010; ) while true, cannot explain why corporate farms, which are large scale, are even
more productive. A common finding in this literature is that the smallest farms use labor more
intensively than larger farms, which would generate higher per-acre output but not necessarily higher
productivity accounting for input costs, but the reasons for this are not settled.
One other salient difference between low-income and high-income country agriculture is the
degree to which mechanized implements are used. And there is evidence that larger farms and farms
that become larger are more likely to be mechanized within countries (Zaibet and Dunn, 1998;
Foster and Rosenzweig, 2011; Hornbeck and Naidu, 2014). However, in contexts in which all farms
are mechanized, such as in developed countries, the mere use of mechanized equipment cannot by
itself explain why larger farms are more productive than smaller farms.2
This paper seeks to explain then the U-shaped relationship between farm productivity and
farm scale - both the initial fall in productivity as farm size increases from its lowest levels and the
continuous upward trajectory as scale increases after a threshold. The explanation focuses on two
factors: transaction costs in the labor market and economies of scale in machinery capacity.
Transaction costs in the labor market are especially important in agriculture because agricultural
operations are sequential and intermittent - labor is thus principally hired on a daily basis, with
employers and workers seeking matches at high frequency. Moreover, the amount of work needed
on a given day may vary, so there is daily variation in worker hours. We show that the existence of
fixed transaction costs, to the extent they are born by farmers, makes farmers at the margin at which
hiring labor would be productive on net (all family labor fully utilized) reluctant to hire labor. And, if
labor is hired at all, average unit labor costs will vary by operational scale because larger scale entails
more intensive use of labor. The result is a U-shape in which the smallest farms are most efficient in
their use of labor, slightly larger farms least efficient and larger farms as efficient as the smallest
2

Some studies have suggested that access to capital and a greater ability to insure against risk may
explain why larger farms may be more productive than smaller farms. However, we show that the U-shaped
relationship between scale and productivity holds across plots for the same farmer, which effectively holds
constant the farmer’s ability to take risk, finance capital and make better allocative decisions. We thus abstract
from these considerations, but this does not imply they are not important determinants of agricultural
productivity in low-income countries.
3

farms because the share of transaction costs in total labor expenditures are smallest.34
The existence of fixed labor market transaction cost can explain a U-shape, but it cannot
alone account for the higher productivity of larger farms compared to the smallest farms, positive
scale economies that continue at higher scales. For this, we focus on scale economies in machinery
capacity. There is ample evidence that agricultural machinery saves on labor costs (Hornbeck and
Naidu, 2014; Davis, 2016) and that mechanization is more likely on larger farms (Foster and
Rosenzweig, 2011). If there is a minimum farm scale at which mechanized equipment can be used,
then only larger farms can exploit this substitution to avoid the additional costs of hiring labor.5 But,
again, a single threshold cannot explain the continuing rise in productivity with scale. We show that
to explain the upper tail of the U requires there be economies of scale in the capacity of machines,
their ability to accomplish tasks at lower costs at greater operational scales. There are two conditions
that must be met: effective machine capacity can only be increased at larger scale and the pricing of
capacity must be non-linear. We address the question of whether these conditions are met within a
low-income country.
We are able to examine the role of transactions costs and machine capacity scale economies
as major factors accounting for the U-shape relationship between scale and productivity within a
low-income country because of the existence of unique data from the India ICRISAT VLS panel
survey. One key advantage of the ICRISAT survey is that the sampling scheme differs from almost
all household surveys, which almost always seek to achieve household representativeness. The
ICRISAT survey sampling frame is instead based on landholding size. As a consequence of this
sampling frame, larger farms are over-sampled and we are able to examine both small and larger
3

Allen (1988) shows that one of the reasons that larger farms were more productive than smaller
farms in 18th century England, when mechanization was not a major factor, was that larger farms could hire
labor crews. Hiring a worker team saves on hiring costs compared with hiring workers individually, but is only
cost-effective for larger-scale operations.
4

Foster and Rosenzweig (2011) highlight the additional supervision costs associated with using hired
labor as an explanation for labor under-utilization at farm scales above the smallest. But supervision costs
cannot explain why above a threshold larger farms become more efficient in the absence of labor-substituting
mechanization since it is not likely such costs diminish as the amount of hired work increases.
5

The idea that there are physical constraints associated with the size of plots inhibiting mechanization
is well known. Bivar (2010), in her study of the French government- and union-led agricultural consolidation
program initiated in the early 1950's - motivated by the potential productivity-enhancing effects of
mechanization - cites documents written by the French Agriculture ministry that suggest for a tractor to be
able to turn around, a minimum plot size of 1.5-2 hectares is required. Of course, there are more mechanized
options today that require a smaller minimum scale, but these may have reduced performance, which is one of
the key hypotheses we test here.
4

farms in a common environment. The data set thus contains the missing link between low-income
country agriculture and developed-country agriculture - because of the over-sampling the sample of
farms exhibits the U-shape that characterizes the global relationship between agricultural
productivity and scale. Representative household surveys in low-income countries do not contain
any large farms. As indicated in Figure 1, there are few farms even above 10 acres in such
environments. The U-shape is simply not visible in low-income country rural data sets because of
survey design.
To our knowledge, there are only two prior studies based on low-income country farm data
that finds evidence of a U-shape. Kimhi (2006), using data on maize producers in Zambia, shows
that dis-economies of scale characterize farms below 7.4 acres, which account for 84% of all farms,
but that productivity rises with scale above that threshold. Muyanga and Jayne (2016), recognizing
the representativeness sampling problem in existing data sets, obtain data from a dedicated survey of
medium-sized farms and a representative sample of small farmers in Kenya that reside in the same
villages. They also find the inverse relationship in the representative sample containing mostly small
farms, but positive scale economies for the larger farms (25-124 acres), measuring productivity both
in per-acre net returns, taking into account all input costs, and per-acre output. However, neither of
these studies provides evidence on the mechanisms behind the U-shape.
There are measurement issues in most existing data sets as well that have made it difficult to
identify the mechanisms that underlies scale economies that we focus on here. In many if not all
low-income country data sets agricultural labor time is measured in days rather than hours. While
time wages are generally paid on a daily basis for most agricultural operations, the true unit cost of
labor time will be masked if there is variation in per day hours. The ICRISAT data record labor time
use in hours and days. The data indicate that not only is there substantial variation in the average
hours per day workers provide, but the amount of daily hours within an agricultural operation differs
by operation scale.
Based both on the wage schedules provided by farm employers and the daily wages and
hours reported by farm workers, we show that the average hourly wage decreases with the number
of hours worked, consistent with the existence of a daily fixed cost of employment. We also are able
to document that smaller farms (but not the smallest) on average employ more low-hour hired labor
across all of their operations than do larger farms. We show that as a consequence, the average
hourly wage, inclusive of the imputed cost of family labor, increases and then decreases with farm
scale. Consistent with this, we also find that for the same plot across time, when the amount of work
5

increases due to more rainfall, on a smaller plot a higher average wage is paid while on a larger plot
average wages are lowered.
Another major deficiency of existing data describing farming in low-income countries even
where mechanized equipment is used is that there is little or no information on the capacity of farm
equipment. The best surveys provide a detailed inventory of owned equipment by type (thresher,
tractor, sprayer) and value, but little or no information on power or capability (e.g., horsepower,
bushels processed per time unit). Thus, any empirical evidence on scale economies obtained from
such data must assume that within machine types machinery capability is homogeneous - an eightrow harvester and a four-row harvester are not distinguished, even though their capabilities and
suitabilities to different production scales are likely quite different. Most data sets also do not
provide information on the time use and the rental price of equipment, by type or capacity. Thus it
has not been possible to measure scale economies in farming due to economies of scale in machine
capacity that could underlie the positively-sloped upper segment of the U.
The ICRISAT data too do not provide direct information on the power or capacities of the
equipment that is used by the farmers. Tractors, for example, are not distinguished by horsepower
or speed or towing ability. However, we show how it is possible to identify the varying capacities of
one major type of equipment - sprayers - using the information provided on the amount of material
sprayed and the time use of sprayers. This enables us to estimate an effective capacity function
relating capacity- material sprayed per hour - to scale and to estimate the capacity pricing schedule.6
We find that, consistent with sprayer capacity scale economies, larger farms do less spraying per acre
and use higher-capacity and more expensive sprayers and we estimate that the implicit rental price of
capacity declines as capacity increases. Based on our structural estimates we are able to identify the
“optimal” scale of operation based on the sprayer scale economies - the scale at which additional
increases in scale would lower productivity, but below which operational scale is too low and thus
excessively labor-intensive, at least with respect to the control of weeds and insects.
In section 2, we describe the data and show that profits per acre exhibit a U-shape with
respect to both farm size and plot scale that is not due to relationships between size and soil quality
or size and measurement error or to differing characteristics (ability, liquidity) of farmers. We also
show that the average daily work hours of a worker varies substantially and that the hour-based wage
6

Our measure of sprayer capacity is identical to that employed by sellers of sprayers. We are thus able
to compare our estimated capacity pricing schedule to those provided by sprayer vendors in the India and the
United States.
6

schedules are consistent with the existence of labor-market transaction costs. We also provide
statistics on worker turnover and one component of fixed costs, worker distance to workplace that
support the assumption of the empirical importance of fixed costs. In section 3, we set out the
model, starting with a labor-only model in a market with transaction costs and then allowing the
possibility of using machinery that is heterogeneous in capacity and substitutable for labor. We show
that both models can replicate the U-shape, but with capacity scale economies the farm scale
economies persist beyond a threshold land size depending on the shapes of the effective capacity
and capacity pricing functions.
Section 4 provides evidence that the marginal return to profits is U-shaped in farm or plot
scale, and describes evidence on the non-linear relationships between scale and the use of low-hour
hired inputs and average hourly labor and bullock prices, and on the non-linear effects of rainfall on
average input costs by plot size. All of these findings are consistent with labor-market transaction
costs playing an important role in the decline in productivity with scale at low scale. In section 5, we
examine equipment use and productivity, focusing on power sprayers. We show that descriptively,
consistent with capacity scale economies, per-acre sprayer hours and weeding hours decline and the
rental price of sprayer hours and sprayer capacity rises with farm scale after a threshold size. Our
structural estimates of the capacity price schedule for sprayers, based on the model, rejects the
hypothesis that capacity pricing is linear in capacity and thus is indicative of capacity scale economies
in India. Indeed, we find that the price parameter we estimate from the ICRISAT data is similar to
that characterizing the price schedule for power sprayers that are available throughout India.
However, both estimates imply a steeper slope for capacity pricing than we see in US pricing
schedules for power sprayers. The estimates suggest that a reduction in the sprayer price slope
parameter from that faced by ICRISAT farmers to that associated with US power sprayers, for a
farm at the median in the ICRISAT villages, would increase the capacity of the sprayer chosen by
5%, increase sprayer hours by 23.3% and reduce weeding hours by 3%.
Finally, our model-based estimates imply that effective capacity for power sprayers reaches
its maximum at a farm size of 25 acres. The fact that this limit to scale economies is at the extreme
right tail of the distribution of farm sizes in the ICRISAT setting (based on census landholding data)
does not imply that the optimal farm size in India is limited to 25 acres (even if all mechanized
inputs were characterized by the same parameters). Rather it is also consistent with a local
equilibrium trap. If the market availability of scale-dependent technologies depends on the existing
scale of operation, the largest farms have no incentive to increase scale because there are no readily
7

available machines with effective capacity beyond their own operation size. The puzzle remains,
however, why if scale economies are positive up to 25 acres we do not see a move towards the
consolidation of land. Our findings suggest that this is an important topic of future research.7
1. The Data
a. Sampling and information content
We begin by describing the data we use. We do this for two reasons. The first is that we need
to show the phenomenon that requires explanation, namely a non-constant relationship between
farm productivity and scale that is not simply due to measurement error or omitted land quality. The
second reason is that the data provide unique information on plot and farm location, prices and
input characteristics, which motivate (and permit) the new explorations of the underlying causes of
non-linear agricultural scale economies.
Our principal data source is the six latest rounds of the India ICRISAT VLS panel survey,
covering the agricultural years 2009-2014. The survey has two components - a census of all
households in 18 villages in five states - Andhra Pradesh, Gujurat, Karnataka, Maharasthra, and
Madhya Pradesh - and a panel survey of the households in those villages, which includes 819
farmers. A key advantage of the ICRISAT survey is that the sampling differs from almost all
household surveys, which seek to achieve household representativeness, because the sampling frame
is based on landholding size. In particular, the survey contains in equal numbers landless
households, small-farm households, medium-farm households, and large farm households. As a
consequence of this sampling frame, we are able to examine both small and larger farms in a
common environment, unlike in most surveys of farm households in countries with similar
landholding distributions, in which most households own small plots.
The ICRISAT data are unique in other ways that are critical for identifying the underlying
mechanisms of scale economies. First, there is information on input quantities and prices by type of
input, by farm operation and by individual plot collected approximately every three weeks.8 The
7

Note that the persistence and ubiquity of small farms in low-income countries does not necessarily
imply that our findings on scale economies must be incorrect. The output gains and increases in
mechanization from the mandatory post-war governmental land consolidation scheme in France, described by
Bivar (2010), from an initial distribution of land characterized by very small scales of operation that had
persisted for centuries, suggests instead a market failure. Discovering the source of the land market failure,
and remedies, thus may have high payoffs.
8

The size of the basic unit of operation, the plot, is not a choice variable - the size of a given named
plot does not vary from year to year. Similarly, farm sizes are stable. There is little change in the number of
plots owned by a farmer over the full span of the panel, from 2009-2014 - only 5.8% of plots were bought or
8

high-frequency input information is thus likely to be more accurate than that found in almost all
surveys, which collect information once or at best twice in an agricultural season. Second, there is
information on market input prices for workers, machinery, and animal traction collected at the
village level, in addition to that elicited from the households survey, by work time. Third,
importantly for identifying the role of mechanization in scale economies, there is information
enabling the measurement of the power and capacities of machines. Fourth, there is information on
how plots were acquired, e.g., inheritance or purchases, including information on the dates of
inheritance, along with information on all other assets of the household.
b. Descriptive information on scale and farm productivity.
Figure 5 displays from the village Census and from the surveyed households in 2014 the
cumulative distribution of farms by total owned (agricultural-use) landholdings along with the
sample-household distribution of plot sizes. The figure shows that the full population (census) land
distribution is similar to that of most low-income countries - 92% of land-owning households have
less than 10 acres. Because of the sampling scheme, however, we observe detailed information on
farms above 10 acres in the household sample - in contrast to the population distribution,
households with more than 10 acres of landholdings constitute almost 40% of the sample.
The oversampling of larger farms is key to understanding the global relationship between
farm productivity and farm scale. The sampling scheme provides the missing link between
developed-country large-scale farming and low-income country small-farm agriculture within the
context of a single low-income country. This is because we are able to observe both the decline in
profitability by scale, characteristic of low-income countries, and its rise with scale, characteristic of
developed countries, in the same setting with comparable data across farms. Figure 6 displays the
lowess-smoothed relationship between average real (1999 rupees) profits per acre in the main
growing season (Kharif) and owned total landholdings for the full data set (2009-2014). As can be
seen, as in most low-income countries, there is a monotonic decline in per-acre profitability with
acreage below 10 acres. But then there is a monotonic increase, as is observed in developed
countries.
Using the detailed information of the data set, we can rule out two reasons for the U-shape

sold, and the main reasons for any land turnover were inheritance or family transfer. Almost all plots
therefore are inherited (0.74% of all plot observations involved a purchase of land). The 2014 Census data
indicate the leasing market is only somewhat thicker than the land sales market, with 8.4% of landowners
leasing out and 11.5% leasing in land.
9

that have been suggested in the literature, which has focused on the decline in productivity with
scale below 10 acres: (a) measurement error in land size that is correlated with size and (b) land
quality that is correlated with land size. We can also rule out credit constraints and farmer ability as
the sole determinants of the U-shape relationship. With respect to measurement, we exploit the fact
that we have two independent, and different, elicitations of farm size in 2009. Each household was
visited and administered a Census questionnaire asking for the total number of acres of owned
unirrigated and owned irrigated land. At a separate time in the same crop year, the panel households
were asked to provide the acreage of each individual plot they owned. Thus, there are two sets of
information on acreage for each panel household collected at different times. We summed the
individual plot acreages to obtain total farm size from the survey and summed the reported total
acreages of irrigated and unirrigated land to obtain total farm size from the Census elicitation. We
then used the latter as an instrument for the former to estimate the effect of farm size on profits.
Table 1 reports the OLS and IV profit estimates. The specifications also include dummy
variables for each village, capturing the influences of weather and prices at the village level. As can
be seen, the IV and OLS estimates are economically identical. However, the fundamental issue is not
how much measurement error there is in acreage reports, but whether measurement error leads to
bias that is correlated with farm size. For example, even if measurement error is on average small, it
may be proportionately large for small plot sizes, which would create a larger negative bias in the
relationship between size and per-acre profitability at small compared with big farms. To assess this
possibility, we obtained the coefficient of land size by land size, using the locally-weighted functional
coefficient model (LWFCM),9 obtained again using OLS and IV. Figure 7 displays the two land
coefficients by land size, indicating that measurement error is small at all acreages. Measurement
error does appear to increase with farm size above ten acres, suggesting that the upward component
of the U-shape for profits per acre displayed in Figure 6 may actually be slightly understated due to
measurement error. Measurement error, however, is clearly not the major cause of the downward
slope in profitability below 10 acres.
The U-shape also survives control for land quality. The survey provides, at the plot level,
multiple measures of plot characteristics. These include soil depth, distance of the plot from the
household residence, four categories of soil fertility, six levels of soil degradation, and 11 soil types.
Table 2 reports the relationship between real output and real Kharif profits and farm size for the full
9

See Cai et al., 2006. The specification we use is locally linear in profits and farm size.
10

sample. In the first column for each dependent variable, the specification only includes village/year
fixed effects. The second column estimate for each is from a specification additionally including all
the plot characteristics. The difference in estimates is negligible, despite the fact that the set of 24
variables associated with the plot characteristics are highly statistically significant for both profits and
gross output value.10
To assess whether credit constraints associated with farmer characteristics, such as total
wealth or ability, are responsible for the U-shape in the third and fourth columns for each
dependent variable we use information on output and profits at the plot level. The third column for
each reports the within-farmer-year estimate of plot size; the fourth column reports the withinfarmer-year estimate of the plot size effect including the soil characteristics of the plots. Again, the
estimates are virtually identical. The within-farmer-year plot size estimates are lower than the crossfarmer farm size estimates, suggesting that farmer ability or wealth may play some role in the
relationship between farm size and productivity. 11
The key issue is whether variation in soil characteristics and farmer characteristics by acreage
are solely responsible for the U-shape. Figure 8 displays three plots: the relationship between peracre real profits and farm size repeated from Figure 6; that relationship estimated using LWFCM
from a specification including all of the soil characteristics in which the coefficients for farm size
and the soil characteristics can vary non-parametrically with farm size; and the LWFCM-estimated
relationship obtained solely from cross-plot variation within a farm and including the soil
characteristics. All three plots display the U-shape, with the LWFCM-estimated curves obtained at
mean soil and plot characteristics. Controls for soil quality evidently lower the observed profitability
of the smallest farms (soil quality and size are negatively related among small farms) but have little
effect on the upward slope. The within-farm estimates suggest that the U-shape also characterizes
plots within farmers.12 Thus, neither variation in farmer wealth or farmer ability or heterogeneity in
10

Below, we will provide plot fixed-effects estimates of operational scale effects by plot size that
control completely for land quality.
11

The ICRISAT survey farms are not especially fragmented. 43% have only one plot, and 74% have
two or less plots, with larger farm having more plots (correlation = 0.6). The correlation between average plot
size and total farm size is 0.7. We show below that the size of plots as well as farm size matter in determining
scale economies.
12

Interestingly, Assunção and Braido (2007) found, controlling for farmer fixed effects, an inverse
relationship between output per acre and plot size but no uptick in productivity for larger plots using the
initial ICRISAT data from the period 1975-1984. In that period the availability of mechanized implements
was substantially lower than in the period covered by the latest rounds of the survey, 25 years later.
11

plot or soil characteristics explains the U-shape association between per-acre profitability and scale.13
c. Fixed costs of labor hiring.
In the next section we will set out a model to explain the U-shaped pattern of farm and plot
efficiency. We will focus on transaction costs in the labor market and scale economies in machinery
capacity. We do this because these aspects of the farming environment are evident in the data. With
respect to identifying a fixed cost component to hired labor, we use information from the price
schedules for hired labor and labor plus bullock pairs by farm operation. Information on daily wages
paid was obtained monthly from one informant from each of the three classes of farmers in the
2010 and 2011 rounds of the survey by farm operation according to the number of hours worked in
the day. The reports are obtained at the beginning of each month over the full year.
The first salient feature of the data from the wage schedules is that a large fraction of
workers paid daily wages work less than eight hours in a day. That is, many workers are hired for less
than a full day. In the wage schedule reports, 31% of the daily wage reports for hired males were for
workers who worked less than eight hours; for bullock pairs and driver, over 58% of daily wages
paid were for work that was less than eight hours. This is in accord with the survey data on off-farm
employment reported by respondents. In the 2014 round, for example, 30.6% of respondents
working off farm for wages in agriculture operations during the peak Kharif season reported that
their average working hours were less than eight (29.8% reported that average hours were six hours
or less per day).
We computed hourly wages based on the monthly wage schedules and then regressed the log
of the hourly wage for the two categories of hired inputs on whether or not the work done was for
the full eight hours, with a full set of dummy variables for farm operation. Any hourly wage
difference by daily hours hired could be due to low-wage operations occurring in slack periods with
little work. The operation fixed effects ensure that this is not the case. The within-operation log
wage estimates are reported in Table 3, where it can be seen that while the daily wage is higher the
more hours a worker works in a day, farmers pay an hourly premium for low-hour work - workers
who work eight hours are paid a statistically-significant 33% less per hour than lower-hour workers;
13

The U-shape is also not due solely due to different crop choices by plot size. Using only plots
devoted to cotton, one also observes the U-shape pattern of per-acre profits and plot size, as displayed in
Appendix Figure A. Cotton is the second largest cash crop in the ICRISAT sample, with 17% of all plots
devoted to cotton. 20% of plots are devoted to soybeans, but soybeans are not grown on the very small plots
that dominate the sample, so it is not possible to identify a U-shape relationship with that crop, but per-acre
profitability on soybean plots rises with plot size above 10 acres.
12

a hired bullock pair and driver working eight hours is paid over 20% less per hour than his part-time
counterpart. The hourly premiums paid to low-hour workers is consistent with the existence of fixed
transaction costs for hiring workers compensated in part by employers. We will use the model to
infer how the existence of these fixed costs affect labor-intensity and profitability by land size.
Is it plausible there are significant fixed cost components in labor costs, as implied by the
labor price schedules? First, most agricultural laborers are hired on a daily basis. There are few
formal longer-term contracts, so each worker must be matched with a farmer who is seeking
workers for a given day’s task. Second, farms are also spatially separated from where workers and
farmers in the village reside, so travel costs are not trivial.14 The ICRISAT data provide the distance
of each plot from the farmers’ home (in the village center). The median distance is one kilometer.
The distance of plots to residences in the sample understates the average distance a worker
must travel to get to an employer because a significant proportion of workers residing in a village
work for a farmer located outside the village. The Yale EGC-CMF Tamil Nadu Panel Survey
contains a representative sample of rural households in 200 villages in the Indian state of Tamil
Nadu in 2011. In this sample, 21.3% of farmers located in the villages who employed any
agricultural laborers reported hiring laborers from outside the village. Consistent with this, 23.6% of
the survey respondents who worked for wages in agriculture reported working for a farmer located
outside the village. Among those traveling to a farm outside the village by foot or bicycle (63.8%),
the average distance to the non-village farm was two kilometers. The median distance to a nonvillage farm for those traveling by bus (26.5%) was 8 kilometers. Finally, the median number of
individual farmers that an agricultural laborer worked for in total during the main growing season
(kharif) was seven. If at least some of these turnover/search and travel costs are born by farmers,
this will be manifested in hourly wage schedules that resemble those we see in the data.
d. Non-linear pricing of machinery capacity.
A second key component of our model is the existence of non-linear pricing in the cost
schedules for farm equipment by machine capacity. The ICRISAT data, like most data sets, has only
an incomplete description of farm equipment. The size or horsepower of tractors owned or used,
for example, are not provided. The inventory of owned equipment in the 2011 round does provide,
however, information on the price and horsepower of electric motors and submersible pumps.
Figure 9 displays the relationship from the inventory data between the cost per horsepower and total
14

Typically, farmers and workers reside in a village center with farm plots surrounding the residential

area.
13

horsepower for both sets of equipment. The figures clearly exhibit scale economies in pricing by
machine power. The information on pricing, is insufficient, however, to demonstrate the importance
of scale economies in equipment as an underlying mechanisms for farming scale economies, as we
will show, because what is also required is the technical relationship between horsepower (in this
case) and the ability of the equipment to accomplish agricultural tasks. We will demonstrate that
there is sufficient information on sprayers, a key piece of farm equipment, from the input data files
to pin down the relationships between machine power, machine capacity and price that is necessary
for identifying the link between equipment and farming scale economies.
2. Model
a. Labor-only model with market transaction costs.
We develop a model with the goal of understanding the mechanisms that underlie the Ushaped profitability and efficiency variation by farm and plot size. We focus on transaction costs in
the labor market and scale economies associated with farm machinery. We thus exclude
consideration of constraints on input use that arise from imperfections in credit or insurance
markets or relationships between farm size and farmer competence. Such constraints cannot explain
variation in the profitability among plots for a given farmer, which we have seen mimic the
profitability patterns observed across farmers sorted by total landholdings.15
Although agricultural production takes place in stages, to fix ideas we initially focus on a
one-stage agricultural production function. We assume that agricultural production is described by a
constant returns to scale production function g that consists of two inputs: land (a) and plant
nutrients (e). The amount of nutrients applied is itself described by a production process. For
example, the application of fertilizer requires labor time. Removing weeds, which reduces
competition for nutrients by the plants, can be accomplished using labor for pulling weeds, and/or
by spraying, using labor and a sprayer. We initially assume that the process of nutrient production
uses only labor, focusing on transaction costs in the labor market. We think that this model is by
itself applicable to settings such as in sub-Saharan Africa where landholdings are especially small and
mechanization is thus infeasible. We will subsequently generalize the model to include a
(heterogeneous) mechanized input that is substitutable with labor, as is the case in settings where

15

In an appendix we explore directly the role of wealth differences and farmer ability in explaining
the U-shape and show they do not account for the U-shape.
14

farm scale is above some threshold.16
The farm is endowed with total family labor time of l and can use family lf or hired lh labor
time to produce nutrients e. Thus total output is

g ( a , e)

(1)

To highlight the role of labor market transaction costs we assume that family and hired labor time
are perfect substitutes, and the nutrient production function is e = lf + lh, which is also CRS.
Workers entering the labor market for off-farm work in a given day face a fixed entry cost per day as
a result of transaction costs and/or travel (in effect we define a production stage as work done on a
particular day). This labor-market entry cost, f, may vary across households. As a consequence, in
equilibrium, farmers wishing to employ workers for just a few hours must at least partly compensate
these workers for this fixed cost. We model this compensation as having a fixed and variable
component, consistent with observed wage schedules, so that the cost of hiring a worker for

lh1 hours is
w(lh )  ø  lh  0  w0  w1lh .

(2)

With w0  f workers are fully compensated for the fixed costs of off-farm work.
Profits are defined as

 (a, lh , l f )  ag (lh  l f )  w(lh )  w1l f

(3)

Costing out hired labor for the purpose of computing profits empirically is straightforward because
total payments to hired labor w(lh ) are readily observed. Here, we cost out family labor using only
the variable component of wages. This is correct under two conditions, as we discuss below: (a) if
the family is engaged in the external labor market regardless of the on farm labor supply or (b) if
transactions costs are fully compensated by the labor market.17
We assume that the farmer, with fixed endowments of family labor time and land, maximizes
16

Our model can identify that threshold, given estimates of the farm production technology, price
schedules and available machine capacities.
17

In principle one might also want to include the uncompensated component of the fixed cost of
entry (e.g., f  w0 ) in the profits calculation; however, such an approach would be problematic when
comparing profits in the model to those in the data as, in contrast to hired labor costs, this cost cannot be
directly observed. In practice, the model with fully compensated fixed costs seems to give the best match
between the theory and data.
15

profits plus labor income minus any fixed costs of entry into the labor market for any given land
area a

L   (a, lh , l f )  ø  lo  0  ( w0  f )  w1lo

(4)

subject to the constraint

lo  lh  l

(5)
where lo is off-farm work time.

The optimal labor allocations, and thus profitability, by area will depend importantly on
entry costs. In general there will be three regimes, depending on land size and the magnitude of
labor market entry cost.18 There are two critical values of a that divide land size into regimes. For
land areas a>0 with a  a * farmers will supply off-farm labor. For land areas a*  a  a** , farmers
will operate in autarchy, and for land areas a  a** farmers will hire workers. In the first regime, at
the lowest land sizes, family members work both on farm and off farm, as long as income working
both on and off-farm exceeds the income from on-farm work only. The upper-bound critical value
a* is where farmers do not hire workers and are just indifferent between entering the labor market
and not.

g (a* , l )  g (a* , l f * )  ( w0  f )  w1 (l  l f * ) ,

(6)

In that regime and at the regime upper bound for a, the marginal value product of family labor is
equal to w1:
fl (a* , l f * )  w1 .

(7)

The second regime is where farm size is sufficiently large so that the profitability of
employing all family labor on farm exceeds that from employing any family labor off farm but no
hired labor is employed on farm. This regime is not infinitesimal because of the existence of the
labor market entry cost that must be paid by the farmer when hiring labor. This will make farmers
reluctant to hire workers until land area reaches some threshold. Thus, in this regime, starting at
threshold land size a*, given the fixity of family labor, the marginal product of labor declines as land
18

A fourth regime in which farmers are both working off farm and hiring in workers is not feasible as
long as f > w0 . The farmer will replace hired work with additional family on-farm work that has the same
opportunity cost at the margin until either hired work is zero and the fixed cost of hiring is saved or off-farm
work is zero and the fixed cost of off-farm work is saved.
16

size increases and hence profitability per acre also falls. The opportunity cost of (family) labor
remains at the variable component of the wage w1. This will continue until land size = a**, where
farmers are just indifferent between hiring workers, and defraying worker entry costs, and working
only with family labor

f (a** , l )  f (a** , l  lh** )  w0  w1**lh .

(8)

The threshold land size at which any hired workers are employed is higher the larger is the
transaction cost w0.
At a** workers are hired and the marginal product of labor rises to the market wage
(9)

fl (a** , l  lh** )  w1 .

However, average labor costs rise at a** because of the necessity of paying transaction costs, which
are a large component of labor costs when hired workers are employed at low hours. Then, as land
area increases above a**, average labor costs fall, as the fixed component becomes a smaller share of
labor costs, and profitability per acre rises ultimately reaching that for the smallest-acreage farms.
To show that the model is capable of replicating the U-shape between profitability per-acre
and farm scale, we simulate the model, assuming a Cobb-Douglas production function with a land
share (α) equal to a half and with w0=2, w1=1/2, l=2 and f=2. Figure 10 displays a U-shaped pattern
between per-acre profitability and farm size. The three regimes are evident : on the smallest farms,
where family members are working both on and off farm, changes in acreage have no effect on
profits per acre. At 2.5 acres, farms become autarchic with respect to labor, and profitability per acre
declines as land size increases because family labor time is fixed, thus lowering productivity. At 11.8
acres in the simulation the farm begins to hire workers so average profitability starts to rise and
continues to rise up to the initial value observed for the smallest farms as transaction costs become
an infinitesimal component of total costs.
Figure 11 plots the pattern of labor costs per acre by farm size from simulations of the same
model. As for per-acre profits in Figure 6, labor per acreage is initially flat with respect to acres
because the marginal return of on-farm labor is fixed by the marginal return to labor given that these
farmers are all working in the market. As acreage rises, however, they eventually leave the off-farm
labor market and apply their labor to their own farm. Because of the fixed costs of hiring workers,
they do not immediately add workers via the labor market. Consequently, farm labor stays constant
as acreage rises and total labor costs per acre falls. At some point profitability falls so low that a
farmer is willing to take on hired workers and so labor expenditures then rise discontinuously. They
17

then fall as acreage rises and the fixed cost is distributed over more hours of hired work.
Finally, Figure 12 traces out the relationship between the average price of labor and farm
size, showing that larger farms, due to the compensation of hired labor for transaction costs, pay
higher average prices for labor than do the smallest farms. We will test for these relationships below.
One limitation of the above model is that production takes place in a single stage. With
multiple stages, the fixed costs of hiring workers (and other inputs) will accrue in each stage. To
capture this idea we augment the production function to two stages

g (a, l f 1  lh1 , l f 2  lh 2 ) .

(10)

The resulting average profits (red) and marginal profits (blue) with respect to acreage are plotted in
Figure 13.19 The marginal profit line now rises in two steps. In the first step the farmer transitions
from autarchy in both stages to hiring in the more intensive stage and autarchy in the less intensive
stage. In the second step the farmer transitions to hiring in both stages. As should be evident, as the
number of stages increases this curve will rise smoothly with acreage. Note further that the average
profitability now falls and rises smoothly with acreage.
b. Adding heterogeneous machinery.
Labor market transaction costs evidently are sufficient to explain why profitability per acre
initially falls as scale increases, with profitability then rising, as in our data, if any labor is hired. It can
explain why small farms tend to be autarchic and why in African countries that have very low-scale
farms and infrequently employ hired labor, per-acre profitability declines with farm scale and never
rises. But the existence of such labor-market costs cannot explain why above some threshold farm
size average profitability continues to rise above the initial per-acre profitability of the smallest
farms, which is what we observe globally and in our data. Indeed, as seen in Figure 10, the laboronly model implies that at the highest farm sizes profitability per acre would never exceed that for
the smallest (regime-1) farms. The smallest African farms would be the most proftitable on earth!
We now relax the assumption that the only input used is labor time and allow for the use of
farm machinery to accomplish farm tasks. We allow machine time and labor time to be substitutes
and emphasize the key feature of machinery, heterogeneity in machine capacity. We define capacity,
consistent with definitions used for most farm equipment, as the amount of processed acreage a
machine can accomplish per unit of time (e.g., acres covered per hour by irrigation or insecticide,
19

To capture the difference is labor intensities, we consider a Cobb-Douglas with factors shares for a,
e1, and e2 of ½, 1/3 and 1/6, respectively.
18

acres of corn per hour harvested). Unlike for manual labor, where individual heterogeneity in
productivity per unit of time (within gender) is relatively low (and unrewarded in the market where
time wages dominate (Foster and Rosenzweig, 1996), farm equipment devoted to specific tasks vary
significantly in capacity and command different prices associated with capacity.20 Thus we need to
distinguish machine time and machine capacity, with the farmer choosing both machine capacity,
based on acreage and capacity prices, and how much time to employ the machine.
To capture these ideas we redefine the nutrient production function as
e(l , q, m )  (l ( l )  m ((1 

(11)

q
)qm ) )1/ ,
 (a )

where q is machine capacity and m is the number of units of time the machine is employed. The
parameter  captures output per hour of labor time and the parameter  captures the extent of
substitutability between labor and machines.21 Farmers can choose among machines of different
capacities q. However, effective machine capacity depends on farm size. To model this, we define the
function  (a ) with  '(a )  0 capturing the loss associated with using a large capacity machine on a
small plot, so that effective capacity is (1- q/  (a ) ) q. For example, a sprayer that can cover a radius
of z yards would be cost ineffective on farms where the radii of farmed area are significantly less
than z yards, assuming that machine prices rises with capacity. Similarly, it is not cost effective to
rent an 8-row harvester for land that has four rows of crops.
We also allow for economies of scale in farm machinery capacity, such that the rental cost
per unit of time xm for a machine increases at a decreasing rate with machine capacity:

xm  pq q ,

(12)

where 0<ν<1 and assuming q  1. Finally, we assume that operation of the machinery requires  of
family labor per hour of machine operation so that the hourly cost of a machine inclusive of labor is

20

Farmers - that is the decision-makers - may differ importantly in capability relevant for making
allocative decisions. We assume in the model, as is traditional, that all allocative decisions are correct, given
technology and prices. We provide in an Appendix tests of whether farmer ability is correlated with owned
landholdings. As noted, the within-farmer plot-specific relationships between profits and acreage indicate that
any such a correlation is not solely responsible for the profitability patterns observed across landholdings of
different size
21

Some labor will be complementary with machine use, the labor used to actually run the machines,
as we specify below.
19

pq  w .

Profits, augmented to include the use of farm machinery, are

 ( a, lh , l f , q, m)  g ( a, e(lh  l f , q, m ))  w(lh )  wl f  ( w  pq q )m .

(13)

In this model machine capacity is determined only by acreage, the parameter  , and the ratio θw/p.
The overall productivity of nutrients and the substitution of labor and machines in the nutrient
production function affect the hours of machinery use but not machine capacity. In particular, q,
solves

  a   2 q   w 

(14)

p

1    q   a   (2   )q 1

= 0.

While a closed form solution for (14) is not generally available, it is evident that optimal capacity
depends on the relationship between machine cost and capacity (  ) and on the effective capacity of
machines by area  ( a ) , as well as the different prices.
Scale economies in farm production associated with machinery thus require both that
effective machine capacity depends on acreage and that there are economies of scale in machine
capacity. If there were no cost advantage to using higher-capacity machines, even large farmers
would use the smallest capacity machine. And if there were only a cost advantage to using largercapacity machines but no relationship between effective capacity and area given actual capacity we
would not observe small machines being employed on small plots. We will obtain estimates of ν
from actual price lists and from our survey data. These indicate non-linear pricing of capacity. The ν
estimates will also allow us to identify non-parametrically the  (a ) function, as shown below.
The model implies that not only will the use of machinery increase with farm scale and with
rising labor costs but so will the machine capacity chosen by the farmer. Implicitly differentiating
(14), we get
q 2 '  a 
dq

> 0,
da   a   q    a   2 q    a   4 q 

which is positive as long as  '(a )  0 22, and
22

This expression must be positive as the first-order condition for q implies q<φ(a)/2<φ(a) and the

second-order condition requires   a   2 q    a   4 q   0 .
20

 q   a   2 q 
dq
 
0.
dw pq    a   q    a   2 q    a   4 q 
2

The mechanism here is that at higher wages for the machine operator one wants to use fewer hours
of machines per unit of nutrient added and this is only possible if the machine is higher capacity. On
the other hand, an increase in the baseline cost of machinery tends to lower machinery capacity
because it affects both the cost of capacity and the cost of machinery
q   a   2 q  w q 
dq
 2
 0,
dp
p    a   q    a   2 q    a   4 q 
2

and a reduction in scale economies of will similarly lower capacity at any given scale of operation:
q   a   2 q  w q  ln  q 
q   a   2 q 
dq


0.
d
 p   a   q    a   2 q    a   4 q     a   2 q    a   4 q 
2

As noted, the determination of machine capacity q is, in the context of the model,
independent of the return to nutrients; it simply involves minimizing the cost of producing a unit of
nutrients using a machine, given land area. On the other hand the optimal number of hours the
machine of capacity q is employed depends on nutrient use and on the cost of labor used to provide
nutrients not associated with machine use. For example, mechanized sprayers may be used to spread
herbicide and thus control competition for nutrients by preventing weed growth. Alternatively, labor
may be used to remove weeds once they have grown. The determination of optimal machine use is
thus considerably more complicated than the choice of optimal capacity, and analytical derivatives
cannot in general be signed. We therefore proceed by calibrating the model to key parameters in the
data and then use the calibrated model to examine how machine and labor use respond to
underlying costs.
The full profit function, incorporating (11) and (13) is

 (a, lh , l f , q, m )  po a ( ( l )  (1   )( q(1 

q
)m ) )(1 )/  wl  ( w  pq q )m
 (a )

With these basic results in place, we now consider how economies of scale in machinery

21

capacity affect the relationship between average profitability and acreage, by simulating the model
incorporating machinery, adding the parameters , δ=0.65, ν=0.32,   1 , p0=1.4, ξ=1, and

 (a )  a 2 / 40 to the initial labor-only model.23 Figure 14 displays the plots derived from the two
models - the initial model with only labor, from Figure 10, and the model with labor and machinery.
Both figures display the U-shaped patter for average-profitability. The key differences are that in the
model that permits machine use and incorporates economies of scale in machine capacity, the
decline in per-acre profits halts at an earlier point in the land distribution and per-acre profitability
eventually rises above that implied by the labor-only model. Thus at the highest farm size, profits per
acre exceed those of the smallest farms, replicating what we see across when comparing small-farm
agriculture and large-farm agriculture across countries.24
Figure 15 displays expenditures per acre for labor in the labor-only model, from Figure 12,
and for labor and machinery per-acre labor expenditures in the model with both labor and
machinery. Labor expenditures decline with acreage at the lower farm sizes in both models.
However, as can be seen, starting at around 9 acres machines are used to augment family labor.
With a high substitutability assumed in the simulation between labor and machine time, the use of
machinery occurs before the threshold acreage for hiring labor in the no-machinery model and thus
no hired labor is employed in the model incorporating machine use. Thus labor expenditures per
acre continue to fall as acreage increases. In addition, however, as scale increases farmers employ
higher-capacity machines. This lowers the cost of producing nutrients, given ν<1. The net effect on
expenditures is thus ambiguous because, depending on the factor elasticity of demand, the farmer
may choose to increase nutrients per acre. At the parameter values chosen, machine expenditures
per acre rise with acreage but at a decreasing rate.25
23

The parameters of the machinery price function are from our estimates based on the data, as
described below.
24

Given our simplifying assumption in the simulation that labor and machinery are perfect substitutes
the increase in effective machine capacity with acreage, given ν<1, and consequent decrease in the need for
labor means that the farmers never exit autarchy. Average profitability thus rises continuously beyond the
threshold at which hired labor is used in the model without machinery solely due to machine capacity
economies.
25

Finally, the patterns of labor and machinery expenditures by land size have implications for how
yields and profits per acre differ as operational scale increases. Simulation results from the model permitting
machine use indicate that both per-acre yields and profits display the U-shape but they differ in slope size and
the location of the nadir. The change in the gap between per-acre profits and output value initially reflects
how labor expenses change as farm size increases. As the farm moves to autarchy with increasing scale both
labor expenses per acre and yields per acre drop but the gap between the two also declines, reflecting the fall
22

3. Identifying Scale Dis-economies due to Labor Market Transaction Costs
a. Production function and profit function methods.
Standard methods used in the literature to identify the existence of scale economies have
been to estimate production functions or profit functions. The model helps clarify the circumstances
under which scale dis-economies associated with transaction costs in the labor market can be
detected by these two methods. By construction the model is constant returns to scale in land and
nutrients. Scale economies thus do not operate through the technology but through (a) the cost of
labor (b) the selection of machine capacity. For illustration we assume a Cobb-Douglas form for (1).
We first consider the labor-only model incorporating labor market fixed costs as above, and where
e  le  lh  l f

, so output is

(15)

y  a le1

.

When the production function is estimated directly, say by regressing the log of output on
log of land and labor time,
(16)

ln y   0  1 ln a   2 ln le

.

 is identified. The standard test for scale economies is then whether 1   2  1 . This equality holds
of course under the assumed production function as
(17)

 ln y
 ln y
 1  1   2  1 
 .
 ln a
 ln le

Thus, estimating the production function will correctly identify that there are not scale economies in
the production function. However, such an approach will miss the presence of scale economies
more generally. The reason is that the fixed costs of labor affect the cost of inputs and thus the level
of inputs but not the relationship between inputs and outputs.
We now examine how the sources of scale economies in the model are manifested in profit
function estimates in the labor-only model with labor-market transaction costs, again specifying the
production technology as Cobb-Douglas with nutrients linear in labor time. The first implication of
the model is that the existence of transaction costs in the labor market imply that estimates of the
profit function area parameter will differ by regime; that is the parameters of the profit function will
be a function of land area. Thus, unlike when directly estimating the production function, scale disin per-acre labor expenses when the farm is relying only on its fixed family labor endowment in autarchy.
Then as the farmer begins to use machines the gap between per-acre yields and per-acre profits widens as the
farmer is increasingly able to take advantage of higher-capacity machinery, saving on labor expenses and
exploiting scale economies in machine capacity.
23

economies associated with input transaction costs can be detected.
In the smallest-area, off-farm labor regime, profits are


  a l f 1  w1l f

(27)

Using the fact that the marginal product of family labor must equal w1 it follows that the regression
ln    0  1 ln a

(28)
yields

1  1 ,

(29)

which (correctly) implies that profits exhibit constant returns to scale in this regime. In the autarchy
regime, at higher land area levels, however, labor is constrained at the family endowment l . The
same regression yields
(30)

1  1 / (1 

(1   )(a / l )  w1
) 1
 (a / l )

where the numerator in the fraction is the positive amount by which the marginal product of labor
exceeds the variable component of the wage, w1 . Thus, in the autarchy regime there are decreasing
returns to scale, the marginal effect of land area in this range decreases with area. Finally, in the
regime in which hired labor is employed on farm and transaction costs diminish proportionally with
scale
(31)

1  1 / (1 

w0
) 1,
 a le1

and there are increasing returns - β1 rises with land area.
In sum, as acreage increases in the labor-only model, the marginal effect of land area on
profits is initially constant, then negative, and then positive. Testing for the existence of transaction
costs in the labor market, if labor market transaction costs are the source of scale economies, thus
entails a search for this pattern of profit-function β1 coefficients by land area. If farm machinery is
not employed at low acreages, as our model simulations imply, the profit-function approach, but not
estimates from a production function, will correctly identify the scale dis-economies associated with
labor market transaction costs - that is, the decrease in profitability with acreage.
The uptick in the marginal effect of land on profitability beyond a land area threshold can be
explained by both the presence of labor market transaction costs and the employment of farm
machinery that is characterized by scale economies in capacity. This is because estimates of the effect
24

of land size on farm profits by land area will also reflect machine capacity scale economies and
pricing. To see this we incorporate into the Cobb-Douglas production function machine scale
economies as in the model with   0 so that e  mq(1  q /  (a)). Profits optimized with respect to
machine capacity, in this special case, are therefore
  a ( m (a )

(32)

1   1
1  
)  ( p ( ( a )
) )m
(2   ) 2
2 

Using the fact that the first-order condition for machine hours must be satisfied, a regression of ln
profits on ln area
(33)

ln    0  1 ln a

yields the coefficient
1  1 

(34)

aq 1     '  a 

   a    a   q 

.

The profit function parameter is again a function of land area, and is greater than 1 if  '(a)  0 .26
We first test for varying β1 coefficients in the profit function by land size. As noted, an initial
decline in the β1 coefficient as farm scale increases is consistent with the existence of labor market
transaction costs. We estimated a locally-linear profit equation using LWFCM of the following form:
yijt = β0(aij) + β1(aij)aij + G βn(aij)Xijt + δjt(aij) + ηijt(aij)
where the yijt are total profits over the kharif season for a farmer i in village j in year t; the Xijn are soil
characteristics, the δjtk are village/time fixed effects (capturing village-level time-varying input prices
and weather); and the ηijt are time-varying land specific iid errors. Figure 16 plots the coefficient β1
and its 95% confidence interval by farm size. The figure corresponds to the implications of the
model in which there are decreasing returns to scale at smaller farm sizes, as larger farms first use
sub-optimal amounts of labor and then employ more-expensive low-hour hired labor. Of course, the
subsequent rise in β1 - increasing returns - is consistent both with a fall in average labor costs due to
the proportionate decline in the fixed cost component of hired labor expenditures and with the
exploitation of scale economies associated with farm machinery.
The model incorporating fixed transaction costs in the labor market implies that the smallest
26

Similarly, estimation of a production function identifies the existence of scale economies if they are
due to machine capacity pricing and capacity economies of scale. For example, if the total rental cost of
machinery, xm  pq m , is used as a measure of the capital input, as is common in estimating agricultural
production functions, the regression of ln y = β0 + β1 ln a + β2 ln xm yields β1 = α + a(1 - ν)(1 - α)[φN(a)/φ(a)]
and  2  1   . Thus, the sum of the β’s exceeds 1 if  '( a )  0 and   1 .
25

farms are efficient producers because they spend within each operation some of their time to offfarm work and thus allocate the optimal amount of family labor time to own production, priced at
the marginal cost of labor. As land size increases less time is spent off farm until all family labor time
is devoted to own farm production. We should therefore observe days of off-farm work by family
members to decline with land size. This is what we see in Figure 17, which plots the lowesssmoothed relationship between average days per month male and female members of land-owning
households spend in off-farm work. For the smallest farms, prime-age males spend on average
almost 16 days of the month working off farm; at 10 acres this drops to only 6.5 days.27
If at higher acreages farmers are reluctant to hire labor because of transaction costs then
total own farm labor costs (family + hired) per acre should also fall with land size. The first and
second columns of Table 4 report village/year fixed effects estimates of the effect of farm size on
the log of labor costs per acre without and with, respectively, controls for land quality. Both
estimates indicate that as farm size increases the labor-land ratio declines - for every one acre
increase in farm size there is a four percent fall in per-acre labor costs. The estimates are similar
when we control comprehensively for all farm-level characteristics (wealth, ability) by using
farmer/year fixed effects, reported in columns there and four of the table. - as plot size increases,
per-acre labor costs decrease by about four percent. However, the fall in per-acre labor costs could
be simply due to the substitution of machinery for labor. We need to show that transaction costs
play a significant role in the decline of labor intensity at lower acreages.
b. Direct tests of the role of labor market transaction costs in determining scale economies.
To test more directly that a mechanism for the U-shape in the marginal effect of land size on
profits is due to changes in unit labor costs by land size, we first plotted the relationship between the
real average hourly wage and farm size. In the ICRISAT data, family labor is priced at the marginal
or eight-hour wage (as if fixed costs were fully born by the employer), while hired labor is priced at
the wage actually paid. Since the latter will be higher per-hour for low-hour hired labor according to
the wage schedule, we should see that moving from the smallest farms to the largest, the average
hourly wage first rises, as farms initially employ only family labor and then employ low-hour hired
labor. At some threshold, the average wage paid falls as less low-hour labor is used. This is what we
see in Figure 18.
To further test that the marginal land size effect on unit labor costs differs by land size, we
27

There is no relationship between farm size and total days worked in the month. Own farm
production time concomitantly rises with farm size
26

estimated the relationships between the fraction of operations in the kharif season that employ
low–hour (hours<=6) daily hired male labor, hired tractor services, and hired bullock pair services
and the corresponding average hourly wages for each. We allow the marginal effect of land size to
differ by land size by employing a quadratic in land. The estimates, which include village/year fixed
effects and the plot characteristics, are reported in Table 5. For all three factors we see that the
fraction of low-hour operations declines with farm size, and for both hired male labor and hired
bullock pairs so do average wages. Thus, these estimates account for the rise in profitability per acre,
and fall in unit-costs, above some threshold due to the declining use of high-cost hired labor and
hired bullock pairs. The exception is for tractors, for which the effect is statistically insignificant but
positive. This may reflect the fact that on larger farms more expensive tractors with more capacity
are hired, an issue we will discuss below.
There are three limitations to the estimates in Table 5. First, there may be incomplete control
for land characteristics, which may be correlated with land size and with input use. Second, the
model and the labor cost figure suggests that a quadratic specification will not fully capture the
change in the marginal effect of labor demand with farm size. Third, farm acreage is positively
correlated with farmer wealth, so the acreage effects will in part reflect wealth effects. To remedy
these limitations, we exploit the plot-specific panel feature of the data and intertemporal rainfall
variation to estimate using plot fixed effects the effects of rainfall on plot-specific input usage and
average input costs by plot size.28
For most levels of rainfall in the semi-arid tropics in which the ICRISAT farmers are
located, increases in rainfall increase input productivity and thus should increase input use. The
exceptions are inputs that are employed in the planting stage, which principally occurs before the
major component of the rainfall realization is known. Tractor use is mostly confined in the sample
to planting-stage operations (tillage, plowing). Thus we use tractor employment as a placebo rainfall should neither affect tractor hours nor the average per-hour rental price of tractors. On the
other hand, for small plots higher levels of rainfall will increase average wages if the additional
28

Plot size and not just total farm size will matter for input costs as long as operations differ across
plots in the same time period. To gage the synchronicity of plot operations, we exploited the daily calendar of
operation start dates in the survey. We used these to compute the standard deviation of the start date of each
operations across plots for farmers with two or more plots and the standard deviation of the distribution of
average operation-specific start dates across farmers in the same village. Note that if in all operations the days
of initiation were the same, the average standard deviations would be zero. Appendix Table 1A in the
appendix reports these results, which show that the average standard deviations in operation start dates across
plots for the same farmer are significantly different from zero and almost as large as those characterizing the
synchronicity of operations across farmers..
27

rainfall induces the hiring of low-hour post-planting labor while for the larger plots, increases in
rainfall induces a shift from low- to normal-hour operations and average input costs decline.
We first establish that rainfall does indeed increase plot-level productivity and affects the
demand for inputs. In the first column of Table 6 plot fixed-effects estimates of rainfall and rainfall
squared on kharif-season profits from each plot are reported. As expected, increases in rainfall
increase profits. And, in the second column, the estimates indicate that increases in rainfall also
increase the number of hours of hired labor employment and hired bullock pairs, but the latter
effect is only statistically significant at the .07 level (one-tailed test), consistent with bullocks being
primarily used in the early stages of the production cycle. The effect of rainfall on tractor hours, as
expected, is not statistically significant by conventional standards and is economically insignificant as
well. In parallel, an increase in rainfall decreases both average hired male labor and bullock rental
costs, but has no effect on the hourly cost of tractors.
Having found that variation in rainfall on a given plot affects its profitability, the number
hired labor hours, and per-hour hired labor costs on average, we then estimated the effects of
rainfall on the fraction of operations on the plot that employ low-hour hired male labor and the
average wage paid by plot size, using LWFCM. The plot fixed-effect estimates of the effects of
rainfall at mean rainfall by plot size on low-hour labor use, and the associated 95% confidence
interval, are reported in Figure 19. The figure is consistent with the shifting of regimes of labor
employment in the model - at small plot sizes, increases in rainfall statistically significantly increase
hired low-hour labor use while for larger plots low-hour labor operations are statistically significantly
reduced when rainfall increases.29 And in Figure 20, among the larger plots increases in rainfall
statistically significantly reduce average hourly hired labor costs.30
4. Identifying Equipment Scale Economies as a Source Farm Scale Economies: the Case of Sprayers.
Figure 6 indicates that beyond a threshold plot size there are positive scale economies that
continue up through the largest land size. Our model implies that if the reduction in the importance
of input transaction costs were the only source of scale economies, or if machinery was employed by
larger farms only to completely eliminate the use of hired labor, then larger farms would be no more

29

Because, as noted, plot size and farm size, and thus farmer wealth, are positively correlated in the
data, the rainfall coefficients at small plot sizes may be underestimated due to credit-market or liquidity
constraints on the ability of small farmers to employ additional hired labor. More relaxed liquidity or credit
constraints for larger farmers, however, cannot explain the negative effect of rainfall on per-unit labor costs.
30

The effects of rainfall on per-acre profits does not vary by plot size over the full range of plot sizes.
28

productive than the smallest farms unless there are also machinery-specific economies of scale,
which is not what we observe in our sample, or across the world. In this section we adduce indirect
and direct evidence on machine scale economies, inclusive of estimation of capacity pricing
schedules and the parameters of the effective capacity function, the fundamental components of
such scale economies.
As in most data sets describing farming where mechanized equipment is used, we see that
larger farms are more likely to be using mechanized farm equipment, as shown in Figure 21 for
tractors and sprayers. There has been scant evidence, however, on the relationship between machine
capacity and scale. The data on usage of machinery, as seen in Figure 22, is suggestive of the rise in
machine capacity with farm scale - while average hours of equipment use per acre first increases with
scale, above 12 acres per-acre use of both types of equipment declines with farm size. This decline in
machine use on a per-acre basis as farm size increases among larger farms is consistent with machine
capacity scale economies. However, these patterns are not directly informative about whether
machine capacity actually increases with farm size, whether there are scale economies in capacity due
to non-linear capacity pricing, or at what scale, if any, capacity scale economies dissipate completely.
To address these issues we need a measure of machine capacity.
The capacities of machines used by farmers are rarely, if ever, available in data sets based on
household surveys from low-income countries. The ICRISAT data set, however, permits the
computation of capacity for one type of equipment - sprayers. This is because there is information
on the amount of material sprayed - weedicide and insecticide - as well as information on hours of
sprayer usage by plot and operation. These data can thus be used to compute capacity - amount
sprayed per hour. Sprayer capacity is typically given in spray rates for a given nozzle size - material
volume per time unit. The relevance of this measure for farming scale is that flow rates translate
directly into area sprayed per hour, given a target amount of material per area.
Another advantage of sprayer technology is that we can exploit the information on input use
by operation to directly measure the labor savings from spraying. This is because an important
alternative to spraying for protecting plant nutrients is weeding, which is typically done manually.
The data provide the hourly rental rate for the sprayer used and labor usage for both spraying and
weeding operations. Figure 23 displays the relationships between per-acre expenditures on sprayers
and on the labor used in spraying and weeding. As can be seen, as farm size increases farmers are

29

using more expensive, and thus, as we will see, higher-capacity sprayers;31 and weeding labor costs
per -acre plummet while per-acre labor time used in spraying only slightly increases with scale.
We focus on sprayer technology so that we can for the first time obtain direct evidence from
data in a low-income setting on how capacity heterogeneity in equipment contributes to economies
of scale in agriculture that persists above a farm (plot) size threshold, conditional on machine use.
This, of course, does not mean that sprayer technology is the sole source of economies of scale due
to mechanization. But spraying weedicide and insecticide is an important operation. Spraying labor
costs alone account for 13.6% of total input costs in the Kharif season. And as can be seen in Figure
22 there are more hours of use of sprayers at every land size than hours of use for tractors, the next
most used machinery.
The data on asset ownership from the last round of the ICRISAT survey indicates that
ICRISAT farmers use two types of sprayers - manual sprayers, whose median cost in 2014 is 700
rupees, and power sprayers, whose median cost is 2700 rupees. Of the 10% of farmers who own a
sprayer, 25% own a power sprayer. Table 7 reports, based on these data, regressions of tractor
ownership, ownership of any sprayer, and, conditional on owning a sprayer, ownership of a power
sprayer on land size and land wealth (based on the farmer’s own assessment of the rental value of
the land). As can be seen scale, not just wealth, matters for equipment ownership: net of wealth,
farmers with more land area are more likely to own a tractor and sprayer; and they are more likely to
own a power sprayer if they own any sprayer.32
Even among power sprayers, however, there is heterogeneity in capacity. Table 8 provides
information taken from the web site of an Indian purveyor of power sprayers (KrisanKraft) that
provides power sprayer prices by precisely the measure of capacity we can construct from the
ICRISAT data - the amount a sprayer can broadcast in litres per hour. A notable feature of the
listing is that there are substantial differences in sprayer capacities - the spray rate of the highestcapacity power sprayer is over 13 times that of the lowest-cost model. More importantly, the posted
price schedule exhibits economies of scale in sprayer capacity, the sprayer price per unit of capacity
31

The per-hour price of the sprayer used increases monotonically with acreage. As noted, the average
hourly wage falls with acreage at medium farm sizes and is constant at larger farm sizes.
32

The market value of land fully captures land quality in a well-functioning market. However, the
effect of scale conditional on the value of land may under-estimate scale economies because the value of land
may reflect in part the existence of scale economies, with per-acre rental prices varying positively with land
size. Over all acreages we find that the reported rental prices of individual plots do indeed rise with total
acreage.
30

decreases as capacity increases.33
The survey data on input usage suggest that farmers are exploiting economies of scale in
spraying. Table 9 reports village/year fixed effects estimates of the effects of land size on the use of
any sprayer, on weeding hours per acre, on sprayer hours per acre, on the log of the price of the
sprayer used, and on the sprayer flow rate (capacity) net of the effects of the land quality variables.
These estimates indicate that net of year-village effects, larger landowners use pricier and highercapacity sprayers and larger landowners spend less time per acre in both spraying and weeding
compared with smaller farmers.
To test directly for scale economies in spraying and the limits, if any, to sprayer scale
economies we use the structure of the model, simultaneously estimating the effective capacity
function  ( a ) and the key parameter of the price function  from the information on the capacity
and per-hour rental prices of the sprayers used by the ICRISAT farmers. The challenge for
estimation is that we observe only the capacity of the sprayer that is used by the farmer: capacity and
the per-capacity price are choice variables. As a consequence we use GMM using land area and land
area squared as instruments.
Equation (14) solves for the optimal choice of q and embeds within it the effective capacity
function and the capacity pricing parameter  . It also contains, however an additive term that
includes the village wage rate w and the base price p of the capacity pricing schedule, which may be
endogenously determined. We thus rearrange (14) and difference across randomly selected pairs of
households i and i’ in each village j to eliminate w and p in (14). Taking the log (12), we then get
moment conditions of the following form
(14)

 1    q    a   (2   ) q  1 1    q    a   (2   ) q  1

ij
ij
ij
i' j
i' j
i' j


E
aij , a i ' j   0 .


  aij   2 qij
  ai ' j   2 qi ' j















E ln( xij )   ln( qij )  ln( xi ' j )   ln( qi ' j )  0 aij , ai ' j  0 .

(14)

We parameterize   a )  b0  b1a  b2 a 2 and employ GMM using land area and land area squared as
instruments to and the bk .
33

We will formally test below whether the sprayer capacity ν parameter is less than one in the
KrisanKraft price schedule and in the ICRISAT data based on the sprayers rented by the farmers.
31

If b1>0 and b2<0, we can identify a maximum farm scale at which further increases in
acreage could not exploit existing equipment scale economies. This establishes the land size at which
per-acre profits are maximized - the technologically-determined optimal land size at which further
increases in scale would not increase productivity but below which, given that b1>0, farms are less
productive net of costs. It is important to note that we can only identify the farm scale upper bound,
if any, based on machinery that is actually available to the ICRISAT farmers. Machinery scale
economies for farm sizes beyond the maximum scale of the farms in the population, if any, cannot
be estimated because machinery for such farm sizes would not be marketed - they would not be
available for rent or purchase. Farmers (and policy-makers) would thus have limited knowledge of
how expansion of scale beyond that in the population would reap benefits via machine scale
economies.
More importantly, finding a maximum located at the upper tail of the actual land distribution
would suggest an equilibrium trap - no single farmer would attempt to expand land size beyond this
truly local maximum because there are no available machines that could be used to exploit the
increase in scale. However, if there were a land consolidation so that a sufficient number of farms
were above this threshold, there might be enough demand for higher-capacity machinery to support
a market for them. There would then be enhanced farm efficiency at larger scale than is found in the
setting.
Table 10 reports the GMM estimates of the effective capacity and pricing function
parameters and their robust standard errors. All parameters are precisely estimated. We can reject the
hypothesis that ν = 1 and thus that there are no scale economies arising from the cost of higher
capacity machines. We can also compare our estimate of ν based on the sprayers used by the
ICRISAT farmers to that characterizing the price schedule for the four power sprayers sold by
KrisanKraft, listed in Table 8, and to that for four power sprayers offered in the United States, as
surveyed in Stiles and Stark (2016). The estimated ν’s are reported in Table 11. As can be seen, our
GMM estimate of ν for the sprayers used by ICRISAT farmers is comparable to that for the
KrisanKraft sprayers that are sold across India. However the estimated India sprayer ν is more than
double that for the sprayers sold in the United States - economies of scale are evidently substantially
greater for the power sprayers available in the United States.
The estimates of the bk indicate that  (a)  0 . Thus, smaller farms are less cost-effective than
larger farms, given that ν is substantially less than one. The estimates also indicate that there is a land
scale at which effective capacity reaches a maximum. The point estimate of the maximum is 24.5
32

acres, with a 95% confidence interval of  3.6 acres. The 2014 Census of all households in the 20
ICRISAT VLS villages indicates that only 1.1% of households owning land have total landholdings
above even the estimated lower bound of the maximum (20.9 acres). As expected, there are
essentially no farms that could exploit further scale economies, given the sprayers that are available.
It does not suggest, as noted, that larger farms than are observed in the ICRISAT area would not be
more productive; rather it is consistent with an equilibrium trap in which none of the largest farmers
has an incentive to expand given the available sprayers in India. Of course, that most farms are
below this maximum, conditional on the local availability of machinery, implies that there are other
barriers to land consolidation, resulting in an excess number of farmers.
How does variation in ν affect the choice of machine capacity q and machine and labor usage
m and l? To gage the magnitudes of these effects using our estimates, we calibrate the additional
parameters of the model, enhancing the production technology to allow for n non-plant-protection
factors whose normalized input price is set to one:

 (a, n, l , q, m)  po a n  ( ( l )  (1   )(q (1 

q
)m) )(1   )/   n  wl  ( w  pq q )m
 (a)

For the rest of the parameters of the model, we set α = 0.27, β = 0.65,, and ω = 0.83 by calculating
factor shares from average weeding cost, spraying cost, other input costs and the value of output.
We set θ = 1 (one worker per machine), as it is the mode based on the data on machine and labor
hours. The values of ξ = 0.3 and δ = 0.65 are set to match the level and change with respect to scale
of average weeding and spraying costs. The base-cost of sprayer capacity pq = 3.7 is determined
based on the average sprayer rental cost net of capacity using the estimate of ν. The value p0 = 33.8
matches average profits given other information. The wage w = 21 is set to the average wage for a
full 8-hour day.
Table 12 contains the calibrated elasticities and their computed standard errors, based on the
sprayer GMM error covariance matrix for farms at the median (3 acres) of the farm size distribution
in the ICRISAT villages.34 The first three rows display the elasticities with respect to the change in
34

Let K1  n, m, l , q  denote the vector of endogenous variables, K 2  a,  ,  , ,  ,  , w, po , pq  the

vector of calibrated parameters, K 3   , b 0 , b1 , b2  , the vector of estimated parameters, and K4 < K2,K3> the
combined vector of exogenous variables. Then an analytic expression for the matrix of implicit derivatives is
1

 d 
dK1
d
 
 ( K1 , K 2 , K 3 )

dK 4 '
 dK1dK1 '  dK1dK 4 '

33

the ν . The estimates suggest that a reduction in the sprayer price slope parameter ν from that faced
by ICRISAT farmers to that characterizing the price schedule for US power sprayers would increase
the capacity of the sprayer chosen by 5%, increase sprayer hours by 23.3% and reduce weeding
hours by 3% even for these very small farms.
The estimates also indicate how changes in wage rates affect plant protection inputs, with
endogenous sprayer capacity choice. In particular, a doubling of the wage reduces the usage of
sprayers by 76%, reflecting the fact that each hour of sprayer use is assumed to require one hour of
labor, but reduces weeding hours by 130%. The disproportionate decline in weeding hours reflects
the substitution of sprayer capacity for labor, as sprayer capacity increases by 3% in response to the
wage change. Finally, sprayer capacity choice is considerably more sensitive to scale than to wage
rates: a doubling of farm size (in this case to only 6 acres) would increase the capacity of sprayers
used by 30% and increase sprayer use by 140%. The increase in scale, which pushes up the capacity
and use of sprayers, results in a decline in the per-acre number of weeding hours by 10%, reflecting
again the substitution between mechanized spraying and labor-intensive weeding in protecting plant
nutrients.
5. Conclusion
Much of the recent literature on economic development in agriculture has focused on the
adoption of new technology. The thrust of the argument is that productivity differences across
countries are importantly driven by the fact that farmers in low income countries do not have access
to the same types of seeds and inputs that are available in other countries. One of the salient
differences in agricultural sectors between countries of very different productivities, however, the
scale of operations, has been relatively ignored.35 The evidence on persistent differences in
productivity within countries associated with scale cannot be easily understood to be a consequence
We use the delta method to compute an estimate of the standard errors of these derivatives. If Ω is the
variance-covariance of the estimates of K3 then for any particular element γij of Γ:
d  dK1 d  ij
d  dK1 d  ij

)( ij

)'
Var ( ij )  ( ij
dK1 ' dK 3 ' dK 3 '
dK1 ' dK 3 ' dK 3 '
where dK1 / dK 3 ' is just a sub-matrix of dK1 / dK 4 ' . This expression is evaluated at the estimated values of K3
and K2 and the calibrated parameters. Note that because the analytic expressions for the implicit derivatives
depend both on the estimated parameters and the endogenous variables, the variance of the estimated
derivative depends both directly on the variance-covariance of the estimated parameters and indirectly
through the effects of this variance-covariance matrix on the estimated optimal endogenous variables.
35

Seed technologies across low-income and developed-country agriculture are in fact not that
different. Most of the cotton grown by the ICRISAT farmers is modern BT cotton, with cotton being the
second most cultivated crop by area planted.
34

of differential lack of access to technologies given evidence on the transmission of technologies
between farmers over time. If farmers within an area have equal access and markets for inputs work
reasonably well, marginal products should be equated across farmers and thus it is unclear why there
should be any differences in productivity across farms. Moreover, despite the global differences in
farm productivity indicating higher productivity among larger farms, almost all of the evidence from
within low-income countries suggests that agricultural productivity and scale are inversely related
over the full distribution of farm sizes observed in those countries. Understanding what lies at the
source of these differentials by scale may thus be indicative of important barriers to development in
rural areas of low-income countries.
In this paper we examined unique data from India that allows us to look at agricultural
operations among a wider distribution of farm scales than is typically observed in low-income
countries because of the over-sampling of larger farms. We found a distinctive U-shaped pattern in
which both small and large farmers are more productive, in terms of both yield and profitability,
than intermediate sized farmers. This pattern replicates within one rural setting what is observed
across countries, with productivity decreasing in scale for smaller farms and increasing in scale for
larger farms. We showed that these productivity patterns by scale are not attributable to differences
in measured aspects of land quality. We also established that measurement error in area, that might
lead to high profitability per acre on small farms, is small and does not importantly explain the
observed patters. In addition we found that the U-shape pattern is observed across plots for the
same farmer, thus ruling out the importance of credit access as the main explanation of higher
profitability among large farmers.
We proposed two alternative mechanisms that drive productivity differences by scale and
can account together for the U-shape patter by scale across countries of the world and in India. We
first considered the role of fixed costs in the hiring of labor and other inputs. We provided evidence
that in fact many workers work for less than a full day, that the hourly price of a workers is higher
when workers are used for part of day, and that intermediate sized farmers are most likely to employ
workers part time. A similar pattern is observed for rented equipment. The implication of this
pattern is that small farmers will be relatively efficient because the shadow price of family worker
time is set by the outside market, as most smallholders work part-time off farm. As farm size grows
however, the farm moves to autarchy and is reluctant to take on hired workers for just a few hours
per operation. This leads to lower yields and profitability per acre. Eventually, this strategy proves
costly and there is discrete jump upward in total work per acre due to the hiring of non-family
35

workers.
Transaction costs in hired inputs can explain the U-shaped relationship between size and
productivity, but cannot explain the continuous rise in profitability by scale beyond a threshold of
farm size. The second mechanism we focus on to explain this component of the U-shape is the
adoption of machine technology that is differentially adapted to farm size. The idea is that higher
capacity machines do more work per hour and that the cost of these higher machines does not
increase proportionately with capacity. However, large machines cannot be used at full capacity on
small farms or plots. As a result large farmers use more productive machines and small farmers, if
they use machines at all, use less productive machines that are also less cost-effective. This leads to
an increase in yield and profitability as farm size increases.
We focused in particular on power sprayers because we are able to measure capacity based
on time use and the amount that is sprayed. We showed that sprayers fit well with our model optimal sprayer capacity increases with farm size and the shadow price of sprayer capacity increases
less than proportionally as capacity increases. The mechanisms of hired-input transaction costs and
economies of scale in machinery together allowed us to replicate the patterns of agricultural
profitability and input costs per acre by farm size that are observed in our data and across countries
of the world. Based on our parameter estimates, we found in particular that in our sample,
economies of scale peter out at the very top of the land distribution (25 acres), suggesting that
average farm size in India is, along this one dimension of technology that we can precisely estimate,
too small - there are too many farms. We also find that the pricing of power sprayer capacity in India
exhibits less scale economies than in the United States. Indian farmers as a consequence use less
sprayer capacity and employ more weeding labor than they would if they has access to US sprayer
technology. However, this difference in labor use and associated loss in productivity due to differing
technologies is substantially less than the productivity differences across small and large farms in
India.
Our results thus suggest that there are barriers to agricultural productivity growth that may
not be easily overcome through individual investment decisions or cross-country technology
transfer. First, on the labor cost side, the fixed costs of the hiring represent real costs associated with
travel to farms and searching for work that may be particularly acute in relative sparsely-populated
areas and/or areas where a small fraction of total land is arable. These geographic features can
largely be taken as exogenous. Moreover, fluctuating labor demand is intrinsic to most agricultural
production processes. Labor in agriculture does not substitute well across time because certain tasks
36

must be carried out a specific times in the growing season. Farmers needing to execute a task cannot
simply wait until they have enough undone tasks accumulated to hire a worker for a full day. Nor are
multi-day contracts that reduce search costs likely to be a panacea as demand for labor is episodic.
There is the potential to aggregate tasks by expanding acreage, but since different tasks will have
different levels of labor demand, the optimal farm size for one stage will not be the same as the
optimal farm size for other tasks.
Second, the ability to make profitable use of larger farms depends critically on access to and
the pricing of larger-capacity machines. Again the episodic demand is likely to play a role. A single
large farmer set among smaller farmers is unlikely to be able to justify the purchase of a large
machine on his own. If there were multiple large farmers than one farmer might be the owner and
then rent it to other farmers. Indeed there is currently an active market for tractors in many Indian
villages. Our key finding that scale economies for sprayers have a limit that is precisely at the top of
the land-size distribution suggest an equilibrium trap. While we see the adoption of larger-scale
power sprayers, equipment such that as available to large Brazilian soy farmers is simply unavailable
in most parts of India because there are no farms of that scale to demand them. In short, without a
simultaneous expansion of large farms it is difficult to see how one expands the scale of available
technologies, but it is difficult to see how this expansion would take place if such technologies were
not available.
Finally, even barring cultural, economic, or legal barriers to the buying or selling of land, the
U-shaped profitability curve complicates the process of transition from profitable small-holder
agriculture to (more) profitable large-scale agriculture that makes use of hired labor. Land is likely to
be accumulated through a series of individual transactions. In a world of one-acre farmers one
would need twenty-five separate transactions among contiguous neighbors to get to an efficiently
sized farms based on our sprayer exercise. This number of transactions would be complicated even
in a relatively competitive market, but the need for contiguous plots raises important issues such as
hold-up problems that will fully extract the rents that would otherwise accrue to a farmer who puts
together a large farm.
In short, despite evidence of the potential gains to profitability of large farms, small farms
are likely to be the dominant force of production in low income countries for the foreseeable future
without external intervention. In India, the higher population density and increased availability of
equipment increases the potential to move to large farms relative to Sub-Saharan Africa, but it seems
unlikely that there will be a large-scale transition absent an expansion in high-paying employment
37

opportunities that draw workers out of the agricultural sector, thus raising wages and encouraging
farmers to expand machine usage. In other areas, such as Brazil we have seen a substantial transition
to large-scale agricultural production in many areas. This reflects the availability of large-scale
machines, the conversion of land that has previously been used for low intensity activities such as
grazing, and the development of an effective series of highly profitable export markets.
In summary, the documented differences in productivity by farm size that have received
substantial attention within countries over the years are not only indicative of underlying inequality
in rural areas. They are also a barometer for the efficacy of markets in the allocation of technologies,
workers, and ultimately land to their most productive usage. Imperfections in these markets
importantly underlie the differences in profitability within villages and the identification and
alleviation of these imperfections are ultimately required for the agricultural sector in low-income
rural areas to reach its full potential.
References
Ali, D. A, and K. Deininger. 2014. “Is there a Farm-Size Productivity Relationship in African
Agriculture? Evidence from Rwanda.” World Bank Policy Research Paper 6770, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Allen, Robert C. 1988. “The Growth of Labor Productivity in Early Modern English
Agriculture.” Explorations in Economic History 25, 117-146.
Assunção, Juliano J., and Luis H. B. Braido. 2007. “Testing Household-Specific
Explanations for the Inverse Productivity Relationship.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 89
(4): 980–90.
Barrett, C. B., M. F. Bellemare, and J. Y. Hou. 2010. “Reconsidering Conventional
Explanations of the Inverse Productivity-Size Relationship.” World Development 38 (1): 88-97.
Benjamin, D. 1995. “Can Unobserved Land Quality Explain the Inverse Productivity
Relationship?” Journal of Development Economics 46 (1): 51-84.
Bhalla, S. S., and P. Roy. 1988. “Misspecification in Farm Productivity Analysis: The Role of
Land Quality.” Oxford Economic Papers 40 55-73.
Binswanger-Mkhize, H.P, Camille Bourguignon, and Rogier van den Brink. 2009. Agricultural
Land Redistribution: Toward Greater Consensus. Washington D.C.: World Bank.
Binswanger, H.P., K. Deininger, and G. Feder. 1995. “Power Distortions Revolt and Reform
in Agricultural Land Relations.” In J. Behrman, and T.N. Srinivasan, ed. Handbook of Development
Economics, Volume III. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V.
Bivar, Venus. 2010. The Ground Beneath Their Feet: Agricultural Industrialization and the
Remapping of Rural France, 1945-1976. Department of History, University of Chicago Dissertation.
Cai, Zongwu, Mitali Das, Huaiyu Xiong, and Xizhi Wu. 2006. “Functional Coefficient
Instrumental Variables Models.” Journal of Econometrics 133 (1): 207-241.
Carletto, C., S. Savastano, and A. Zezza. 2013. “Fact or Artifact: The Impact of
Measurement Errors on the Farm Size Productivity Relationship.” Journal of Development Studies 103:
254-261.
38

Carter, Michael. R. 1984. “Identification of the Inverse Relationship between Farm Size and
Productivity: an empirical Analysis of Peasant Agricultural Production.” Oxford Economic Papers 36:
131-45.
Carter, M. R., and K. Wiebe. 1990. Access to Capital and its Impact on Agrarian Structure
and Productivity in Kenya. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 72: 1146-1150. 41
Collier, P., and S. Dercon. 2014. “African Agriculture in 50 Years: Smallholders in a Rapidly
Changing World?” World Development 63: 92-101.
Davis, C. Austin. 2016. “Why Did Sugarcane Growers Suddenly Adopt Existing
Technology?” University of Michigan.
Foster, A., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 1996. “Comparative Advantage, Information and the
Allocation of Workers to Tasks: Evidence from an Agricultural Labour Market.” The Review of
Economic Studies 63(3): 347-374.
Foster, A., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 2011. Are Indian Farms too Small? Mechanization, Agency Cost,
and Farm Efficiency. New Haven CT: Economic Growth Center, Yale University.
Hayami, Yujiro, and Keijuro Otsuka. 1993. The Economics of Contract Choice: An Agrarian
Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hazell, Peter. 2011. “Five Big Questions about Five Hundred Million Small Farms.” Paper
presented at the IFAD Conference on New Directions for Smallholder Agriculture, IFAD
Headquarters, Rome, Italy, 24-25 January, 2011.
Hazell, P., C. Poulton, S. Wiggins, and A. Dorward. 2010. “The Future of Small Farms:
Trajectories and Policy Priorities.” World Development 38(10): 1349-1361.
Hornbeck, Richard and Suresh Naidu. 2014. “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and
Economic Development in the American South.” American Economic Review 104(3): 963–990.
Huang, Jikan; Ruifa Hu; Jianmin Cao; and Scott Rozelle. 2008. “Training Programs and
In-the-field Guidance to Reduce China’s Overuse of Fertilizer Without Hurting Profitability.” Journal
of Soil and Water Conservation 63 (5): 165A-175A.
Jayne, T.S., J. Chamberlin, and Derek D. Headey. 2014. “Land pressures, the evolution of
farming systems, and development strategies in Africa: A synthesis.” Food Policy, 48: 1-17.
Kagin, J., E. Taylor, and A. Yúnez-Naude. 2015. Inverse Productivity or Inverse Efficiency?
Evidence from Mexico, Journal of Development Studies DOI:10.1080/00220388.2015.1041515.
Kimhi, A. 2006. “Plot Size and Maize Productivity in Zambia: Is there an Inverse
Relationship?” Agricultural Economics 35(1): 1-9.
Larson, D., K. Otsuka, T. Matsumoto, and T. Kilic. 2013. “Should African Rural
Development Strategies Depend on Smallholder Farms? “An Exploration of the Inverse
Productivity Hypothesis.” Agricultural Economics 45: 1-13.
Mazumdar, D. 1965. “Size of Farm and Productivity: A Problem of Indian Peasant
Agriculture.” Economica 32(126): 161-173.
Muyanga, Milu and T.S. Jayne. 2016. “Is Small Still Beautiful? The Farm Size-productivity
Relationship Revisited in Kenya.”
Catherine Morrison Paul, Catherine Morrison; Catherine Paul; Richard Nehring; David
Banker, and Agapi Somwaru. 2004. “Scale Economies and Efficiency in U.S. Agriculture: Are
Traditional Farms History?” Journal of Productivity Analysis 22(3): 185-205 .
Schultz, T.W. 1964. Transforming Traditional Agriculture. New Haven, CT: Yale University.
Press.
Stiles, Scott and C. Robert Stark, jr. 2016. “Estimating Farm Machinery Costs.” FSA21,
Division of Agriculture, Research and Extension, University of Arkansas.
Vollrath, D. 2007. “Land Distribution and International Agricultural Productivity.” American
39

Journal of Agricultural Economics 89(1): 202-216.
Yotopoulos, P.A., and L.J. Lau. 1973. “A Test for Relative Economic Efficiency: Some
Further Results.” Am. Econ. Rev. 63(1): 214–223.
Zaibet, L.T., and E.G. Dunn. 1998. “Land Tenure, Farm Size, and Rural Market
Participation in Developing Countries: The Case of the Tunisian Olive Sector.” Economic Development
and Cultural Change 46(4), 831-848.
Zhang, B., and A.C. Carter. 1997. “Reforms, the Weather, and Productivity Growth in
China’s Grain Sector.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 79(4): 1266-

40

Figure 1. Percent of Households with Operational Landholdings Below 10 Acres,
by Country
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

bi
a
om

a

a
C
ol

U
ga
nd

nz
an
i

Ta

er
ia
N
ig

na
G
ha

es
ili
p

pi
n

ia
Ph

In
d

on
es
ia

na

In
d

C
hi

a
C
an
ad

U
S

0

Figure 2. Soybean Yields (Metric Tons per Hectare) in 2016, by Country
(Source: USDA, 2016)
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
United
States

Canada

China

Indonesia

India

Philippines

Figure 3. Fertilizer Intensity (Kilograms per Hectare) in 2014, by Country
(Source: World Bank, 2016)
600

500

400

300

200

100

0
United
States

Canada

China

Indonesia

India

Philippines

Figure 4. Relationship Between Plot Value per Acre (Nigerian Naira)
and GPS-Measured Plot Size (Acres)
(Nigeria General Household Panel, 2015-16)

16000000
14000000
12000000
10000000
8000000
6000000
4000000
2000000
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 5. Cumulative Distributions of Owned Total Land and Land Plots (Acres),
By Sample and Census: ICRISAT VLS 2014

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Total landholdings - sample

0.4

Plots - sample
Total landholdings - Census

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 2 4 6

2 per. Mov. Avg. (Total
landholdings - Census)
2 per. Mov. Avg. (Plots sample)
2 per. Mov. Avg. (Total
landholdings - sample)
2 per. Mov. Avg. (Plots 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22sample)
24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46

Figure 6. Relationship Between Real Average Profits per Acre and Farm Size (Acres)
(ICRISAT VLS 2009-14)

6000

5500

5000

4500

4000

3500

3000
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

Figure 7. Measurement Error Effects: Profits and Owned Acreage
Coefficient Point Estimates, by Farm Acreage and Estimation Procedure
(ICRISAT VLS 2009)

14000

12000
OLS

10000

IV

8000

6000

4000

2000
0

5

10

15

20

Figure 8. Real Profits per Acre by Owned Area: Roles of Plot Quality and Farmer Characteristics
(ICRISAT VLS 2009-14)

7500
7000
Within Farmer, soil quality controls

6500
Across Farms, soil quality controls

6000

Across Farms, no soil quality controls

5500

2 per. Mov. Avg. (Across Farms, no soil
quality controls)
2 per. Mov. Avg. (Within Farmer, soil
quality controls)
2 per. Mov. Avg. (Across Farms, soil
quality controls)

5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Figure 9. Cost per Horsepower for Electric Motors and Submersible Pumps by Horsepower
(ICRISAT VLS Equipment Inventory, July 2011)
9000
8000

Electric motors

7000

Submersible pumps
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 10: Profits per acre by farm-scale:
simulation based on the model with only labor

Figure 11: Input costs per acre by farm-scale:
simulation based on the model with only labor

Figure 12: Average wage by farm-scale:
simulation based on the model with only labor

Figure 13: Profits per acre by farm-scale:
simulation based on the model with two labor stages

Figure 14: Profits per acre versus farm-scale:
simulation based on the model with and without machines

Figure 15: Labor and machine costs per acre versus farm-scale:
simulation based on the model with and without machines

Figure 16. LWFCM Estimates of the Effects of Land Size on Profits with 95% CI,
Net of Soil Quality and Time/Village Fixed Effects, by Farm Size
(ICRISAT VLS, 2009-14)

10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0

5

10

15

20

Figure 17. Average Days per Month Worked Off Farm, by Farm Size
Male and Female Workers Aged 21-59
(ICRISAT VLS 2014)

Figure 18. Average Hourly Wage Paid for Male Labor, by Farm Size
(ICRISAT VLS 2009-14)

20

19

18

17

16

15

14
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 19. LWFCM Plot Fixed Effect Estimates:
The Effect of Rainfall on the Fraction of Operations Using Low-Hours Hired Male Labor,
with 95% CI, by Plot Size (ICRISAT VLS 2009-14)
0.0003

0.0002

0.0001

0
0

-0.0001

-0.0002

-0.0003

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Figure 20. LWFCM Plot Fixed-Effect Estimates:
the Effect of Rainfall on the Average Male Wage, with 95% CI, by Plot Size
(ICRISAT 2009-14)
0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
0
-0.005

-0.01

-0.015

-0.02

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Figure 21. Fraction of Farms using Sprayers and Tractors, by Farm Size
(ICRISAT VLS 2009-14)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
Tractor

0.5

Sprayer

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 22. Per-Acre Equipment Hours for Tractors and Sprayers, by Farm Size
(ICRISAT VLS 2009-14)

3

2.5

Tractor

Sprayer

2

1.5

1

0.5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 23. Real Weeding and Sprayer Labor Costs and Total Sprayer Costs per Acre, by Farm Size
(ICRISAT VLS 2009-14)

1400.07
1200.07
1000.07

Weeding Labor Costs per Acre
Total Sprayer Costs per Acre
Sprayer Labor Costs per Acre

800.07
600.07
400.07
200.07
0.07
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

Appendix Figure A1. Lowess-Smoothed Relationship of Profits per Acre and Owned Plot Size,
Cotton Plots Only
(ICRISAT Survey, 2009-14)
9500
9000
8500
8000
7500
7000
6500
6000
5500
5000
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Appendix Figure A2. Lowess-Smoothed Relationship of Profits per Acre and Owned Area
(ICRISAT VLS Survey, 2009)
6000

5500

5000

4500

4000

3500

3000

2500
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Appendix Figure A3. Average Per-Acre Profit Residuals and Farm Size,
With Lowess-smoothed Average (ICRISAT VLS 2009)
20000

15000

10000

5000

0
0
-5000

-10000

-15000

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Appendix Figure A4. LWFCM Estimates of Predicted Per-Acre Profit Residuals on Farm Size,
with 95% CI, by Farm Size (ICRISAT VLS 2009)
0.0006
0.0005
0.0004
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0
0
-0.0001
-0.0002
-0.0003

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Table 1
Measurement Error Test: The Effect of Total Owned Area on Profits,
by Estimation Procedure, Using the Survey and Census Owned Land Self-reports in 2009
Variable
Estimation Procedure

Profits

Owned Land Survey

OLS

IV

OLS

4324.2
(1305.8)

4433.5
(1328.1)

-

Owned land - Census, sum of irrigated and
non-irrigated land

-

-

0.9637
(0.0128)

Village fixed effects

Y

Y

Y

306

306

306

Total owned land - survey, sum of plot
sizes

N

Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village level. Profits are for
the Kharif season.

Table 2
Does Land Quality Affect Estimates of the Relationship Between Real Output Value and Profits and Area?
(Kharif Seasons 2009-14)
Variable

Real Output Value

Real Profits

Farm size (acres)

9138.9
(676.3)

9053.4
(671.2)

-

-

3911.8
(501.4)

3871.9
(500.7)

-

-

Plot size (acres)

-

-

7390.6
(1463.8)

7548.6
(1506.0)

-

-

5841.8
(1474.0)

5939.5
(1521.7)

Village/year FE

Y

Y

-

-

N

Y

-

-

24 plot characteristics/categories

N

Y

N

Y

N

N

N

Y

Farmer/year fixed effects

N

N

Y

Y

N

N

Y

Y

H0: Plot and household
characteristics = 0 F(24,107) [p]

-

8.45
[.0000]

-

1.22
[.239]

-

3.61
[.0000]

-

1.22
[.245]

3,835

3,835

7,865

7,865

3,835

3,835

7,865

7,865

Number of observations

Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village/year level.

Table 3
Operation Fixed Effects Estimates:
the Percentage Difference in Hourly Wage Rates Paid for Eight Hours
versus Less than Eight Hours of Work, by Input
(2010 and 2011 ICRISAT Monthly Price Schedules)
Variable

Hired Male Labor

Hired Bullock Pair +
Driver

-0.332
(0.0314)

-0.223
(0.0454)

22.1
(9.34)

78.7
(39.6)

Percent working <8 hours

30.7

58.4

N

729

450

Worked eight hours in the day versus
<8
Mean wage (rupees)

Standard errors in parentheses. Hourly wage rates constructed by dividing reported daily
wages by the report of hours worked.

Table 4
Log Total Labor Costs per Acre and Area: Cross-Farm and Within-Farm Estimates
(Kharif Seasons 2009-14)
Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Farm size (acres)

-0.0576
(0.00750)

-0.0388
(0.00486)

-

-

Plot size (acres)

-

-

-0.0497
(0.0172)

-0.0437
(0.0168)

Village/year FE

Y

Y

-

-

24 plot characteristics/categories

N

Y

N

Y

Farmer/year fixed effects

N

N

Y

Y

H0: Plot and household characteristics =
0 F(24,107) [p]

-

3.99
[.0000]

-

8.17
[.0000]

3,177

3,177

5,786

5.786

Number of observations

Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village/year level.

Table 5
Plot Size and Fraction of Operations that Employ Hired Inputs at Low (<=6 ) Daily Hours and the Average Hourly Wage Paid,
by Input Type (Kharif Seasons 2009-14)
Variable
Input type

Fraction of Operations <6 Hours/Day

Average Hourly Wage

Hired Male
Labor

Hired
Tractor

Hired
Bullock Pair

Hired Male
Labor

Hired
Tractor

Hired
Bullock Pair

-.0165
(.00306)

-.0197
(.00247)

-.0170
(.00306)

-.183
(.0876)

1.25
(.769)

-.866
(.306)

.450
(.112)

.449
(.0682)

.555
(.117)

8.29
(3.23)

18.3
(32.4)

29.3
(10.9)

Village/year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

25 Plot and household characteristics

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

6,777

6,777

6,777

6,777

6,777

6,777

Plot size (acres)
Plot size squared x10-3

Number of observations

Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village/year level.

Table 6
Plot Fixed Effects Estimates: The Effects of Kharif-Season Rainfall on Profits, Hours Employed and Average Hourly Wage Rates,
by Input Type (Kharif Seasons, 2009-14)
Variable

Profits

Input type

-

Hired Male
Labor

Hired
Tractor

Hired
Bullock Pair

Hired Male
Labor

Hired
Tractor

Hired
Bullock Pair

Rainfall (mm)

38.1
(17.1)

.182
(.0701)

.00362
(.00316)

.0347
(.0248)

-.0158
(.00672)

.0130
(.0601)

-.0593
(.0355)

Rainfall squared x10-3

-21.2
(8.59)

-.107
(.0377)

-.00214
(.00161)

-.0500
(.0268)

.00778
(.00398)

-.0132
(.0282)

.0757
(.0331)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

3.09
[.0504]

4.18
[.0183]

0.99
[.3742]

1.97
[.1452]

3.47
[.0352]

0.28
[.7589]

3.02
[.0538]

5,291

3,987

4,016

2,523

3,987

4,016

2,523

Year and plot FE
H0: Rain and rain squared
= 0 F(2,n) [p]
Number of observations

Hours Employed

Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village/year level.

Average Hourly Wage

Table 7
Farm Size, Wealth and Mechanization (Ownership): 2014 ICRISAT VLS Round
Variable

Owns a Tractor

Owns a Power Sprayer

Sample
All Farmers

All Farmers

Farmers Who Own
Any Sprayer

Total owned land (acres)

.0125
(.00415)

.0107
(.00474)

.0133
(.00494)

Total rental value of land
(wealth) x 10-5

.0506
(.0146)

.0512
(.0166)

.0273
(.0144)

Village FE

Y

Y

Y

Percent owning

3.5

10.3

24.8

Number of farmers

652

652

288

Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village level. All specifications include the
head’s age and schooling.

Table 8
Cost and Capacities of Indian KrisanKraft Power Sprayers, 2017
Power sprayer

Litres/Hour

Current Price (Rupees)

180

7830

420

12260

1320

25900

2400

27900

Table 9
Estimates of the Effects of Owned Land Size
on Sprayer Use, Weeding Hours per Acre, Sprayer Hours per Acre, Log Sprayer Price per hour, and Sprayer Flow Rate

Any sprayer use

Weeding hours per
acre

Sprayer hours per
acre

Sprayer log price
per hour

Sprayer flow rate

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

0.006197
(0.0009879)

-0.5631
(0.1286)

-0.4063
(0.0853)

0.01335
(0.00669)

0.01360
(0.00667)

All land characteristics

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Village/year fixed effects

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

1,219

1,219

1,219

Variable
Estimation procedure
Owned area

N
3,374
3,374
Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village/year level.

Table 10
GMM Estimates of the Effective Capacity Function ö(a) and Price Parameter õ
Coefficient

Point Estimate

Robust SE

õ

0.316

0.124

b0

5.58

0.0375

b1

0.933

0.0343

b2

-0.0190

0.00211

H0: õ < 1, ÷2(1) [p]
Maximum land size (acres) = ö(a)N = -b1/(2*b2) = 0
N
Instruments: owned land area and land area squared.

30.4 [.0000]
24.5

1.84
617

Table 11
Estimates of Sprayer í, by Source
Country
Source

India

United States

ICRISAT Survey,
2009-2014

KrisanKraft Price
List (2016)

Stiles and Stark
(2016)

IVa

OLS

OLS

í

0.5802
(0.1200)

0.5209
(0.0605)

0.1458
(0.0789)

H0: í = 1, F(1,x)
[p]

÷2=12.2
[0.0005]

F(1,2)= 62.8
[0.0156]

1,219

4

Estimation procedure

N

F(1,2)=117.1
[0.0084]
4

Village/year fixed
Y
N
N
effects
a
First-stage includes log of owned area and all land quality characteristics. Standard error
clustered at the village/year level.

Table 12
Elasticities for Changes in Area, õ and Wage Rates on Sprayer Capacity (q), Sprayer Hours
(m) and Weeding Labor Hours (l) for a Farm of Median Size (3 acres),
from the Calibration and GMM Estimates
Coefficient

Point Estimate

Robust SE

dq/dõ

-0.0498

0.0728

dm/dõ

-0.233

0.113

dl/dõ

0.0299

0.130

dq/da

0.297

0.0124

dq/dw

0.0292

0.0399

dm/dw

-0.756

0.977

dl/dw

-1.365

0.112

Appendix Table A1
Mean Standard Deviations (Days) of First Operation Dates Across Plots
Within and Across Farmers, by Operation
(Kharif Season 2014)
Cross-Plot within
Farmera

Cross-Farmer within
Village

Sowing

9.55
(14.7)
N=713

14.8
(10.9)
N=946

Fertilizing

20.2
(19.7)
N=464

24.8
(14.2)
N=647

Weeding

16.6
(15.9)
N=737

19.3
(9.8)
N=984

Spraying

17.7
(19.5)
N=447

22.4
(12.0)
N=664

Threshing

13.7
(13.5)
N=468

18.0
(8.31)
(678

Harvesting

21.8
(19.7)
N=914

24.9
(12.4)
N=1,133

Operation/sample

a

Farmers with two or more plots. Standard errors in parentheses.

Appendix Table A2
Test of Farmer Ability Bias: Profit Function Estimates for Farm Size<11 Acres
(Kharif Season 2009)
Variable/Estimations Procedure

OLS

IV

IV

Owned cultivated land (acres)a

-725.7
(302.1)

-1284.9
(636.4)

-1254.5
(656.6)

Rental value of owned cultivated landa

0.1341
(0.0644)

0.2245
(0.0853)

0.2102
(0.1167)

Total wealtha

0.00596
(0.00298)

0.00763
(0.00624)

0.00720
(0.00667)

Total value of inheritance

-

-

0.000153
(0.000857)

Village FE

Y

Y

Y

Sargan overidentification test: ÷2(4) [p]

-

1.292
[.863]

1.270
[.736]

H0: Owned land orthogonal to the error,
Durbin-Wu-Hausman ÷2(1) [p]

-

0.4603
[.498]

-

H0: Owned land, land value, and total wealth
orthogonal to the error, Durbin-Wu-Hausman
÷2(3) [p]

-

1.408
[.704]

-

466

466

466

Number of observations

Standard errors in parentheses robust to error clustering and heteroscedasticity. aEndogenous
variable. Identifying instruments include total inherited land, the real value of inherited land,
the real value of nonland inherited wealth, average village rainfall since inheritance, the
standard deviation of rainfall since inheritance, and the two rainfall variables interacted with
inherited land area.

Appendix Table A3
First-Stage Profit Function Estimates for the Test of Farmer Ability Bias, Farm Size<11 Acres
(Kharif Season 2009)

Owned
Cultivated Land

Rental Value of
Owned Cultivated
Land

Total Wealth

Total inherited land area

0.563
(0.2436)

2205
(1492)

13749
(26989)

Real value of inherited land (x 10-5)

0.0148
(0.0194)

743
(119)

-1840
(2147)

Real value of inherited nonland
wealth (x 10-5)

0.291
(0.0603)

593
(369)

0.450
(0.0668)

Mean rainfall since year of
inheritance (MR)

0.00587
(0.00242)

8.16
(14.8)

-129
(268)

Standard deviation of rainfall since
year of inheritance (SDR)

-.0134
(0.00368)

-89.0
(22.5)

-387
(407)

MR x total inherited land area

-.00108
(0.000396)

-7.07
(2.43)

-13.2
(43.9)

SDR x total inherited land area

0.00336
(0.000668)

24.6
(4.09)

37.5
(74.0)

Y

Y

Y

Partial R2 of excluded instruments

0.338

0.291

0.142

H0: Excluded instruments = 0,
F(7,441) [p]

32.1
[.000]

25.9
[.000]

10.4
[.000]

466

466

466

Variable

Village FE

Number of observations

Standard errors in parentheses robust to error clustering and heteroskedasticity.

