                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW TAXING IS TAX FILING? USING REVEALED PREFERENCES TO ESTIMATE
                           COMPLIANCE COSTS.

                                      Youssef Benzarti

                                     Working Paper 23903
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23903


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




I thank Alan Auerbach, Stefano DellaVigna, Matthew Rabin and Emmanuel Saez for invaluable
advice, guidance, and encouragement throughout this project. I benefited from discussions with
Miguel Almunia, Pierre Bachas, Dan Benjamin, Kimberly Clausing, Erik Eyster, Alex Gelber,
Daniel Gross, Ben Handel, Nathaniel Hendren, Hilary Hoynes, Emiliano Huet-Vaughn, Damon
Jones, Louis Kaplow, Marc Kaufmann, Henrik Kleven, Wojciech Kopczuk, Laurence Kotlikoff,
David Laibson, Etienne Lehmann, Attila Lindner, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Takeshi Murooka,
Michaela Pagel, Colin Raymond, Alex Rees-Jones, Antonio Rosato, Jesse Rothstein, Josh
Schwartzstein, Dan Silverman, Joel Slemrod, Charles Sprenger, Justin Sydnor, Alisa
Tazhitdinova, Danny Yagan and seminar participants at the Tax Systems Conference (Oxford and
U. of Michigan), Paris II, CREST, Aarhus University, SITE Psychology and Economics, the US
Department of Treasury, Princeton, Harvard KSG, UCLA, McMaster, U. Mass Amherst and U.
of Toronto. Funding from the Robert D. Burch Center for Tax Policy and Public Finance is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Youssef Benzarti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Taxing Is Tax Filing? Using Revealed Preferences to Estimate Compliance Costs.
Youssef Benzarti
NBER Working Paper No. 23903
October 2017
JEL No. H24,H31,H83

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses a quasi-experimental design and a novel identification strategy to estimate the
cost of filing income taxes. First, using US income tax returns, I observe how taxpayers choose
between itemizing deductions and claiming the standard deduction. Taxpayers forgo tax savings
to avoid compliance costs, which provides a revealed preference estimate of the compliance cost
of itemizing. I find that this cost increases with income, consistent with a higher opportunity cost
of time for richer house-holds. Second, using my estimates and estimates of the time required to
file other schedules, I estimate the cost of filing federal income taxes. I find that this cost has
been increasing since the 1980’s and has reached 1.2% of GDP in the most recent years.


Youssef Benzarti
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall, 315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
benzarti@econ.ucla.edu
   Income taxes represent the largest source of tax revenue in the United States.
Today, 8.8% of GDP is transferred from individuals to the Federal Government
through income taxes. While there is an extensive literature documenting the
eﬃciency cost of taxation, we know less about the cost of collecting taxes. But
every year, 140 million taxpayers spend numerous hours gathering receipts and
statements, filling out various tax schedules and forms and submitting them to the
Internal Revenue Service (I.R.S.). A large literature documents that individuals
frequently leave “money on the table” in other domains because of transactional
costs which would suggest that the compliance costs of taxation are likely to be
very large.1
   This paper provides the first estimate of this cost using quasi-experimental
methods. I exploit the fact that taxpayers can choose between itemizing their
tax deductions or claiming the standard deduction. Itemizing deductions re-
quires some eﬀort cost but can provide large tax savings. Claiming the standard
deduction saves time and eﬀort but results in more taxes due.
    If compliance costs are non-existent, taxpayers should itemize if the benefit of
itemizing is greater than zero. With compliance costs, itemizing is only beneficial
if it reduces the tax bill by more than the cost of itemizing. This implies that if
compliance costs are non-zero, some taxpayers will claim the standard deduction
even though the sum of their deductions is greater than the standard deduction
amount. The main identification challenge is to diﬀerentiate individuals who fail
to itemize deductions because of compliance costs from individuals who claim the
standard deduction because their total deductions are smaller than the standard
deduction amount. This is particularly diﬃcult because taxpayers who claim the
standard deduction are not required to report their deductions, implying that
their true level of deductions is not observable in tax data.
   If individuals are forgoing tax benefits because of compliance costs, there
should be a missing mass in the density of deductions just above the standard
deduction threshold. I test this hypothesis by graphing the density of deductions
for years ranging from 1980 to 2006 using a stratified random sample of US tax
returns, weighted to be representative of the population of itemizers. The shape
  1
   See for example Currie      (2006),   Bertrand et al.   (2006)   and   more   recently
Bhargava and Manoli (2015).



                                         1
of the density function suggests the presence of a missing mass just above the
standard deduction. To confirm that this shape is due to taxpayers responding
to the standard deduction, I turn to a quasi-experimental design. Following a
large increase in the standard deduction amount, I observe a drop in the mass
of itemizers just above the post-reform standard deduction threshold. The post-
reform density is systematically lower than the pre-reform one just above the
post-reform standard deduction threshold and the two densities overlap further
away from the standard deduction. I ensure that no other reforms are aﬀecting
the densities of itemized deductions.2
   I use the missing mass to construct the distribution of forgone benefits. I find
significant heterogeneity among taxpayers. Some taxpayers still itemize even
when savings are modest and some forgo large tax benefits, resulting in a large
average cost of itemizing.
  If individuals switch to the standard deduction because they value their time
more than the benefits they can derive from itemizing, richer households should
forgo more tax benefits than poorer ones. To test this hypothesis, I break down
individuals by income deciles and repeat the estimation using the same iden-
tification strategy outlined above. The results show an increasing relationship
between forgone tax benefits and income - while controlling for the marginal tax
rate - consistent with the hypothesis that tax filing imposes a higher cost on
richer individuals because they have a higher marginal value of time.
   The presence of a missing mass just above the standard deduction is consistent
with taxpayers forgoing benefits to avoid the cost of itemizing. However, there
are three alternative explanations to the presence of the missing mass. The first
is that the standard deduction acts a concave kink point, eﬀectively changing the
price of a deduction. Behavioral responses to concave kink points predict that
taxpayers will respond to variations in marginal tax rates but should not respond
to variations in income while holding the marginal tax rate fixed. The fact that
forgone benefits increase with income - while controlling for the marginal tax rate
- supports the compliance costs explanation. A second alternative explanation
for the presence of a missing mass is that some taxpayers mistakenly believe that
  2
    My estimates are not aﬀected by the Alternative Minimum Tax, variation in marginal tax
rates and the phase out of the personal interest deduction in 1987.



                                            2
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audits are more likely when itemizing and switch
to the standard deduction to avoid the expected cost of an audit. To assess
this explanation, I conduct a survey of taxpayers to elicit their beliefs over audit
probabilities and audit costs. I find that the perceived expected cost of audits
would explain at most one fifth of the cost. A third alternative explanation is
that the uncertainty taxpayers face over the amount of deductions they can claim
drives them to not itemize. The cost I estimate is derived using taxpayers who
were itemizing the year before the reform and deductions are stable over time,
which implies that taxpayers should have a small uncertainty range over their
level of total deductions. I show that for this theory to explain the result, this
uncertainty range would need to be extremely large (±$14, 000).
   Next, I use the cost of itemizing to estimate the total cost of filing Federal
income taxes.3 I find that total filing costs are significantly larger than previously
estimated using surveys and this cost has been steadily increasing and reached
more than $200 billion (≃ 1.2% of GDP) in recent years. This increase has
occurred in spite of the rise in the number of electronic filers over time. It can
be explained by growth in the total number of filers – which has been faster
than growth of the US population – and an increase in the number of additional
schedules taxpayers have to file along with their 1040 form. To estimate total
costs, I proceed in the following way. First, I use the population of itemizers just
above the standard deduction to estimate key demographics likely to aﬀect the
cost of filing: income, use of tax preparers, electronic filing and dependents. With
these estimates, I can impute the cost of itemizing for non marginal itemizers.
Second, I use IRS survey estimates of the number of hours required to file each
tax schedule to infer the cost of filing other schedules from the cost of itemizing.
My approach relies on three key assumptions. The first is that controlling for
the demographics I estimate, the cost of filing for individuals just above the
standard deduction is similar for other filers. The second is that controlling for
the number of hours required to file a schedule, individuals do not dislike filing
a given schedule more than another i.e. spending an hour working on schedule
   3
    Filing costs include both the cost of filling out forms, record keeping, learning about the
law and sending documents to the IRS. I estimate the cost of filing the 1040 form, Schedule A,
Schedule B, Schedule C, Schedule D, Schedule E, Schedule F and Schedule SE. I do not have
information on Schedule R.


                                              3
A is equally costly as spending an hour working on any other schedule.4 The
third is that the IRS survey estimates of the number of hours required to file
each schedule are accurate.
   While the large magnitude of the costs could be explained by high levels of
aversion to filing taxes, I gather empirical evidence suggesting that taxpayers
procrastinate on filing their taxes which leads them to incur high costs. Procras-
tination makes two testable predictions: first, procrastinators will delay filing
until the deadline and second, taxpayers who file close to the deadline will forgo
more deductions. I provide empirical evidence consistent with both predictions
and show that late filing is a persistent behavior confirming that it is a systematic
bias.
    The results of this paper have implications in several dimensions. First, this
is the only paper to provide estimates of the cost of filing taxes using a quasi-
experimental design. The most related paper is Pitt and Slemrod (1989): they
estimate the cost of itemizing deductions using a censored model with unobserved
censoring thresholds using maximum likelihood and find a smaller cost of item-
izing of $107. They use estimators from Gronau (1973) and Nelson (1977) to
address the fact that the distribution below the standard deduction is unobserv-
able. While our approaches are related, my method is able to provide reduced
form demonstration of the existence of compliance costs without relying on a
structural model. In both cases, assumptions are required to estimate the mag-
nitude of the compliance costs, but fewer in my case.5 There is also a literature
that uses survey evidence to estimate compliance costs.6 Although informative of
the time spent filing taxes, it does not capture the preferences of taxpayers and
in particular any aversion to filing taxes or any behavioral biases. It also suﬀers
from the usual biases of surveys including high attrition rates and measurement
errors.7
   Finally, this paper adds to a long tradition in public economics emphasizing
the need to screen out applicants for welfare benefits by imposing high hassle
  4
      Complexity of the return is already included in the number of hours.
  5
      I discuss their approach in more details in appendix section A
    6
      See for example Slemrod (1989). The compliance costs estimated by this literature are
listed in table I.8.
    7
      Slemrod and Sorum (1984) and Slemrod (1989) report an attrition rate of 71.3%.



                                            4
costs8 such as waiting in line, filling out forms etc. If poorer individuals value
their time less – possibly because they are unemployed – then such policies can
successfully target them by screening out richer individuals. My results show that
this eﬀect is indeed true because richer individuals tend to forgo more benefits
than poorer ones. However, given how large hassle costs are, such policies could
be screening out too many individuals. In addition, time inconsistency could
lead to unwanted distortions such as screening out procrastinators versus non-
procrastinators rather than rich versus poor individuals.

1         Data and Institutional Background
1.1         The Decision to Itemize Deductions
    Taxpayers can reduce their taxable income by claiming deductions. Consider,
for example, a single person with an income of $150,000 in the 28% marginal tax
bracket. If she spends a total of $10,000 on deductible expenses, her tax liability
is reduced by $2,800. If instead she decides to claim the standard deduction –
which in 1989 was $3,100 – her tax liability is reduced only by $868.
    The decision to itemize deductions requires comparing two numbers: the sum
of itemized deductions to the standard deduction amount. Itemizing however is
administratively costly as it requires collecting several documents and working
through a separate tax form.
   Approximately two thirds of the population claim the standard deduction.
The standard deduction amount varies by filing status (single, joint, married
fling separately and head of household) and by whether the person is blind or
older than 65.

1.2         The Cost of Itemizing
   Itemizing deductions is a two-step process. First, the taxpayer has to keep a
record of all the expenses she wants to deduct during the year she is filing taxes
for, year t. Second, she has to file a separate form when itemizing: Schedule A.
   The majority of taxpayers itemize four types of deductions:
    • State and local income taxes: these are taxes paid in year t to the state or
          to the locality. They are reported on form W2 received in January of year
          t + 1. On average they represent 17% of total deductions.
    8
        Nichols et al. (1971) and Duclos (1995).

                                                   5
   • Mortgage interest: this is the interest paid to finance the main or second
     home of the taxpayer. It is reported on form 1098 which is received in
     January of year t + 1. On average they represent 40% of total deductions.
   • Real estate taxes: these are taxes paid on real estate owned by the taxpayer.
     They can be found in financial records or by calling the county tax assessor.
     On average they represent 14% of total deductions.
   • Charitable donations: any payment made for charitable purposes including
     to religious institutions. Except for vehicle donations in excess of $500,
         these payments are not subject to third-party reporting. There are, how-
         ever, documentation requirements for large donations.9 In addition, tax-
      payers need to keep records of their own receipts. On average charitable
      donations represent 12% of total deductions.
   In addition, some taxpayers can also deduct other taxes (sales taxes in some
years), other interest expenses (credit-card interest in some years), casualty or
theft losses, medical and dental expenses and miscellaneous deductions.
   Schedule A is relatively easy to fill out especially if the taxpayer only needs to
itemize the most common deductions outlined above. All she has to do is copy
numbers from form 1098, form W2 or charitable contribution receipts, sum them
up and copy the sum in the 1040 form. There are no complicated tax schedules
nor intricate tax operations. Record keeping is more time consuming as one has
to archive the various evidence of expenses to be able to recover them when the
tax season arrives. It is however easier to keep track of deductions that are third-
party reported given that taxpayers receive the W2 and 1098 in January of year
t + 1.

1.3       Data
   The dataset used to carry this analysis consists of annual cross sections of
individual tax returns. It is constructed by the IRS and called the Individual
Public Use Tax Files. They are commonly referred to as the Statistics of Income
(SOI) files. The data is available annually for the periods that I am analyzing.
The number of observation per year ranges from 80,000 to 200,000. The repeated
cross sections are stratified random samples where the randomization occurs over
the Social Security Number. The data over samples high-income taxpayers as well
  9
      Property donations in excess of $500,000 require an appraisal.


                                                6
as taxpayers with business income but weights are provided by the IRS and used
in this analysis to produce estimates representative of the total US population.
All the analysis in this paper uses these weights to reflect population averages.
In addition, I use a panel of tax returns known as the University of Michigan
tax panel. The panel covers 1979 to 1990 and contains the same variables as the
SOI files but has a smaller sample size (less than 40,000 observations per year).
Sample restrictions for each figure and table are detailed in appendix section C.

2      Missing Mass
   If some taxpayers are claiming the standard deduction when the sum of their
itemized deductions is greater than the standard deduction there should be a
missing mass just above the standard deduction threshold. I graph the density
of deductions for years 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005 in Figure 1 by bin
sizes of $2,000 in figure 1.10 The bin closest to the standard deduction only in-
cludes itemizers whose deductions are strictly larger than the standard deduction
amount. Notice that the density is systematically low just above the standard
deduction and then increases and peaks 2 to 3 bins away. This holds true across
all years from 1980 to 2006 and for all filing status. Since I cannot observe the
distribution of itemizers below the standard deduction, this cross-sectional evi-
dence does not prove that the missing mass is caused by the standard deduction,
and one could argue that is but a naturally occurring feature of the distribution.11
   To prove that the missing mass is a distortion due to the standard deduction,
I turn to a quasi-experimental design. There were four large increases in the
standard deduction amounts since 1960. These changes occurred in 1971, 1975,
1988 and 2003. I use the 1988 reform to estimate the cost of itemizing because
there are other changes that occur at the same time as the 1971, 1975 and 2003
reforms. In particular, the 2003 reform is likely to provide a lower bound on the
cost of itemizing since there were changes in marginal tax rates and deduction
rules that made it more attractive to itemize. In 1971 and 1975 there were
changes to the parallel standard deduction system.12 Although the magnitude of
  10
     All remaining years from 1980 to 2006 are plotted in appendix Figures H.10, H.11, H.12,
H.13 and H.14. All dollar amounts are in 2016 dollars in the rest of the paper.
  11
     Appendix figure H.22 shows diﬀerent alternative scenarios that could create a missing mass.
  12
     More details about the parallel system of standard deduction and other changes are pro-
vided in E.


                                               7
the estimated cost for the 1971, 1975 and 2003 reforms is inaccurate, they still
provide reduced-form evidence of the existence of compliance costs.
   I compare the pre-1988 reform year to the post-reform year to account for
lagged behavioral responses. Figures 2a and 2b graph the density of deductions
in pre and post-reform years for the 1988 reform.13 Notice that the shape of the
distribution in year t+1 mirrors that of years t and t-1 and that the missing mass
precisely follows the new standard deduction threshold. This shows that some
itemizers switch to the standard deduction once it is increased even though their
deductions are larger than the standard deduction.
   The fact that the missing mass closely follows the standard deduction estab-
lishes that there is a discontinuity in the distribution caused by the standard
deduction. If this missing mass was a feature of the distribution and not due
to the standard deduction, it should not track the standard deduction once it is
increased.

3      Cost Estimation
3.1     Cost Estimation Methodology
   To calculate the distribution of forgone benefits in the population, I need
to reconstruct the counterfactual distribution of itemizers. Using the pre-reform
year as the counterfactual distribution would lead to an underestimate of the cost
because the pre-reform distribution is distorted by its proximity to the standard
deduction, as can be seen in figure 2a. This section explains how I reconstruct
the counterfactual distribution.
   Denote by f (·) the unobserved p.d.f. of itemizers assuming there is no stan-
dard deduction and no cost of itemizing as illustrated in Figure 3. Denote by
gS (·) the observed probability density function (p.d.f.) of itemizers when the
standard deduction is equal to S. Then g0 (·) and gδ (·) respectively correspond
to the pre- and post-reform p.d.f. of itemizers when the standard deduction in-
creases from 0 to δ. The cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of the cost of
itemizing is denoted by CS (·) and is defined over [0, cmax ], where cmax denotes the
largest cost an individual can have.14 Individuals whose total deductions exceed
  13
     Appendix Figure H.16 report these densities for the 1971, 1975 and 2003 reforms and shows
that the changes are qualitatively consistent with the 1988 reform.
  14
     No assumptions about the drivers of the cost are needed in this section: CS (·) can be due


                                              8
the standard deduction by less than the cost of itemizing choose the standard
deduction. Formally,
                                ⎧
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪ 0,                    if d ≤ S
                                ⎨
    ∀S = {0; δ} :       gS (d) = f (d)(1 − CS (d − S)), if S < d ≤ cmax + S                    (1)
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎩f (d),
                                ⎪
                                                        if d > cmax + S.

By rearranging (1) over d ∈ [0, cmax ]:

                                                 f (d) − gS (d)
                                CS (d − S) =                    .                              (2)
                                                     gS (d)
  In other words the cost of itemizing is related to the missing mass f (d) − gS (d)
which is shown in Figures 1, 2a and 2b. However, because f (·) cannot be observed
directly, it needs to be reconstructed using g0 (·) and gδ (·). Two assumptions are
necessary:

    • A1: Cost is constant across years.
    • A2: Cost is independent of the level of deductions.

Assumptions A1 and A2 imply that C0 (·) = Cδ (·), and from equation (2) follows
that:
                    f (d) − g0 (d)   f (d + δ) − gδ (d + δ)
           C0 (d) =                =                        = Cδ (d),        (3)
                        g0 (d)             gδ (d + δ)
this implies that the same proportion of individuals is missing d deductions above
the pre-reform standard deduction and d + δ deductions above the post-reform
standard deduction.
   Assumption A1 can be verified by graphing two densities in years with no
reforms and ensuring that they are overlapping. This assumption is verified on
all years from 1980 to 2006.15 A failure of A2 introduces a relatively small bias
in the cost estimate: in appendix section B, I provide an upper bound on the size
of this bias and show that it is small.16
to the sum of the costs of record-keeping and filing or also include fear of audits and uncertainty
which we discuss in section 5.
  15
     See appendix figure H.17.
  16
     For joint filers in the 28% bracket for example, the estimated cost would lie between $572
and $644 if A2 fails, instead of $644.



                                                9
   To estimate C(·) and reconstruct f (·), I proceed in three steps. First, if
d ∈ [δ + cmax ; +∞] then the benefit of itemizing is greater than its cost both pre-
and post-reform and taxpayers will not forgo deductions by claiming the standard
deduction. This corresponds to the rightmost area in Figure 3. Formally, if
d ∈ [δ + cmax ; +∞] then C(d) = 1 and gδ (d) = g0 (d) = f (d) i.e. the pre- and
post-reform distributions of itemizers overlap for ranges of deductions exceeding
the post-reform standard deduction δ by more than the largest possible cost
cmax . And for any d ∈ [δ + cmax ; +∞], f (d) = g0 (d) i.e. the pre-reform observed
distribution of itemizers g0 (·) corresponds to the undistorted distribution f (·).
   Second, if d ∈ [cmax ; δ + cmax ] then over this range, the pre-reform taxpayers
do not forgo any deductions but the post-reform ones will. This corresponds to
the middle area in Figure 3. As a consequence, the pre-reform distribution is not
aﬀected by its proximity to the standard deduction and is equal to the undistorted
distribution i.e. g0 (d) = f (d), but the post-reform distribution is distorted i.e.
gδ (d) < f (d). From equation (3) it follows that ∀d ∈ [cmax ; δ + cmax ]:

                                  f (d) − gδ (d)   g0 (d) − gδ (d)
                     C(d − δ) =                  =                                 (4)
                                      gδ (d)            gδ (d)

this allows me to estimate C(·) over [cmax − δ; cmax ].
   Third, if d ∈ [cmax −δ, cmax ] then both the pre-reform and post-reform itemizers
are forgoing deductions. This corresponds to the leftmost area in Figure 3. In this
case, both the pre- and post-reform distributions are distorted by their proximity
to the standard deduction and g0 (·) is now diﬀerent from f (·). To reconstruct
f (·), I use the estimate of C(·) over [cmax − δ; cmax ] from equation 4 to correct the
pre-reform distribution by using the definition of g0 (·): f (d) = g0 (d)(1 + C(d)).
From equation 3 follows that ∀d ∈ [cmax − δ; cmax ]

                            f (d) − gδ (d)   g0 (d)(1 + C(d)) − gδ (d)
               C(d − δ) =                  =                                       (5)
                                gδ (d)                 gδ (d)

this allows me to estimate C(·) over [cmax − 2δ; cmax − δ]. By repeating this
procedure over [cmax − 3δ; cmax − 2δ], [cmax − 4δ; cmax − 3δ] etc. I can recover C(·)
and f (·) over [0, cmax ].



                                          10
3.2       Cost Estimates
   I apply the methodology outlined above to the 1988 reform which increased the
standard deduction from $2,540 to $3,000 for single filers, from $3,760 to $5,000
for joint filers and from $2,540 to $4,400 for head of households filers. Besides the
standard deduction reform, the only reform happening in 1988 that could aﬀect
the amount of deductions is the phase out of the personal interest deduction,
which I control for (details in section 5.5). There were no other reforms aﬀecting
deductions in 1988 or 1989 and the reforms aﬀecting the 1987 distribution do
not have lagged eﬀects.17 Each cost estimate is performed on individuals with
the same marginal tax rate and who are not subject to the Alternative Minimum
Tax (AMT). There is a marginal tax rate decrease for married filing jointly with
income above $45,000 (in 1987 dollars) in 1988. I address this by estimating the
cost separately for individuals above and below this cutoﬀ.
   I use 1989 as the post-reform year rather than 1988 because the reform occurs
in 1988. If taxpayers learn about the increase in the standard deduction when
filing their taxes, we should observe the full response in 1989. Figure 2b confirms
that the eﬀect is smaller during the reform year.
    Table 1 shows the estimated costs for single, joint and head of households
filers in the 15% and 28% marginal tax brackets. Costs vary from $175 for single
filers in the 15% bracket to $591 for joint filers in the 28% bracket. Costs are
systematically lower for individuals in lower tax brackets, suggesting that income
matters in determining the cost as is shown in the next section.
   To calculate the standard errors of the diﬀerence between the bins in the 1987
and 1989 densities, I use a bootstrap procedure. The results are reported in table
2. The diﬀerence between the first and second bins is statistically significant with
large z statistics (6.55 and 3.47). The rest of the bins are all overlapping with
diﬀerences that are not significant even at the 10% level, at the exception of bin
10, 11 and 13 that are statistically significantly diﬀerent at the 5 and 10% level,
with diﬀerences of very small magnitude (less than 10 times that of the first or
second bins).
 17
      See section 5.5 for the full list of reforms and appendix section D for the TRA’86 reforms.




                                                11
4       Anatomy of the Missing Mass
4.1       Costs Increase With Income
    If rich taxpayers value their time more than poor ones because their hourly
wage is higher, we should expect them to forgo more deductions. I can test this
using the income reported on tax returns. To do so, I break down the sample
used above by deciles of income. This raises power issues that I deal with in two
ways. First, I use a moving average of the income deciles. For example, the lower
income group consists of every individual with income below the second decile
threshold. And the second group consists of taxpayers with income above the
first decile and below the third decile etc. Second, I focus on joint filers in the
28% marginal tax bracket as they represent by far the largest group of taxpayers.
   Once the groups are constructed, I fit a polynomial of degree 3 through each
deduction bin. I then calculate the diﬀerence in density for each bin. When this
diﬀerence is not statistically significant, I consider that the bins are overlapping
and therefore no deductions are forgone in that specific bin. Using the predicted
bins from this polynomial, I calculate the forgone benefits for each group by
repeating the procedure developed in the previous section: I compare the dis-
tribution in 1987 to that in 1989, reconstruct the counterfactual distribution of
itemized deductions and calculate the distribution of the cost of itemizing by
comparing the counterfactual distribution to the true one. I only report results
for the first seven groups because deductions and income are positively correlated
implying that there are very few high income individuals close to the standard
deduction threshold making the estimates for these bins uninformative.18 The
results are plotted in Figure 4(a): as income increases taxpayers forgo more ben-
efits consistent with the idea that they value their time relatively more. Two
pieces of information are worth emphasizing: first, all taxpayers in figure 4(a) fall
in the 28% marginal tax bracket, implying that the positive relationship between
income and forgone benefits is not due to marginal tax rate variation but rather
to income per-se. Second, even though itemized deductions increase with income,
this is not what drives the increasing relationship between income and forgone
benefits. Because I am using a quasi-experimental design, and compare the same
 18
      The remaining two income bins are reported in appendix Figure H.21.



                                             12
income groups before and after the reform, I am implicitly controlling for the
relationship between income and deductions.

4.2    Tax Preparers and Electronic Filing
   Electronic filing and the use of tax preparers may reduce the cost of filling
out forms as one need not file schedule A. However, it does not aﬀect the cost of
record keeping. Therefore, if record keeping costs are non-zero, electronic filing
or the use of tax prepapers will not reduce costs to zero and one will still observe
a missing mass close to the standard deduction threshold. That record keeping
is the driver of the cost of itemizing has been consistently documented by survey
estimates of the cost of filing taxes.19
   To test for whether electronic filing or using a tax preparer eliminates the cost
of itemizing, I graph the density of itemizers who use a tax preparer and those
who use electronic filing in graph 5 and look for whether there is still a missing
mass close to the standard deduction threshold. The missing mass is still present
implying that tax preparers or electronic filing does not eliminate the cost of
itemizing.
   Figure 5(b) compares the density of taxpayers who use electronic filing to
those who do not. It shows a slightly smaller – but statistically significant –
missing mass for taxpayers who file electronically than those who do not. The
diﬀerence is statistically significant.20 This is consistent with the missing mass
being driven by taxpayers claiming the standard deduction to avoid the cost of
itemizing. However, electronic filing only slightly reduces the cost of itemizing
and does not eliminate the missing mass, consistent with record-keeping being
the main driver of compliance costs.
   I cannot perform a similar test for taxpayers who use tax preparers as the two
densities do not overlap away from the standard deduction – possibly because the
population that uses tax preparers is intrinsically diﬀerent from the population
that does not – making a comparison of the missing mass impossible. Figure
5(a) shows however that the use of tax preparers does not eliminate the cost of
itemizing.
  19
     See for example Guyton et al. (2003), Slemrod and Sorum (1984), Slemrod and Bakija
(2008) and Blumenthal and Slemrod (1992).
  20
     Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in table I.6



                                          13
5      Alternative Explanations to Compliance Costs
5.1     Information
    Information or cognitive abilities are unlikely to explain the forgone deduc-
tions. I focus on taxpayers who switch from itemizing to claiming the standard
deduction, therefore they should be well aware of the decision to itemize and have
the cognitive abilities to do so. In addition, taxpayers are reminded on the 1040
form of the fact that they can itemize deductions as they have to make an active
decision between itemizing and claiming the standard deduction.

5.2     Evasion
   An alternative explanation for the presence of a missing mass is that taxpayers
are concerned with being audited by the IRS. They mistakenly believe that audit
probabilities are higher when itemizing. Their beliefs over audit probabilities
could lead them to switch to the standard deduction once it increases to avoid
the expected cost of an audit.
  Audit probabilities are very low, therefore for this behavior to explain the
missing mass, taxpayers would need to mistakenly believe that audit probabilities
are high or that audit costs are large. To address this, I carry a survey of 195
individuals in a wealthy neighborhood of the city of Los Angeles to capture as
many itemizers as possible. Appendix section F details the survey instrument.
The survey allows me to elicit their beliefs over both the audit probabilities for
itemizers and the perceived costs of undergoing an audit. The results of the
survey are reported in figure 9.
   Surveyed individuals have similar levels of income as joint filers in the 1988
28% marginal tax bracket. On average, they believe that audits occur with a
probability of 8.72%, which is 7.9 times the true audit probabilities.21 This
accounts for at most 25% of the $591 estimated forgone benefits for joint filers in
the 28% marginal tax bracket.22
  21
     This is consistent with Bhargava and Manoli (2015) who find that EITC filers believe that
audit probabilities are 8 times larger than the true ones.
  22
     On average, their willingness to pay to avoid an audit is $1,748, which implies that the
expected cost of an audit is $147, with a 95% confidence interval of [126, 169].




                                             14
5.3    Concave Kink Points
  When claiming the standard deduction, taxpayers are paying the full cost of
charitable donations, mortgage interest etc. they may have incurred below the
standard deduction. However, when they itemize, they only pay a portion of it
because deductions are subsidized by 1 minus the marginal tax rate. The stan-
dard deduction acts as a concave kink point: the price of charitable donations is
lower when itemizing than when claiming the standard deduction. The indiﬀer-
ence curve of a given taxpayer can be tangent at two points of the concave kinked
budget set (see figure 6(a)), possibly inducing some taxpayers to be indiﬀerent
between two points, one above the standard deduction and one below it. De-
pending on the curvature of the indiﬀerence curve, this could create a bi-modal
distribution with a missing mass both to the right and to the left of the standard
deduction (see figure 6(b)).
   However, according to the assumption that taxpayers respond to concave kink
points, the size of the missing mass should not respond to variations in income
when controlling for the marginal tax rate. The only reason taxpayers should
adjust their deductions in response to a concave kink point is because of the
marginal tax rate and income should not matter per se in this case. On the
other hand, a behavioral response due to compliance costs predicts that richer
taxpayers will forgo more money because they have a higher opportunity cost of
time even controlling for the marginal tax rate. Figure 4 graphs the relationship
between forgone benefits and income - controlling for the marginal tax rate -
and finds an increasing relationship, rejecting the hypothesis that taxpayers are
responding to concave kink points in this setting.
   In addition, behavioral responses to concave kink points lead individuals to
locate away from the concave kink point. This mechanism is illustrated in figure
6. If behavioral responses to concave kink points were leading to the observed
missing mass, as the standard deduction increases, the bi-modal distribution
should track the new standard deduction threshold as illustrated in figure 6(c)
and the pre and post-distribution peaks should not overlap. The observed pre
and post distributions in Figures 2a and 2b contradict the prediction of figure
6(c): the pre and post distribution peaks are overlapping rejecting again that the
missing mass is caused by behavioral responses to concave kink points.


                                       15
   Overall, both the fact that forgone deductions increase with income and the
shape of the post reform distribution of deductions rule out responses to con-
cave kink points. The absence of behavioral responses to concave kink points is
consistent with the empirical public finance literature that documents behavioral
responses to tax systems and does not find any evidence of responses to concave
kink points. Saez (2010), Kleven and Waseem (2013) and Tazhitdinova (2015)
directly test the predictions of a behavioral response to both concave and convex
kink points, find responses to convex kink points but no responses to concave
kink points. For example, Saez (2010) finds evidence of bunching at the thresh-
old of the first income tax bracket where tax liability starts and at the first kink
of the EITC – which are both convex kinks – but no evidence of bunching at the
second EITC kink – which is concave. Kleven (2016) in a survey of the bunching
literature confirms that there is no evidence of bunching at concave kink points.

5.4       Rational Inattention
   Can uncertainty over the level of deductions lead a taxpayer to switch to the
standard deduction and explain the observed missing mass? Table 3 shows the
results of the calibration of a model illustrative of this type of behavior with
varying levels of risk aversion.23 Taxpayers would need an uncertainty range of
at least ±$14, 000 for them to forgo similar amounts of money as found in this
paper when their true deductions are $10,000. This uncertainty range is large
and unlikely given that I focus on taxpayers who were itemizing the year before
and because total deductions are highly serially correlated across years for a given
individual since 71% of total deductions are mortgage interest, state taxes and
real estate taxes which are relatively stable for a given person year after year.

5.5       Other Reforms Aﬀecting Deductions?
   Other changes happened in 1988. In this section, I describe these changes
and explain how I adjust for the ones that are likely to aﬀect my estimates. The
estimates derived in section 3 already accounted for these adjustments. The fact
that the pre and post-reform densities overlap away from the standard deduction
threshold shows that the pre-reform density is a relevant counterfactual for the
post-reform density in figure 2a and that – after adjusting for these changes –
 23
      The model is outlined in appendix section G.



                                              16
the missing mass estimates are not aﬀected by these changes.
   The personal interest deduction was phased out starting from 1986. In 1987,
taxpayers could only deduct 65% of their personal interest, 40% in 1988 and
20% in 1989. This is likely to aﬀect the distribution of deductions from 1987
to 1989. To control for this eﬀect, I adjust the 1987 distribution - which is the
counterfactual for 1989 - by recalculating the personal interest deduction as if only
20% of it could be deducted. This leads some taxpayers to have deductions below
the standard deduction whom I drop. To ensure that there is no behavioral eﬀect
associated with the phasing out of the personal interest deduction, I compare the
distribution of deductions for individuals below the 28% marginal tax rate bracket
and above. If there was a behavioral eﬀect, we should observe more deductions for
individuals above the 28% marginal tax bracket. I find no significant behavioral
response of personal interest deductions.24 This is consistent with the fact that
the majority of the personal interest deduction is claimed for interest on student
loans which are hard to adjust once they are contracted. In addition, after
making this correction, I can compare the overlap between the pre and post-
reform densities. Away from the standard deduction, the two graphs overlap
implying that the post-reform density is an appropriate counterfactual for the
1989 density.

6       Total Filing Costs Increase Over Time
6.1       Average Treatment Eﬀect
  The cost I estimate is a local average treatment eﬀect representative of filers
who are just above the standard deduction. To get an average treatment eﬀect,
I need to estimate the cost for individuals away from the standard deduction
threshold. These individuals diﬀer in their demographics, in particular they are
more likely to have diﬀerent income levels since deductions and income tend to
be positively correlated. For this reason, I need to estimate the eﬀect that these
demographics have on cost. I do so for four variables: income, dependents, use
of tax-preparers and electronic filing.
   To estimate the eﬀect of dependents and use of tax-preparers on the cost of
itemizing, I apply the procedure outlined in section 3.1 for the 1988 reform on
 24
      See appendix figure H.23.


                                         17
subsamples of joint filers. I use joint filers to perform this subsample analysis
because they represent more than 50% of the population of filers which is essen-
tial to getting enough power when breaking down the main sample into multiple
groups. This means that my approach relies on the assumption that these de-
mographics aﬀect filing costs the same way for diﬀerent types of filers and for
diﬀerent years. To estimate the eﬀect of tax-preparers, I compare the cost for
joint filers who use a tax preparer to those that do not. I use a similar approach
for taxpayers with and without dependents. To estimate the eﬀect of income on
the cost of filing, I use the estimates from section 4.1. Because electronic filing did
not exist in 1988, I cannot use the procedure from section 3.1. Instead, I pool all
cross-sections in years when electronic-filing was commonly used – 1998 to 2006
–, fit a polynomial through the bins that are away from the standard deduction to
extrapolate the counterfactual distribution close to the standard deduction and
compare the distribution of electronic-filers and paper-filers to this counterfactual
to assess the size of the missing mass for each group.25 Formally, I assume that
filing cost is given by the following equation:

          C = β ∗ {[(αef i     ef i   + αef i (1 −   ef i )]   + [αprep       prep   + αprep (1 −   prep )]
                                                             9
                                                             %
               + [αdep   dep   + αdep (1 −      dep )]   +           αi i ,                                   (6)
                                                               i=0


where β is the baseline cost of itemizing as estimated in section 3.1, αef i is the
eﬀect of electronic filing on the cost of itemizing, αef i is the eﬀect on cost of
not filing electronically. The remaining variables are defined similarly, with prep
corresponding to the use of a tax preparer and dep having at least one child
dependent. Each αi coeﬃcient corresponds to the eﬀect of income on the cost.
They are derived in section 4.1: each αi is equal to the ratio of the cost of itemizing
for income group i divided by the average cost of itemizing for all groups. The
coeﬃcients are reported in Table 1.

6.2        Other Schedules
  To infer the cost of filing other schedules, I assume that holding constant the
number of hours spent working on a given tax schedule, taxpayers derive the
  25
       The three distributions are shown in Figure H.20.


                                                      18
same disutility from each tax schedule. In other words, they do not dislike filing
particular schedules more than others as long as they require the same number
of hours. I also assume that the demographics estimated in section 6.1 aﬀect
the cost of other schedules in the same way. The IRS provides estimates of the
number of hours required to file each tax schedule based on surveys of taxpayers
at the time of filing.26 I use these survey estimates to scale the cost estimates of
other schedules. For example, filing schedule B requires 1 hour and 19 minutes,
which is 28% the total time required to file schedule A, so I assign a baseline
cost of filing schedule B of 28% of that of schedule A. The filing cost for each
taxpayer is given by a similar equation as equation (6), with a subscript x that
corresponds to each tax schedule:

       Cx = βx ∗ {[(αef i   ef i   + αef i (1 −   ef i )]   + [αprep   prep   + αprep(1 −   prep )]
                                                       9
                                                       %
             + [αdep   dep + αdep (1 −      dep )] +          αi i }                                  (7)
                                                       i=0


Where Cx is the cost of schedule x = 1040, A, B, C, D, E, F, SE and βx is the
baseline cost estimate of schedule x. The coeﬃcients are reported in Table 1.

6.3     Costs Have Been Increasing Since the 1980’s
   Using equation (7), I estimate the total cost of filing all schedules of the fed-
eral income tax for every year from 1984 to 2006.27 Figure 7a shows that costs
have been increasing steadily from $150bn in 1984 to $200bn in 2006 (both in
2016 dollars). Part of this increase is mechanically driven by an increase in the
number of tax filers. But, it is also driven by a steady increase in the number of
taxpayers who have to file other schedules in addition to the 1040 form. Some of
these schedules require a substantial amount of time to be filed. Figure 7b plots
the number of forms filed by schedule over time. The proportion of non-1040
forms filed increased by 15% from 1984 to 2009. While it is often believed that
filing costs decreased over time since the 1980’s because of the rapid increase of
electronic filing, Figure 7b shows that there are two countervailing forces to elec-
  26
     According the IRS survey estimates, the 1040 form requires 9.4 hours, Schedule A 4.5 hours,
Sch. B 1.3 hours, Sch. C 9.6 hours, Sch. D 3.8 hours, Sch. E 5.8 hours, Sch. F 16.1 hours and
Sch. SE 1.1 hours. See appendix Table I.10 for a break-down of the cost.
  27
     I start in 1984 because prior years are missing information on Schedule SE.


                                                  19
tronic filing which drive total costs upwards: the number of individuals who file
taxes and the number of scheduled filed by each taxpayer. My estimates suggest
the upward pressure on filing costs exerted by these two forces outweigh the cost
savings of electronic filing. The number of non-1040 forms filed can be easily re-
duced by increasing the filing thresholds for their corresponding schedules. The
cost savings from increasing these thresholds would need to be weighed against
the eﬀect they would have on increasing evasion.28

7      Compliance Costs or Behavioral Costs?
   There is extensive evidence that individuals are time inconsistent and tend
to procrastinate.29 If taxpayers procrastinate on filing their taxes, one should
observe a large proportion of taxpayers filing on April 15th. And these taxpayers
should forgo more deductions.30
   First, consistent with individuals procrastinating on filing their taxes, I find
that taxpayers bunch at the deadline of April 15th. Figure 8a graphs the volume
of Google search of the term 1040 by week and figure 8b uses data from irs.gov31
and graphs the number of tax returns filed by week. Both exhibit a clear spike in
the weeks that include April 15th. This is consistent with Hoopes et al. (2015)
who show that that there are more calls made to the IRS close to April 15th and
that taxpayers search more actively on Google and Wikipedia for capital-gains-
tax-related information.
   Second, I also find that taxpayers who file close to the deadline tend to forgo
more deductions consistent with procrastination accounting for a portion of the
estimated forgone deductions. Figure 8c32 shows that the missing mass for close
to the deadline filers (first two weeks of April) is larger than for March filers.
   Note that rational taxpayers should not file close to the deadline for two rea-
sons: by delaying filing, they forgo interest on their refunds and they expose
themselves to higher filing costs. Indeed, the sample I use to generate figure 8c
only includes taxpayers who are owed a refund by the IRS and therefore have an
  28
     Tazhitdinova (2014) explores this tradeoﬀ in the case of charitable donations.
  29
     See DellaVigna (2009) for a survey of the literature.
  30
     I formalize this argument in appendix section H and show that procrastination can lead to
high record keeping costs resulting in individuals failing to itemize.
  31
     https://www.irs.gov/uac/2016-and-prior-year-filing-season-statistics
  32
     Appendix section C.6 explains how the graph is constructed.


                                             20
incentive to file as early as possible to save on interest.33 Second, filing costs are
substantially higher closer to the deadline because lines at the post oﬃce and tax
preparers are longer and it is harder to get tax help from the IRS because their
phone lines are busier than usual.34
  Notice also that late filing is hard to reconcile with the option value of waiting
for low cost realizations. One could argue that taxpayers who bunch at the
deadline are rational taxpayers who wait for a low cost realization and face a series
of idiosyncratic shocks that force them to file hastily at the very last moment
and lead them to forgo benefits. If that is the case, then we should observe that
taxpayers who file late in year t are likely to file earlier in year t + 1. To test
for this, I graph the average week in which returns are processed in year t + 1
by week of processing in year t, in figure 8d. If taxpayers who bunch at the
deadline are doing so for rational reasons, the relationship should be constant as
we should observe mean reversion. If they are doing so because of a systematic
bias, the relationship should be increasing as year t week of processing should
predict year t + 1 week of processing. Figure 8d shows an increasing relationship
– with a t-statistic equal to 49 – between processing week in year t and year t + 1
consistent with the explanation that late filing is due to a systematic bias.

8      Conclusion
    Using a quasi-experimental design and a novel method to recover the coun-
terfactual density of deductions, I find that taxpayers forgo large amounts of
deductions. This implies tax filing costs of a much larger magnitude than previ-
ously estimated using survey methods. The aggregate cost of filing federal taxes
has been steadily increasing over time since the 1980’s in part because of pop-
ulation growth but also because of the increase in the number of forms filed by
each taxpayer.
   Should the cost of tax filing be reduced? The IRS faces a tradeoﬀ between
requiring less forms and receipts (and therefore reducing filing costs) versus re-
ducing evasion. The large magnitude of my estimates suggests that reducing
  33
     Slemrod et al. (1997) estimates that taxpayers forgo $46 million in interest by not claiming
their refund as soon as possible.
  34
     Redelmeier and Yarnell (2012) for example report that there are more road crash fatalities
on April 15th and argue that is due to taxes.



                                               21
reporting might be welfare improving even if it leads to higher evasion costs.
   Filing costs can also be reduced without reducing reporting. This is especially
true if taxpayers tend to procrastinate. The IRS can ensure that the deadline
for filing taxes falls on a day when people are likely to be less busy such as the
weekend. In addition, the IRS could shift the cost of filing taxes to firms since
they are less likely to be subject to procrastination. This can be achieved through
informational reporting as is the case with the mortgage deduction.
   However, some compliance cost can be eﬃcient when designing a tax system
and can be used as a policy instrument. This is especially true when the social
gains of deductions or loopholes are small and political economy concerns pre-
vent the government from repealing these deductions. One way of ensuring that
taxpayers do not claim them is to impose large compliance costs.35
   Finally, the identification strategy used in this paper can be exported to esti-
mate other compliance costs when individuals have a choice between a low cost
low benefit option versus a high cost high benefit one as is the case for example
when deciding whether to file a lawsuit in small claims court versus regular court.
It can also be used when identifying responses from a censored distribution above
or below a certain threshold.


References
Bertrand, M., S. Mullainathan, and E. Shafir (2006). Behavioral economics and
  marketing in aid of decision making among the poor. Journal of Public Policy
  & Marketing 25 (1), 8–23.
Bhargava, S. and D. Manoli (2015). Psychological frictions and the incomplete
  take-up of social benefits: Evidence from an IRS field experiment. The Amer-
  ican Economic Review 105 (11), 3489–3529.
Blank, R. and D. Card (1991). Recent trends in insured and uninsured unem-
  ployment: Is there an explanation? Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (4),
  1157–1189.
Blumenthal, M. and J. Slemrod (1992). The compliance cost of the us individual
  income tax system. National Tax Journal , 185–202.
Currie, J. (2006). The take-up of social benefits. Public Policy and the Income
  Distribution, 80.
DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field. Jour-
  nal of Economic Literature 47 (2), 315 –372.
 35
      Discussed in Kaplow (1998).


                                        22
Duclos, J.-Y. (1995). Modelling the take-up of state support. Journal of Public
  Economics 58 (3), 391–415.
Gronau, R. (1973). The eﬀect of children on the housewife’s value of time. The
  Journal of Political Economy, S168–S199.
Guyton, J., J. O’Hare, M. Stavrianos, and E. Toder (2003). Estimating the
  compliance cost of the US individual income tax. National Tax Journal , 673
  –688.
Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets:
  When nudging hurts. The American Economic Review 103 (7), 2643–2682.
Holt, C. A. and S. K. Laury (2002). Risk aversion and incentive eﬀects. American
  Economic Review 92 (5), 1644–1655.
Hoopes, J. L., D. H. Reck, and J. Slemrod (2015). Taxpayer search for in-
  formation: Implications for rational attention. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 7 (3), 177–208.
Kaplow, L. (1998). Accuracy, complexity, and the income tax. Journal of Law,
  Economics, and Organization 14 (1), 61–83.
Keys, B. J., D. G. Pope, and J. C. Pope (2014). Failure to refinance. Working
  Paper .
Kleven, H. J. (2016). Bunching. Annual Review of Economics 8 (1).
Kleven, H. J. and M. Waseem (2013). Using notches to uncover optimization
  frictions and structural elasticities: Theory and evidence from pakistan. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 669–723.
Little, A. D. (1988). Development of methodology for estimating the taxpayer
  paperwork burden.
Madrian, B. and D. Shea (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
  participation and savings behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4),
  1149–1187.
Nelson, F. D. (1977). Censored regression models with unobserved, stochastic
  censoring thresholds. Journal of Econometrics 6 (3), 309–327.
Nichols, D., E. Smolensky, and T. N. Tideman (1971). Discrimination by waiting
  time in merit goods. The American Economic Review , 312 –323.
Pitt, M. and J. Slemrod (1989). The compliance cost of itemizing deductions:
  Evidence from individual tax returns. The American Economic Review , 1224–
  1232.
Redelmeier, D. A. and C. J. Yarnell (2012). Road crash fatalities on us income tax
  days. The Journal of the American Medical Association 307 (14), 1486–1488.
Saez, E. (2010). Do taxpayers bunch at kink points? American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 180–212.
Slemrod, J. (1989). The return to tax simplification: An econometric analysis.
  Public Finance Review 17 (1), 3–27.



                                       23
Slemrod, J. and J. Bakija (2008). Taxing ourselves: a citizen’s guide to the debate
  over taxes. MIT Press Books.
Slemrod, J., C. Christian, R. London, and J. A. Parker (1997). April 15 syndrome.
  Economic Inquiry 35 (4), 695 –709.
Slemrod, J. and N. Sorum (1984). The compliance cost of the US individual
  income tax system. National Tax Journal , 461 –474.
Steuerle, E., R. McHugh, and E. M. Sunley (1978). Who benefits from income
  averaging? National Tax Journal , 19–32.
Sydnor, J. (2010). (over) insuring modest risks. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 2 (4), 177–199.
Tazhitdinova, A. (2014). Optimal reporting threshold: Theory and evidence from
  charitable contributions. Manuscript, UC Berkeley.
Tazhitdinova, A. (2015). Tax breaks for low earners: Who benefits from them?
  evidence from mini-jobs in germany. Working Paper .
Wicks, J. H. (1965). Taxpayer compliance costs from the montana personal
  income tax. Montana Business Quarterly 3, 36–42.
Wicks, J. H. and M. N. Killworth (1967). Administrative and compliance costs
  of state and local taxes. National Tax Journal , 309–315.




                                        24
                      0.5                                             Figure 1: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Number of itemizers in millions
                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                   0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                   0.25
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                        0   6,699          20,000    30,000                                                                                                       0     5,331                20,000        30,000                                                                                             0   5,968                 20,000           30,000
                                                    Total Itemized Deductions in 1980 bin size of $2000                                                                                         Total Itemized Deductions in 1985 bin size of $2000                                                                                   Total Itemized Deductions in 1990 bin size of $2000



                                                               (a) 1980                                                                                                                                    (b) 1985                                                                                                                              (c) 1990




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
25


      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                          Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Number of itemizers in millions
                                 0.5




                                                                                                                               0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
           0.25




                                                                                                             0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                      0




                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                        0       6,142                     20,000                30,000                                      0                                         6,133                          20,000                30,000                                       0                    12,289      20,000         30,000         40,000                  50,000
                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 1995 bin size of $2000                                                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 2000 bin size of $2000                                                                Total Itemized Deductions in 2005 bin size of $2000



                                                               (d) 1995                                                                                                                            (e) 2000                                                                                                                       (f ) 2005

     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for itemizers filing jointly. The bin size is $2,000 and the vertical line
     represents the standard deduction threshold for each year. Additional years are reported in appendix figures H.11, H.12, H.13
     and H.14 and figure H.15 for single filers.
Figure 2: Density of Deductions for Itemizers Filing Jointly
Pre and Post Reform
                                                              (a) 1987-1989 Comparison
                          1.2
          Number of Itemizers In Millions
          0.2 0.4      0.60  0.8      1
                                            0



                                                    10 010
                                                         73




                                                                        00




                                                                                     00




                                                                                                  00




                                                                                                               00
                                                      ,1




                                                                     ,0




                                                                                  ,0




                                                                                                ,0




                                                                                                             ,0
                                                     8,




                                                                   20




                                                                                 30




                                                                                              40




                                                                                                           50
                                                Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                              1987                 1989



                                                              (b) 1987-1988 Comparison
                          1.2
          Number of Itemizers In Millions
          0.2  0.4     0.60  0.8       1
                                            0



                                                       ,2 0
                                                         38




                                                                      00




                                                                                   00




                                                                                                00




                                                                                                             00
                                                    10,01




                                                                     ,0




                                                                                  ,0




                                                                                              ,0




                                                                                                           ,0
                                                     8




                                                                   20




                                                                                30




                                                                                             40




                                                                                                          50




                                                Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                              1987                 1988


Notes: The first graph plots the density of itemizers one year before and one year
after the standard deduction reform while the second one plots these densities one year
before and during the reform.
  Figure 3: Reconstruction of the Counterfactual Density

                                  (a) Procedure Illustration




                              (b) Reconstructed Counterfactual
                      0




                          0
                                Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 inflation adjusted

                                          missing mass                 reconstructed 1989
                                          observed 1989




Notes: The first graph illustrates the method used in section 3.1 to reconstruct the counterfac-
tual density of itemizers f (.) using the pre- and post-reform densities g0 (.) and gδ (.). The second
graph plots the reconstructed counterfactual in 1989 using the method outlined in section 3
and the observed density for 1989. The missing mass used to estimate the cost of itemizing is
given by the area lying between the two curves.
Figure 4: Relationship Between Income and the Cost of
Itemizing Deductions
  150 300 450 600 750 900 1050 1200 1350
           Burden of Itemizing
                     0




                                      70000   80000   90000      100000   110000   120000
                                                              Income


Notes: This graph shows the increasing relationship between income and the cost of itemizing:
richer households are more likely to forgo deductions. This relationship controls for the variation
in MTR across the diﬀerent income groups.




                                                              28
    Figure 5: Use of Tax Preparer and Electronic Filing
                                                (a) Tax Preparer



                 density
                           0




                                   0      5000           10000          15000          20000     25000
                                        Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 (1980−2006)


                                             (b) Electronic Filing
                 0




                               0             10000             20000               30000         40000
                                       Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 (1998−2006)

                                                           Not efi             efi




Notes: The x-axis is normalized such that 0 corresponds to the standard deduction
threshold. Graph (a) plots the density of total deductions for taxpayers who use tax
preparers from 1980 to 2006 by bin size of $2000. Graph (b) plots the density of
total deductions for taxpayers who file returns electronically from 1998 to 2006 by
bin size of $2000 and compares it to the density of taxpayers who do not file returns
electronically. Both graphs exhibit a missing mass close to the standard deduction
implying that neither tax preparers nor electronic filing eliminate the cost of itemizing.
The use of electronic filing slightly reduces the missing mass consistent with compliance
costs being the driver of the missing mass and record-keeping being the largest portion
of the cost of itemizing.

                                                              29
        Figure 6: Concave Kink Point: Densities Following Reform Should Not Overlap

                            (a) Concave Kink Point
                                                                (b) Missing Mass Due to Concave Kink Point
30




                                                (c) Pre and Post Reform Densities




     Notes: Panel (a) displays a budget set with a concave kink point. Panel (b) shows the eﬀect that a concave kink point could in
     theory have on the density of itemizers. Panel (c) shows that if itemizers were responding to the concave kink point, we should
     observe that the pre and post reform densities are not overlapping just above the standard deduction. This is contradicted by
     figure 2a.
                                                               Figure 7: Cost Trends

                                                                      (a) Total Costs



               100 120 140 160 180 200
                 Total Cost in 2016 Dollars (billion)




                                                        1985        1990         1995    2000          2005
                                                                                 Years

                                                                1040                     1040+Sch A
                                                                1040 + SchA + Sch C      1040 + ... + Sch E
                                                                1040 + ... + Sch D       1040 + ... + Sch B
                                                                1040 + ... + Sch F       All Forms




                                                               (b) Number of Forms Filed
                                                300
                Total Nb. of Forms Filed (million)
               100             200




                                                        1985        1990         1995    2000          2005
                                                                                 Years

                                                                1040                     1040 + Sch A
                                                                1040 + SchA + Sch C      1040 + ... + Sch E
                                                                1040 + ... + Sch D       1040 + ... + Sch B
                                                                1040 + ... + Sch F       All Forms




Notes: The first figure plots the cost of filing each schedule for the total US population
over time as estimated in equation (7). The second figure plots the total number of
forms filed over time. Each curve is cumulative: it incrementally adds each schedule to
the previous curve.
                                                                                          Figure 8: Deadline Eﬀects
                              (a) Google Search of the Term 1040                                                                 (b) Number of Returns Filed by Week




                            100




                                                                                                                                              2.0e+07
                                                                                          Week 15 ~ April 15th


                                     80
                                                                                          Week 41 ~ October 15th
                 Search Volume of 1040




                                                                                                                                 5.0e+06 1.0e+07 1.5e+07
                                                                                                                                       NB. of returns filed
                20     40   060




                                              1    5             15                                     41
                                                                           Week of the Year




                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                             2013               2012                                                          0   5            10              15    20
                                                                                                                                                                              Filing Week
                                                                             2011               2010
                                                                             2009               2008                                                                         2015             2014


               (c) March Itemizers v.s. April Itemizers (d) Processing Week in Year t v.s. t − 1




                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                 Processing Week in Year t
                                                                                                                                    10              15
                 0




                                          0               5000         10000           15000           20000             25000
                                              Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 1000 adjusted to account for inflation
                                                                                                                                              5




                                                                                                                                                              5        10                     15          20
                                                                            March               April                                                                 Processing Week in Year t−1

Notes: Panel (a) plots the volume of search of the term “1040 ” in Google and panel (b) plots the volume of tax returns filed
by week in 2014 and 2015. The red vertical line corresponds to the week of April 15. Panel (c) plots the density of itemizers
who file in March versus in April, the x-axis is normalized such that 0 corresponds to the standard deduction. Panel (d) plots
the average week in which a return is processed in year t on the y-axis and the average week in which a return is processed in
year t − 1 on the x-axis.
                                                            Figure 9: Audit Survey
                            (a) Expected Cost of Audit                                           (b) Audit Probability

                20




                                                                                        40
                15




                                                                                        30
            Frequency




                                                                            Frequency
                10




                                                                                20      10
                5
                0




                                                                                        0
                        0     100        200          300      400   500                     0      5         10         15    20
                                           expected_cost                                                   probability


                                    (c) Cost of Audit                                            (d) Income (in $1,000)




                                                                                        15
                20
                15




                                                                                        10
            Frequency




                                                                            Frequency
             10




                                                                                        5
                5
                0




                                                                                        0




                        0       1000           2000          3000    4000                    0     100        200        300   400
                                               cost                                                         income

Notes: The number of observations for each panel is 95 individuals. Panel (a) is the distribution of expected cost of audit and is
equal to the product of audit probabilities by cost of audit. Panel (b) is the distribution of perceived audit probabilities. Panel
(c) is the distribution of cost of audit. Panel (d) is household income in brackets of $1,000. 195 individuals were surveyed, of
which 95 files their taxes themselves and itemize deductions.
                             Table 1: Cost Variables
                                      Variable           Cost
                                βA , Single, τ =15%      $175
                                βA , Single, τ =28%      $369
                                βA , Joint, τ =15%       $195
                                βA , Joint, τ =28%       $591
                                βA , Head, τ =15%        $270
                                βA , Head, τ =28%        $458
                                        β1040           2.08βA
                                         βB             0.28βA
                                         βC             2.13βA
                                         βD             0.83βA
                                         βE             1.29βA
                                         βF             3.55βA
                                        βSE             0.25βA
                                        αdep             0.99
                                        αdep             1.01
                                        αef i            1.07
                                        αef i            0.93
                                        αprep            0.99
                                        αprep            1.01
                                         α1              0.21
                                         α2              0.21
                                         α3              0.27
                                         α4              0.38
                                         α5              0.61
                                         α6              0.99
                                         α7               1.4
                                         α8              1.74
                                         α9               2.7

Notes: This table shows the estimates used in equations (6) and (7). βA is estimated in section
3.1. β1040 , βB , βC , βD , βE , βF and βSE are estimated in section 6.2. Section 6.1 explains how
αdep , αef i and αprep are estimated. Section 4.1 explains how αi , i = 1, ..., 10 are estimated.




                                               34
Table 2: Standard Errors of the Diﬀerence Between the 1987 and 1989
Densities (figure 2a)


              Bin       Deduction   Diﬀerence Standard            z-stat
                         Range                  Errors
                1     [9991, 11991] 0.00311*** 0.00047             6.55
                2    (11991, 13991] 0.00190*** 0.00044             3.47
                3    (13991, 15991]   0.00000  0.00040             0.02
                4    (15991, 17991]  -0.00047  0.00041             -1.13
                5    (17991, 19991]   0.00022  0.00038             0.59
                6    (19991, 21991]  -0.00010  0.00033             -0.31
                7    (21991, 23991]  -0.00041  0.00028             -1.45
                8    (23991, 25991]  -0.00042  0.00025             -1.67
                9    (25991, 27991]  -0.00032  0.00020             -1.60
               10    (27991, 29991] -0.00042** 0.00018             -2.24

Notes: This table shows the bootstrapped standard errors for the diﬀerence between
bins in figure 2a * denotes significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at
the 1% level. I use 100 replications for the bootstrap estimation.


     Table 3: Calibration of Rational Inattention Model

                                      Precision of Beliefs
                                   About Level of Savings (σ)
                            10 50 100 200 500 1000 2000 3000
       CRRA coeﬃcient
            0.1              0    0     0        1     5    28     70       152
           0.25              0    0     0        2    11    44    167       203
            0.5              0    0     1        4    22    86     64       625
            0.8              0    0     1        5    35   134    462       880
             1               0    1     2        7    44   164    547      1015
            1.1              0    1     2        8    48   179    586      1074
           1.25              0    1     2        9    54   200    640      1153
            1.5              0    1     3        11   64   233    718      1262
            1.8              0    1     3        13   76   270    799      1364
             2               0    1     4        14   84   293    844      1417

Notes: This table shows the results of a calibration of the rational inattention model
derived in section 5.4.


                                            35
       WEB APPENDIX
  FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION
A      Pitt and Slemrod (1989)
    Pitt and Slemrod (1989) very elegantly apply the methods of Gronau (1973)
and Nelson (1977) to assess the compliance cost of itemizing deductions by esti-
mating a censored model with unobserved censoring thresholds using maximum
likelihood.
To do so they estimate a cost and benefit function of itemizing deductions. The
benefit of itemizing is given by T Si = Xi β + ui where Xi are exogenous and ob-
served characteristics, β is a vector of parameters and ui an error term. Similarly,
the cost of itemizing is assumed to be Ci = Zi γ + vi , where Zi are exogenous and
observed characteristics, γ a vector of parameters and vi an error term. A person
will itemize if T Si ≥ Ci . T Si is only observed when T Si ≥ Ci but Ci is never ob-
served. Gronau (1973) and Nelson (1977) show that if ui and vi are uncorrelated
or if there are some characteristics present in Xi but not in Zi then the model is
identified and a likelihood function can be maximized to estimate both T Si and
Ci . Pitt and Slemrod (1989) acknowledge that there is no reason to assume that
the errors are uncorrelated but that there are some characteristics that are likely
to be present in Xi but not in Zi , therefore arguing that identification should be
valid.
The set of exogenous and observable characteristics they consider to estimate both
β and γ are whether a person is married, her AGI, the square of AGI, whether a
person owns a farming business, the number of age exemptions a person claims
and the number of exemptions claimed. The set of exogenous characteristics
specific to β are positive investment income, the average state income and sales
taxes for an income of $40,000, the average property tax rate in a given state and
an index of medical costs in a given state.
If the assumptions from Gronau (1973) and Nelson (1977) hold and given these
exogenous and observed characteristics, they can estimate the cost and benefit
function. They find that the average cost of itemizing is $107 (in 2016 dollars)
i.e. 6 times lower than the cost I estimate.


                                        36
Since Pitt and Slemrod (1989) acknowledge that ui and vi are likely to be corre-
lated, for the Gronau (1973) and Nelson (1977) estimators to be consistent, the
exclusion restriction imposed on Xi and Zi becomes necessary for identification.

B      Assumption A2
    Assumption A2 states that the cost should not increase with the level of de-
ductions. It makes sense to assume that the cost of deducting $10,000 worth
of mortgage interest is the same as deducting $100,000 because total mortgage
interest is reported on form 1098. However, it is also reasonable to assume that
an individual who donates $100,000 to charity is more likely to donate to more
charities than an individual who donates $10,000.
Assumption A2 is important for equation 3. Intuitively, it allows me to infer the
distortion imposed by the standard deduction on the pre-reform distribution in
bin j from bin j+m when the pre- and post-reform standard deduction thresholds
are m bins away. A2 can fail if the cost of itemizing decreases with the size of total
deductions which would bias my cost estimate downwards. But more importantly
it can fail if the cost of itemizing increases with the size of total deductions, which
would overestimate the cost. There is an easy way to provide an upper bound
for the bias introduced by a failure of A2: by using the pre-reform distribution
gδ (d) as the true counterfactual instead of f (d). This is a generous upper bound
because it assumes that the pre-reform distribution is undistorted just above the
standard deduction in spite of figure 2a showing a clear distortion. In this case,
the estimated cost would be $519 instead of $591. Therefore if A2 fails, the cost
of itemizing would lie between $519 and $591.

C      Sample Restrictions
C.1     Figure 1
   The sample used for figure 1 are joint filers who itemize deductions. I focus
on joint filers because they represent more than 50% of the population and the
standard deduction is specific to the filing status. This means that I cannot
show every tax filing status on the same graph because they would have diﬀerent
standard deductions. Figure H.15 shows the same patterns for single taxpayers.




                                          37
C.2     Figures 2a, 2b
   In figure 2a and 2b, I focus on taxpayers who are married filing jointly for the
reasons outlined in section C.1. In addition, in 1988 and 1989 there were two tax
brackets (15% and 28%) and a tax rate “bubble” (33%). Most taxpayers who
itemize deductions fall in the 28% marginal tax bracket. Therefore, to control for
the change in marginal tax rates, I only consider taxpayers who fall in the 28%
marginal tax rate bracket. This allows me to precisely calculate the amount of
after tax forgone benefit.

C.3     Figure 4
  In figure 4, I use the same sample restrictions as in figure 2a and 2b and break
down the sample into deciles of income.

C.4     Figure 5
   To generate figure 5, I consider joint filers as explained in section C.1. In figure
(a), I consider all years from 1980 to 2006 but exclude 1985 and 1990 because the
tax preparer variable is missing in those years. In figure (b), I consider all years
from 1998 to 2006 because few taxpayers used electronic filing prior to 2006.

C.5     Figure 8c
   The variable indicating the week in which a return is processed by the IRS
is only present in the SOI files in year 1980 to 1999. Thus, to generate figure
8c, I restrict attention to those years. I use the same sample restrictions as in
figure C.1 in addition to dropping taxpayers who have a balance due to the IRS.
If taxpayers owe money to the IRS, it is rational to wait as much as possible so
as to save on interest.

C.6     Week of Filing Variable
   The SOI files contain a variable that indicates the week in which a return is
processed by the IRS. Slemrod et al. (1997) have access to the internal IRS files
that record the filing date and compare it to the processing date from the SOI
files. They find that the order in which returns are processed matches the order
in which they are filed. Knowing the order is suﬃcient for my purposes because
what I am interested in is comparing taxpayers who file close to the deadline to
those who file earlier. I can therefore use the processing time variable to identify
late filers and verify the predictions of the naive present bias model. The IRS

                                          38
promises that returns are processed within 6 weeks. This constraint is likely to be
binding for returns that are filed close to the deadline given that a lot of returns
are processed at the time. Therefore, I assume that the processing time has a lag
of 6 weeks.
   I restrict the sample used to generate this graph to taxpayers who are owed
refunds by the IRS and who do not have to file any other schedule but Sched-
ule A. This allows me to rule out taxpayers who rationally delay filing to save
on interest on the amount they owe to the IRS and taxpayers who cannot file
early because others schedules sometimes require additional paperwork that only
becomes available later in the year.

C.7      Taxpayers Who Have To Claim the Standard Deduc-
         tion
    In rare cases, taxpayers have to claim the standard deduction even when
their itemized deductions exceed the standard deduction. These individuals are
dropped from my sample. This happens in the following four cases:
  1. A married taxpayer whose spouse files separately and itemizes deduction.
  2. In some states, a taxpayer who wants to itemize on her state tax return has
     to itemize on her federal tax return as well.
  3. A taxpayer who is neither a citizen nor a permanent resident of the United
     States.
  4. A taxpayer who can benefit from itemizing for alternative minimum tax
     purposes even though the standard deduction is greater than the sum of
     her itemized deductions.

D      Tax Reform Act of 1986 and Lagged Responses
    Could there be any other exogenous variation altering the distribution of item-
ized deductions in 1989 aﬀecting my main identification strategy? The majority
of tax reforms happened following the TRA’86 and were enacted in 1987. Among
those, there were some deduction reforms. Because I am comparing 1987 to 1989,
I am implicitly controlling for the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA’86) reforms.
But there might be slow adjustments and lagged responses in 1988 or 1989. To
rule these out, I consider all the reforms enacted by TRA’86 that could aﬀect
the level of deductions and show that it is reasonable to assume that the adjust-


                                        39
ment is immediate. Because all of the reforms reduced the amount of eligible
deductions, they have no lagged response. To see this consider a hypothetical
example: assume the charitable donation deduction is capped at $10,000. A tax-
payer who was donating $15,000 will now only be able to deduct $10,000. Will
the taxpayer reduce her donations? She might reduce them up to $10,000 but
there is no reason to expect that she will reduce them any further. What does
this imply for the level of deductions? We should observe a drop in deductions to
$10,000 in 1987 and then no further drop in 1988 or 1989, ruling out any lagged
responses. Since I am comparing 1987 to 1989, any reform that caps the amount
of deductions should not aﬀect my estimates. The deduction reforms enacted in
1987 are the following (source: IRS):
   • Prior to 1987, medical deductions in excess of 5% of the AGI are deductible.
     In 1987, this threshold is increased to 7.5% of AGI, further limiting the
     allowable amount of medical deductions. There is no reason to assume that
     there will be a slow adjustment that spills over into 1988 or 1989 in this
     case.
   • Sales taxes are not deductible anymore. For similar reasons, one should
     observe a drop in the total deductions in 1987 as sales taxes were a large
     portion of it but there should be no lagged eﬀect.
   • The home mortgage interest deduction is subject to a new limit. The home
     mortgage interest deductions for a given year are capped at the value of
     one’s house (plus renovations). Anything in excess of the value of the house
     have to be deducted as personal interest for which only 65% of the total
     value can be deducted. First, the IRS estimated that very few taxpayers
     were aﬀected by this reform since it is very rare that one’s home mortgage
     interest in one given year exceeds the total value of one’s house. Second,
     there is no reason to expect a drop in levels in the subsequent years. If a
     person is aﬀected by this reform, in 1987 she will be forced to claim less
     deduction than she was previously claiming.
   • Any interest for home mortgages in excess of 1 million dollars is not de-
     ductible anymore. Again, there is no reason to expect any lagged eﬀects
    due to this reform because it caps the amount of deductions.
  There are no other reforms aﬀecting directly or indirectly the amount of item-


                                       40
ized deductions an individual can qualify for.

E      The 1971, 1975 and 2003 reforms
E.1     The 1971 and 1975 reforms
   In 1970 and 1975 taxpayers could claim as a standard deduction the smaller
of the standard deduction or 10% of their income. In 1971, both thresholds were
increased to $8,809 or 13% of income if income is greater than $46,983, and the
larger of $6,166 or 13% of income for taxpayers with income smaller than $46,983.
In 1975, a similar two tiered standard deduction existed with an AGI limit of 16%
and a dollar limit of $74,431.
  If I were to only look at the density of itemizers above $6,130 in 1970 and
compare it to the density of itemizers above $8,809 in 1971, my estimates would
be biased because some taxpayers who have deductions greater than $8,809 in
1971 are likely to stop itemizing – not because of compliance costs – but only
because their deductions are now smaller than 13% of their income. This is why
using 1971 and 1975 will not yield accurate estimate of compliance costs (they
tend to over-estimate them).

E.2     The 2003 reform
    Two main changes occurred in 2003 that aﬀect the post-reform standard de-
duction. The first one is that tax rates were reduced 2 to 3 percentage points
(depending on the bracket), reducing the incentive to itemize. The second one is
that electronic filing was rapidly expanding in the early 2000’s complicating the
comparison between the pre and post-reform standard deduction.

F      Audit Survey
  The survey was carried outside a health food supermarket in Santa Monica,
California. The location was chosen to attract as many wealthy individuals as
possible to increase the proportion of itemizers. 195 individuals were surveyed
of which 114 file their taxes themselves. Of those 95 itemize deductions, which
constitutes the final sample. They were asked the following questions:

    1. Do you file taxes yourself?

    2. Do you itemize deductions or claim the standard deduction?


                                       41
  3. Per year, what do you think the chances of being audited are?

  4. Assume the IRS wants to audit you. What is the highest amount you would
     pay a lawyer that would deal directly with the IRS and prevent you from
      being audited?

  5. What is the annual income of your household? (Brackets of $1,000)


G      Rational Inattention
   Could taxpayers forgo large amounts of deductions because they are uncer-
tain of whether their total deductions are larger than the standard deductions
threshold?
Most of the deductions are relatively stable from year to year as they mostly
consist of items that vary very little such as mortgage payments, real estate taxes
or state income taxes. This means that taxpayers should have an accurate signal
of their true deductions. In addition, the expenses associated with deductions
are an active decision: if deductions increase or decrease by a large percentage,
taxpayers are likely to be aware of this change because they caused it.
Therefore, for rational inattention to explain the magnitude of the estimated
compliance costs, one would need to assume that taxpayers receive a very noisy
signal which is unlikely given that deductions vary little from year to year. I
formalize this argument in what follows:
Assume that the taxpayer has a Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) utility
                            1
function given by U(x) = 1−θ  x1−θ if θ ̸= 1 and U(x) = log(x) if θ = 1.
Denote by τ the after tax amount of deductions the taxpayer can claim (deduction
multiplied by marginal tax rate) and by S the after tax amount of the standard
deduction. Assume that the taxpayer has beliefs over τ that follow a normal
distribution with mean µ and standard deviation σ. Denote by c the cost incurred
by the taxpayer to calculate the total amount of deductions τ . The cost is only
incurred when she itemizes, not when she claims the standard deduction.
The taxpayer will decide to itemize if the expected benefit from itemizing given
her beliefs over τ exceeds the cost of figuring out the level of τ ı.e. c. This occurs




                                         42
when the following equation is satisfied:
                            &               '
                             1          1−θ      1
                          E     (τ − c)       ≥     S 1−θ .                           (8)
                            1−θ                 1−θ

This equation does not have a closed form solution, so I use a Taylor expansion
of second degree around the mean of τ − c, as follows:

                  1              1                    1
                     (µ − c)1−θ − θ(µ − c)−1−θ σ 2 ≥     S 1−θ .                      (9)
                 1−θ             2                   1−θ

And for θ = 1, it is equal to:

                                             σ2
                           log(µ − c) −             ≥ log(S).                        (10)
                                          2(µ − c)2

The first term in equation 10 is the expected benefit that the taxpayer derives
from itemizing. The second term is a correction for the risk aversion of the tax-
payer: she will itemize deductions if the benefit of itemizing corrected for her risk
aversion is greater than the benefit she derives from itemizing. Holt and Laury
(2002) find a θ that ranges between -0.95 and 1.37. I assume here that θ = 1
but also consider 0 < θ ≤ 236 in table 3. I fix the standard deduction at $10,000
for joint filers. The cost estimated by the IRS of the time required to itemize
deductions is c = 149. I can calculate a lower bound on the standard deviation of
the taxpayer’s beliefs over τ (σ). Using these parameters, I find that for rational
inattention to explain the magnitude of the forgone benefits, the standard devi-
ation of after tax deductions σ has to be greater than $1,814 (which corresponds
to $6,479 worth of deductions with a 28% marginal tax rate). This means that
the taxpayer has a range of uncertainty of deductions of more than $6,479. This
implies very high uncertainty in the beliefs of the benefits that the taxpayer can
save from itemizing which is unlikely given that deductions are relatively stable
from year to year as they are mostly constituted of mortgage payments and state
taxes and are the results of active decisions. If a taxpayer’s total deductions
were to increase or decrease dramatically, she would most likely know about it
because it would be due to for example to large income variations, the take up
   36
      Negative values of θ are not considered because they imply risk lovingness and would
trivially reject rational inattention.


                                           43
of a mortgage etc. which are salient.
   If I assume a standard deviation of σ = 200 – which corresponds to a standard
deviation of deductions of $714 – then rational inattention with θ = 1 predicts
that taxpayers would claim the standard deduction up to total deductions of
$10,557 and forgo an average of $557 worth of deductions, i.e. 156 of after tax
dollars given a cost c=$149. With reasonable parameters, rational inattention
predicts that taxpayers will forgo an additional $7 in excess of the cost of $149.

H      Time Inconsistency: Model
    I assume that the cost of record keeping continuously increases for every day
that the receipt is not archived as soon as it is received. When the taxpayer
is issued a receipt for a charitable donation and fails to archive it, the cost of
keeping track of this receipt increases continuously because it is more likely to be
lost or it could take more time to look for it. The rational taxpayer archives the
receipt as soon it is issued. The naive present-biased taxpayer plans on archiving
the receipt but fails to do so, leading to high record keeping costs.
   Assume for simplicity that the taxpayer only needs to itemize one deduction
for example for a charitable contribution she made. The taxpayer is facing two
distinct costs when considering the decision to itemize deductions. The first one
is that of record keeping, denoted here by c. The second one is filling out Schedule
A itself which is denoted by k.
   If the taxpayer succeeds in performing the two tasks she receives a one time
benefit b in the subsequent period. Once the taxpayer gets the receipt for her
charitable contribution, she can decide to archive it immediately by incurring a
cost c or archive it later and incur a larger cost c(1 + r) next period where r is
the rate at which the cost of record keeping grows if the receipt is not archived.
   δ is the time-discount factor, β the present-bias parameter, t the period in
which the record keeping is performed and Schedule A is filled out and (t + 1)
the period in benefit b is received.
   In what follows, I use two definitions:
  Definition 1: For given β, δ, c, k, (1 + r) and t a task is said to be β-
worthwhile if −c(1 + r)t − k + βb > 0.
   Similarly:
   Definition 2 For given δ, c, k, (1 + r), and t a task is said to be δ-worthwhile

                                        44
if −c(1 + r)t − k + δb > 0.
   The rational taxpayer has a standard utility function where per-period utility
is discounted by δ in the future.
   The decision to itemize or claim the standard deduction for the rational tax-
payer can be written as follows:

                            max δ t (−c(1 + r)t − k + δb),
                              t


conditional on itemizing being δ-worthwhile.
   Cost c is incurred as soon as the taxpayer starts the record keeping. If she waits
an additional t periods before archiving the receipt, the cost of record keeping is
multiplied by (1 + r) for every additional period i.e. (1 + r)t overall. Therefore,
to minimize the cost of record keeping, the rational taxpayer will choose t = 0,
this means that she will archive the receipt as soon as it is received and will incur
a record keeping cost of c rather than c(1 + r)t .
   The taxpayer is left with choosing t such that:

                            max δ t (−c(1 + r)t − k + δb)
                              t


Assume the taxpayer is contemplating the decision to perform the record keeping
task in the first period yielding utility: −c − k + δb. She will only perform
it if −c − k + δb > 0. And if she waits an additional period she will receive
δ(−c(1 + r) − k + δb), which is smaller than the utility she would have enjoyed
if the task had been performed in the first period. This means that the rational
taxpayer will either archive the receipt immediately or never archive it because
she does not plan on itemizing her deductions.
   The naive present biased taxpayer can perform the record keeping in period t
or can wait and perform it in period t + 1. She will prefer performing it in period
t + 1 if the following inequality is satisfied:

                  −c(1 + r)t − k + βb < β[−c(1 + r)t+1 − k + b].




                                          45
This inequality simplifies to:

                      − c(1 + r)t − k < β[−c(1 + r)t+1 − k].                   (11)

A suﬃcient condition for equation 11 to hold is:

                                   (1 + r)β < 1.                               (12)

   Intuitively, for the naive present-biased taxpayer to procrastinate on archiving
her receipt, it is suﬃcient that the rate at which the record keeping cost increases
be smaller than the rate at which she discounts the future.
   Provided that condition 11 holds in period t = 0, it will also hold in any
subsequent period t > 0 i.e. if itemizing is worthwhile but not performed in the
very first period, the taxpayer will procrastinate until she reaches the deadline.
   Testable Prediction 1: Naive present-biased taxpayers will file their returns
at the deadline of April 15th when condition 11 holds.
   Testable Prediction 2: The cost of record keeping for naive present-biased
taxpayers is greater than for rational ones. This predicts that taxpayers who file
close to the deadline are likely to forgo more deductions.




                                        46
     Figure H.10: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction 2004-2006 (Joint
     Filers)
                      3




                                                                                                                           3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                           Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Number of itemizers in millions
                             2




                                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
47


          1




                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                      0




                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                        0      12,324      20,000        30,000          40,000   50,000                                     0      12,289      20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000                                     0      12,262      20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000
                                            Total Itemized Deductions in 2004 bin size of $2000                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 2005 bin size of $2000                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 2006 bin size of $2000



                                                       (a) 2004                                                                                             (b) 2005                                                                                             (c) 2006

     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for itemizers filing jointly. The bin size is $2,000 and the vertical line
     represents the standard deduction threshold for each year.
     Figure H.11: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction 1998-2003 (Joint
     Filers)
                      3




                                                                                                                                                             3
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                             Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of itemizers in millions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                             2




                                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.25
          1




                                                                                                                                                 1
                      0




                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                        0   10,454         20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000                                                                       0           10,372         20,000        30,000          40,000        50,000                                                                     0    6,133                          20,000                30,000
                                            Total Itemized Deductions in 1998 bin size of $2000                                                                                            Total Itemized Deductions in 1999 bin size of $2000                                                                                         Total Itemized Deductions in 2000 bin size of $2000



                                                       (a) 1998                                                                                                                                       (b) 1999                                                                                                                                    (c) 2000
48


                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                             2,000,000
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of itemizers in millions
                                                                                                             Number of itemizers
                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                           1,000,000
          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                      0




                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                        0   10,299         20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000                                 0                                         10,473         20,000        30,000         40,000        50,000                                        0                    12,392      20,000        30,000          40,000               50,000
                                            Total Itemized Deductions in 2001 bin size of $2000                                                                                    Total Itemized Deductions in 2002 bin size of $2000                                                                       Total Itemized Deductions in 2003 bin size of $2000



                                                       (d) 2001                                                                                                                               (e) 2002                                                                                                                               (f ) 2003

     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for itemizers filing jointly. The bin size is $2,000 and the vertical line
     represents the standard deduction threshold for each year.
     Figure H.12: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction 1992-1997 (Joint
     Filers)
                      3




                                                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                    Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of itemizers in millions
                             2




                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
          1




                                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                        0     10,264         20,000         30,000         40,000    50,000                                                                           0           10,298         20,000        30,000          40,000        50,000                                                                    0     10,284         20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000
                                              Total Itemized Deductions in 1992 bin size of $2000                                                                                                 Total Itemized Deductions in 1993 bin size of $2000                                                                                        Total Itemized Deductions in 1994 bin size of $2000



                                                         (a) 1992                                                                                                                                            (b) 1993                                                                                                                                   (c) 1994
49




                                                                                                                              3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                              Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of itemizers in millions
                                 0.5




                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
           0.25




                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                      0




                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                        0   6,142                     20,000                30,000                                              0                                         10,249         20,000         30,000         40,000       50,000                                       0                 10,318         20,000        30,000          40,000                50,000
                                              Total Itemized Deductions in 1995 bin size of $2000                                                                                         Total Itemized Deductions in 1996 bin size of $2000                                                                      Total Itemized Deductions in 1997 bin size of $2000



                                                         (d) 1995                                                                                                                                    (e) 1996                                                                                                                              (f ) 1997

     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for itemizers filing jointly. The bin size is $2,000 and the vertical line
     represents the standard deduction threshold for each year.
     Figure H.13: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction 1986-1991 (Joint
     Filers)
                      3




                                                                                                                                                                   3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                   Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of itemizers in millions
                             2




                                                                                                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
          1




                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                        0   8036             20000          30000           40000   50000                                                                            0         7944             20000          30000           40000   50000                                                                     0     10144          20000          30000           40000   50000
                                              Total Itemized Deductions in 1986 bin size of $2000                                                                                                Total Itemized Deductions in 1987 bin size of $2000                                                                                   Total Itemized Deductions in 1988 bin size of $2000



                                                         (a) 1986                                                                                                                                           (b) 1987                                                                                                                              (c) 1988
50


                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                             0.5
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                             Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of itemizers in millions
                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                         0.25
          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                      0




                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                        0     10,033         20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000                                     0                                     5,968                 20,000           30,000                                                         0                10,044         20,000         30,000         40,000                  50,000
                                              Total Itemized Deductions in 1989 bin size of $2000                                                                                        Total Itemized Deductions in 1990 bin size of $2000                                                                Total Itemized Deductions in 1991 bin size of $2000



                                                         (d) 1989                                                                                                                                   (e) 1990                                                                                                                         (f ) 1991

     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for itemizers filing jointly. The bin size is $2,000 and the vertical line
     represents the standard deduction threshold for each year.
     Figure H.14: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction 1980-1985 (Joint
     Filers)
                      0.5




                                                                                                                                                                        3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                        Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Number of itemizers in millions
                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                   0.25




                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                        0   6,699          20,000    30,000                                                                                                               0             8977            20000          30000           40000           50000                                                                         0    8977            20000          30000          40000    50000
                                                    Total Itemized Deductions in 1980 bin size of $2000                                                                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 1981 bin size of $2000                                                                                               Total Itemized Deductions in 1982 bin size of $2000



                                                               (a) 1980                                                                                                                                             (b) 1981                                                                                                                                           (c) 1982
51




                                                                                                                                  3
                      3
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                  Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of itemizers in millions
                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.25
                                                                                                                      1
          1           0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                        0       8193             20000          30000           40000     50000                                     0                                         7853             20000          30000           40000            50000                                       0   5,331                          20,000        30,000
                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 1983 bin size of $2000                                                                                           Total Itemized Deductions in 1984 bin size of $2000                                                                              Total Itemized Deductions in 1985 bin size of $2000



                                                               (d) 1983                                                                                                                                    (e) 1984                                                                                                                                      (f ) 1985

     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for itemizers filing jointly. The bin size is $2,000 and the vertical line
     represents the standard deduction threshold for each year.
                      0.5               Figure H.15: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction (Single Filers)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                  Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of itemizers in millions
                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                   0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.25
                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                        0    6,699                          20,000                30,000                                                                            0          5,331                              20,000                   30,000                                                                      0     5,968                           20,000                30,000
                                            Total Itemized Deductions in 1980 bin size of $2000                                                                                                 Total Itemized Deductions in 1985 bin size of $2000                                                                                          Total Itemized Deductions in 1990 bin size of $2000



                                                       (a) 1980                                                                                                                                            (b) 1985                                                                                                                                     (c) 1990
52




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.75
      Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                            Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Number of itemizers in millions
                                 0.5




                                                                                                                                 0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
           0.25




                                                                                                               0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.25
                      0




                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                        0   6,142                           20,000                 30,000                                     0                                          6,133                            20,000                  30,000                                         0            6,144.57                           20,000                                30,000
                                            Total Itemized Deductions in 1995 bin size of $2000                                                                                         Total Itemized Deductions in 2000 bin size of $2000                                                                    Total Itemized Deductions in 2005 bin size of $2000



                                                       (d) 1995                                                                                                                                    (e) 2000                                                                                                                                (f ) 2005

     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for single filers who itemize deductions. The bin size is $2,000 and the
     vertical line represents the standard deduction threshold for each year.
      Figure H.16: Reduced Form Evidence of the Existence of Compliance Costs
                                                    (a) 1970-1971 Comparison                                                                                                               (b) 1974-1975 Comparison

           0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5




                                                                                                                                                                          2.4
                                                                                                                                            Number of Itemizers In Millions
                Number of Itemizers In Millions




                                                                                                                                           0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6  0       2
                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                          11 94
                                                                                                                                                                                               23




                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                  94 7
                                                     01




                                                                     0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 00
                                                     6




                                                                  00




                                                                              00




                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                  00




                                                                                                                                                                                           90
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,8
                                                  62




                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                20




                                                                             30




                                                                                                   40




                                                                                                                50
                                                    Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 inflation adjusted                                                                   Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                           1970                         1971                                                                                                      1974               1975




                                                                                                             (c) 2002-2003 Comparison
                                                                                         3
                                                                                         2.5   2
                                                                                     Frequency
                                                                                   1    1.5
                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                               388
                                                                                                                 6



                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                            1246



                                                                                                                          00




                                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                                                                00




                                                                                                                                                                                              00
                                                                                                            10




                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                  30




                                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                            50




                                                                                                            Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 inflation adjusted

                                                                                                                                   2002                                                2003


Notes: These graph plot the density of deductions before and at the time of the 1971, 1975 and 2003 reforms. While these
show reduced form evidence of the existence of compliance costs, they do not provide accurate estimates of these compliance
costs because other changes occurred at the same time.
         Figure H.17: Placebo Test: Overlapping Densities In Years With No Reforms

                                                            (a) 1990-1992                                                                                   (b) 1991-1993



                         Frequency




                                                                                                                         Frequency
                                     0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                         0                                                                                               0
                                          Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation                    Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                         1990              1992                                                                          1991              1993
54




                                                            (c) 1992-1994                                                                                   (d) 1993-1995
                         Frequency




                                                                                                                         Frequency
                                     0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                         0                                                                                               0
                                          Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation                    Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                         1992              1994                                                                          1993              1995




     Notes: The figures above test assumption A1 which states the cost of itemizing does not vary from year to year.
         Figure H.18: Placebo Test: Overlapping Densities In Years With No Reforms

                                                            (a) 1994-1996                                                                                   (b) 1995-1997



                         Frequency




                                                                                                                         Frequency
                                     0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                         0                                                                                               0
                                          Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation                    Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                         1994              1996                                                                          1995              1997
55




                                                            (c) 1996-1998                                                                                   (d) 1997-1999
                         Frequency




                                                                                                                         Frequency
                                     0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                         0                                                                                               0
                                          Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation                    Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                         1996              1998                                                                          1997              1999




     Notes: The figures above test assumption A1 which states the cost of itemizing does not vary from year to year.
         Figure H.19: Placebo Test: Overlapping Densities In Years With No Reforms

                                                            (a) 1998-2000                                                                                   (b) 1999-2001
                         Frequency




                                                                                                                         Frequency
56




                                     0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                         0                                                                                               0
                                          Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation                    Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                         1998              2000                                                                          1999              2001




     Notes: The figures above test assumption A1 which states the cost of itemizing does not vary from year to year.
                        Figure H.20: Eﬀect of Electronic Filing on Cost
           .00015
                .0001
        density
  .00005   0




                         0                  10000                     20000                   30000
                              Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 inflation adjusted

                                        Extrapolated Counterfactual                E−filers
                                        Paper filers




Notes: This graph pools all cross sections from 1998 to 2006 for joint filers and plots the
distribution of itemizers using electronic filing and paper filing. It uses the area away from the
standard deduction to extrapolate the shape of the counterfactual distribution of itemizers just
above the standard deduction.




                                                       57
           Figure H.21: Forgone Benefits Increase With Income
  300 600 900 1200 1500 1800 2100 2400
         Burden of Itemizing
                    0




                                    70000   80000   90000   100000   110000   120000   130000
                                                            Income




Notes: This graph plots the relationship between forgone benefits and income for all income
deciles.




                                                            58
                     Figure H.22: Diﬀerent Scenarios Below the Standard Deduction

                                   (a) Increasing: Impossible                                                         (b) Double Peaked: Unlikely



                                                         65% of taxpayers claim
                                                           Standard Deduction                                                                     65% of taxpayers claim
                                                                                                                                                    Standard Deduction
                           0




                                                                                                              0
                               0                                                                                  0
                                      Total Itemized Deductions in 2006 bin size of $2000                                      Total Itemized Deductions in 2006 bin size of $2000

                                                  Hypothetical              Observed                                                       Hypothetical              Observed
59




                                                                                       (c) Missing Mass



                                                                                                 65% of taxpayers claim
                                                                                                   Standard Deduction
                                                                 0




                                                                     0
                                                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 2006 bin size of $2000

                                                                                               Hypothetical               Missing
                                                                                               Observed




     Notes: The graphs above plot the diﬀerent scenarios that could be happening below the standard deduction. Graph (a) assumes that
     the density is strictly increasing, which is impossible given that 65% of taxpayers claim the standard deduction. This scenario would fail
     to account for most of the population of taxpayers. Graph (b) accounts for most of the population and is continuous at the standard
     deduction but the density is double peaked. This is possible but unlikely given that densities are usually single peaked. This however
     does not rule out densities that are double-peaked because of the standard deduction. Graph (c) assumes that there is a discontinuity at
     the standard deduction threshold because of compliance costs creating a missing mass.
               Figure H.23: No Behavioral Response For Personal Interest Deduction




                                                               2,000
                           Mean Of Personal Interest Deduction
                                        1,000       1,500
60




                              500               0

                                                                       21000
                                                                       22000
                                                                       23000
                                                                       24000
                                                                       25000
                                                                       26000
                                                                       27000
                                                                       28000
                                                                       29000
                                                                       30000
                                                                       31000
                                                                       32000
                                                                       33000
                                                                       34000
                                                                       35000
                                                                       36000
                                                                       37000
                                                                       38000
                                                                       39000
                                                                       40000
                                                                       41000
                                                                       42000
                                                                       43000
                                                                       44000
                                                                       45000
                                                                       46000
                                                                       47000
                                                                       48000
                                                                       49000
                                                                       50000
                                                                       51000
                                                                       52000
                                                                       53000
                                                                       54000
                                                                       55000
                                                                       56000
                                                                       57000
                                                                       58000
                                                                       59000
                                                                         AGI


     Notes: This figure plots the average personal interest deduction claimed by income bins of $1000 in 1989. Below $30,950, the
     marginal tax rate is 15% for married filing jointly and above it is equal to 28%. If taxpayers were responding to tax incentives
     when claiming the personal interest deduction, one would observe a discontinuity at the MTR threshold. None is observed
     here.
I     APPENDIX TABLES

    Table I.4: Standard Deduction By Year For Joint Filers

 Year Standard           S.D.      Growth       Year   Standard         S.D.   Growth
      deduction       in 2014 $      Rate              deduction     in 2014 $   Rate
 1961   1000            7968        0.00%       1984      3400          7796    0.00%
 1962   1000            7889        0.00%       1985      3540          7838    4.12%
 1963   1000            7786        0.00%       1986      3670          7978    3.67%
 1964   1000            7686        0.00%       1987      3760          7886    2.45%
 1965   1000            7564        0.00%       1988     5000          10070   32.98%
 1966   1000            7353        0.00%       1989      5200          9991    4.00%
 1967   1000            7133        0.00%       1990      5450          9935    4.81%
 1968   1000            6846        0.00%       1991      5700          9971    4.59%
 1969   1000            6492        0.00%       1992      6000         10189    5.26%
 1970   1000            6140        0.00%       1993      6200         10223    3.33%
 1971   1500            8824       50.00%       1994      6350         10208    2.42%
 1972   2000            11400      33.33%       1995      6550         10240    3.15%
 1973   2000            10732       0.00%       1996      6700         10174    2.29%
 1974   2000            9665        0.00%       1997      6900         10243    2.99%
 1975   2600            11514      30.00%       1998      7100         10378    2.90%
 1976   2800            11724       0.08%       1999      7200         10293    1.41%
 1977   3200            12580       0.14%       2000      7350         10169    2.08%
 1978   3200            11693       0.00%       2001      7600         10515    3.40%
 1979   3400            11158       0.06%       2002      7850         10560    3.29%
 1980   3400            9831        0.00%       2003      9500         12301   21.02%
 1981   3400            8911        0.00%       2004      9700         12234    2.11%
 1982   3400            8394        0.00%       2005     10000         12199    3.09%
 1983   3400            8133        0.00%       2006     10300         12173    3.00%

Notes: The table shows the standard deduction amounts from 1961 to 2006 for joint fil-
ers and its growth rate. The years that I use to identify the cost of itemizing deductions
are in bold.




                                           61
Table I.5: Standard Errors of the Diﬀerence Between the 1970 and
1971 Densities (figure H.16a)


               Bin      Deduction   Diﬀerence Standard              z-stat
                          Range                 Errors
                1      [6140, 9140] 0.00373*** 0.00102              3.64
                2     (9140, 12140] 0.00288*** 0.00090              3.20
                3    (12140, 15140] 0.00307*** 0.00074              4.11
                4    (15140, 18140] 0.00083*   0.00046              1.81
                5    (18140, 21140]   0.00019  0.00037              0.54
                6    (21140, 24140]   0.00039  0.00027              1.45
                7    (24140, 27140]  -0.00025  0.00018              -1.41
                8    (27140, 30140]  -0.00001  0.00015              -0.09
                9    (30140, 33140]  -0.00007  0.00011              -0.63
               10    (33140, 36140]  -0.00010  0.00010              -0.94

Notes: This table shows the bootstrapped standard errors for the diﬀerence between
bins in 1970 and 1971 for taxpayers with deductions below $30,000. * denotes signifi-
cance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. I use 100 replications
for the bootstrap estimation.




                                           62
Table I.6: Standard Errors of the Diﬀerence Between the Density of
Electronic Filers v.s. Paper Filers (Figure 5(b))


               Bin      Deduction    Diﬀerence Standard              z-stat
                          Range                  Errors
               1         [0, 2000)  7.08e-06*** 1.44e-06              4.92
               2       [2000, 4000)  3.02e-06*  1.55e-06              1.95
               3       [4000, 6000) 5.91e-06*** 1.39e-06              4.25
               4       [6000, 8000)  3.44e-06** 1.54e-06              2.23
               5      [8000, 10000) 5.10e-06*** 1.49e-06              3.42
               6     [10000, 12000)   1.47e-06  1.41e-06              1.04
               7     [12000, 14000)   2.37e-07  1.42e-06              0.17
               8     [14000, 16000)   -1.73e-06 1.18e-06             -1.47
               9     [16000, 18000)   -1.93e-07 1.04e-06             -0.19
               10    [20000, 22000) -1.88e-06*  1.03e-06             -1.82



Table I.7: Standard Errors of the Diﬀerence Between the Density of
March vs. April Filers (Figure 8c)


              Bin       Deduction     Diﬀerence  Standard             z-stat
                          Range                   Errors
                1        [0, 2000)   -.000012*** 2.87e-06             -4.17
                2      [2000, 4000) -.0000114*** 2.83e-06             -4.02
                3      [4000, 6000)    -5.08e-06 3.09e-06             -1.64
                4      [6000, 8000) -.0000141*** 3.39e-06             -4.17
                5     [8000, 10000) -9.22e-06*** 3.41e-06             -2.71
                6    [10000, 12000) -8.12e-06**  3.42e-06             -2.51
                7    [12000, 14000)    -4.21e-06 1.42e-06             -1.23
                8    [14000, 16000)    -5.94e-06 3.05e-06             -1.94
                9    [16000, 18000)   -4.86e-07* 3.36e-06             -0.14
               10    [20000, 22000) -5.57e-06**  2.81e-06             -1.98

Notes: These two tables show the bootstrapped standard errors for the diﬀerence
between the density of itemizers who use electronic filing versus paper filing in the first
table and the diﬀerence between April and March Filers in the second table.
* denotes significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.




                                            63
      Table I.8: Survey Based Estimates of the Compliance Costs of Taxation in the US

                    Article                             Methodology                          Cost of                Aggregate Costs
                                                                                      Itemizing Deductions           of Filing Taxes
            Wicks (1965) and                Survey of Montana                             Not reported          32% of state and 11.5%
        Wicks and Killworth (1967)                residents                                                      of federal tax revenue
        Slemrod and Sorum (1984)              Survey of 2000                               Not reported               5% to 7% of
                                            Minnesota residents                                                     total tax revenue
              Little (1988),              Two separate surveys of                          Not reported                1.59 billion
         Commissionned by IRS             750 and 6200 taxpayers                                                          hours
             Slemrod (1989)         Estimate structural model based on                   3.2 to 3.5 hours             Not reported
                                    survey of 2000 Minnesota residents
      Blumenthal and Slemrod (1992)      Survey of 2000 Minnesota                             9 hours                   85 billion
64




                                            households in 1990                                                           dollars
          Guyton et al. (2003)              Survey and ITBM*                                 9.9 hours              18.7 billion hours
                                                simulations                                                              dollars

     Notes: This table reports the results of several research article documenting the cost of tax filing using survey evidence. *ITBM
     stands for the Individual Tax Burden Model.
     Table I.9: Articles Documenting Low Take-Up Rates/Large Forgone Benefits

                Article                        Setting                       Forgone Benefits
         Steuerle et al. (1978)     Tax Benefits/Income Averaging                    $666
        Blank and Card (1991)      Unemployment Insurance Benefits     Take-up rate of less than 30%
                                                                     of eligible unemployed individuals
       Madrian and Shea (2001)           Retirement Savings           50% match of retirement savings
                                                                          up to 6% of contributions
            Sydnor (2010)                  Home Insurance            Five times the insurance premium
      Bhargava and Manoli (2015)              Taxes                             Earned Income
                                                                             Tax Credit Benefits
           Handel (2013)                 Health Insurance                       $2,032 per year
          Keys et al. (2014)            Mortgage Refinancing         Present discounted cost of $11,500
65
                                       Table I.10: IRS Hourly Cost Estimates

            Form          Recordkeeping     Learning about the         Preparing      Copying, assembling             Total
                                             law or the form           the form       and sending the form
                                                                                           to the IRS
             1040          3 hrs., 7 min.      2 hrs., 32 min.      3 hrs., 10 min.          35 min.            9hrs., 24 min.
           Sch. A         2 hrs., 47 min.         26 min.            1 hr., 1 min.           20 min.            4 hrs., 34 min.
           Sch. B             33 min.              8 min.              16 min.               20 min.            1 hr., 17 min.
           Sch. C         6 hrs., 13 min.       1 hr., 4 min.       1 hr., 56 min.           25 min.            9 hrs., 38 min.
           Sch. D          1 hr., 2 min.            1 hr.            1 hr., 8 min.           35 min.            3 hrs., 45 min.
          Sch. D-1            13 min.              1 min.              13 min.               35 min.             1 hr., 2 min.
           Sch. E         2 hr., 52 min.        1 hr., 7 min.       1 hr., 16 min.           35 min.            5 hrs., 50 min.
           Sch. F         9 hr., 41 min.       1 hr., 59 min.       3 hr., 52 min.           35 min.            16 hrs., 7 min.
66




           Sch. R             20 min.             15 min.              22 min.               35 min.            1 hr., 32 min.
        Sch. SE short         20 min.             11 min.              13 min.               14 min.               58 min.
        Sch. SE long          26 min.             22 min.              37 min.               20 min.            1 hr., 45 min.

     Notes: Each cell of this table is an estimate of the time it takes to perform each task associated with each tax schedule. They
     are based on IRS surveys of taxpayers at the time of filing and are reported in the 1040 instructions (on page 3 in 1989). There
     is no information on Sch. R in the SOI public use files so its cost is not estimated in this paper.
