                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DO PARENTS VALUE SCHOOL EFFECTIVENESS?

                                       Atila Abdulkadiroglu
                                         Parag A. Pathak
                                      Jonathan Schellenberg
                                      Christopher R. Walters

                                       Working Paper 23912
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23912


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 2017, Revised July 2019

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation and the W. T. Grant
Foundation. Thanks also go to Nikhil Agarwal, Josh Angrist, Stephane Bonhomme, David Card,
David Chan, Michael Dinerstein, Will Dobbie, James Heckman, Peter Hull, Pat Kline, Thibaut
Lamadon, Magne Mogstad, Jack Mountjoy, Derek Neal, Ariel Pakes, Stephen Raudenbush, Jesse
Rothstein, Alex Torgovitsky, Miguel Urquiola, Jeffrey Wooldridge, Danny Yagan, Seth
Zimmerman, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago Committee on Education
Workshop, the University of Chicago Harris School, UC Berkeley, the University of Chicago
Econometrics Lunch, the University of Chicago Interactions Conference, UW Madison, the 2017
NBER Labor Studies Fall meetings, the University of Virginia, the University of Hawaii, the
University of Rochester, Princeton University, the University of Maryland, and Arizona State
University for suggestions and comments. We’re grateful to Eryn Heying for invaluable
administrative support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23912.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Atila Abdulkadiroglu, Parag A. Pathak, Jonathan Schellenberg, and Christopher R.
Walters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Parents Value School Effectiveness?
Atila Abdulkadiroglu, Parag A. Pathak, Jonathan Schellenberg, and Christopher R. Walters
NBER Working Paper No. 23912
October 2017, Revised July 2019
JEL No. I21,I24,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

School choice may lead to improvements in school productivity if parents’ choices reward
effective schools and punish ineffective ones. This mechanism requires parents to choose schools
based on causal effectiveness rather than peer characteristics. We study relationships among
parent preferences, peer quality, and causal effects on outcomes for applicants to New York
City’s centralized high school assignment mechanism. We use applicants’ rank-ordered choice
lists to measure preferences and to construct selection-corrected estimates of treatment effects on
test scores, high school graduation, college attendance, and college quality. Parents prefer schools
that enroll high-achieving peers, and these schools generate larger improvements in short- and
long-run student outcomes. Preferences are unrelated to school effectiveness and academic match
quality after controlling for peer quality.

Atila Abdulkadiroglu                             Jonathan Schellenberg
Department of Economics                          University of California at Berkeley
Duke University                                  jschellenberg@econ.berkeley.edu
213 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708                                 Christopher R. Walters
and NBER                                         Department of Economics
atila.abdulkadiroglu@duke.edu                    University of California, Berkeley
                                                 530 Evans Hall #3880
Parag A. Pathak                                  Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Department of Economics, E52-426                 and NBER
MIT                                              crwalters@econ.berkeley.edu
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu
1     Introduction
Recent education reforms in the United States, including charter schools, school vouchers, and district-wide
open enrollment plans, increase parents’ power to choose schools for their children. School choice allows
households to avoid undesirable schools and forces schools to satisfy parents’ preferences or risk losing
enrollment. Proponents of choice argue that this competitive pressure is likely to generate system-wide
increases in school productivity and boost educational outcomes for students (Friedman, 1962; Chubb and
Moe, 1990; Hoxby, 2003). By decentralizing school quality assessment and allowing parents to act on local
information, school choice is conjectured to provide better incentives for educational effectiveness than
could be achieved by a centralized accountability system (Peterson and Campbell, 2001). Choice may also
improve outcomes by allowing students to sort into schools that suit their particular educational needs,
resulting in improved match quality (Hoxby, 2000). These arguments have motivated recent policy efforts
to expand school choice (e.g., DeVos, 2017).
    If choice is to improve educational effectiveness, parents’ choices must result in rewards for effective
schools and sanctions for ineffective ones. Our use of the term “effective” follows Rothstein (2006): an effec-
tive school is one that generates causal improvements in student outcomes. Choice need not improve school
effectiveness if it is not the basis for how parents choose between schools. For example, parents may value
attributes such as facilities, convenience, student satisfication, or peer composition in a manner that does
not align with educational impacts (Hanushek, 1981; Jacob and Lefgren, 2007). Moreover, while models in
which parents value schools according to their effectiveness are an important benchmark in the academic
literature (e.g., Epple et al., 2004), it may be difficult for parents to separate a school’s effectiveness from
the composition of its student body (Kane and Staiger, 2002). If parent choices reward schools that recruit
higher-achieving students rather than schools that improve outcomes, school choice may increase resources
devoted to screening and selection rather than better instruction (Ladd, 2002; MacLeod and Urquiola,
2015). Consistent with these possibilities, Rothstein (2006) shows that cross-district relationships among
school choice, sorting patterns, and student outcomes fail to match the predictions of a model in which
school effectiveness is the primary determinant of parent preferences.
    This paper offers new evidence on the links between parent preferences, school effectiveness, and peer
quality based on choice and outcome data for more than 250,000 applicants in New York City’s centralized
high school assignment mechanism. Each year, thousands of New York City high school applicants rank-
order schools, and the mechanism assigns students to schools using the deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm
(Gale and Shapley, 1962; Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2005). The DA mechanism is strategy-proof: truthfully
ranking schools is a weakly dominant strategy for students (Dubins and Freedman, 1981; Roth, 1982). This
fact motivates our assumption that applicants’ rankings measure their true preferences for schools.1 We
   1 As we discuss in Section 2, DA is strategy-proof when students are allowed to rank every school, but the New York City

mechanism only allows applicants to rank 12 choices. Most students do not fill their preference lists, however, and truthful
ranking is a dominant strategy in this situation (Haeringer and Klijn, 2009; Pathak and Sönmez, 2013). Fack et al. (2015)
propose empirical approaches to measuring student preferences without requiring that truth-telling is the unique equilibrium.



                                                             2
summarize these preferences by fitting discrete choice models to applicants’ rank-ordered preference lists.
   We then combine the preference estimates with estimates of school treatment effects on test scores, high
school graduation, college attendance, and college choice. Treatment effect estimates come from “value-
added” regression models of the sort commonly used to measure causal effects of teachers and schools (Todd
and Wolpin, 2003; Koedel et al., 2015). We generalize the conventional value-added approach to allow
for match effects in academic outcomes and to relax the selection-on-observables assumption underlying
standard models. Recent evidence suggests that value-added models controlling only for observables provide
quantitatively useful but biased estimates of causal effects due to selection on unobservables (Rothstein,
2010, 2017; Chetty et al., 2014a; Angrist et al., 2017). We therefore use the rich information on preferences
contained in students’ rank-ordered choice lists to correct our estimates for selection on unobservables. This
selection correction is implemented by extending the classic multinomial logit control function estimator
of Dubin and McFadden (1984) to a setting where rankings of multiple alternatives are known. We show
that predictions from our models match the effects of randomized lottery assignment for a subset of schools
where lottery quasi-experiments are available, suggesting that our methods provide accurate measures of
causal effects.
   The final step of our analysis relates the choice model and treatment effect estimates to measure
preferences for school effectiveness. The choice and outcome models we estimate allow preferences and
causal effects to vary flexibly with student characteristics. Our specifications accommodate the possibility
that schools are more effective for specific types of students and that applicants choose schools that are a
good match for their student type. We compare the degree to which parent preferences are explained by
overall school effectiveness, match quality, and peer quality, defined as the component of a school’s average
outcome due to selection rather than effectiveness. We explore these relationships for test scores as well
as longer-run postsecondary outcomes, which is important in view of recent evidence that school quality is
multi-dimensional and only imperfectly measured by effects on test scores (Beuermann et al., 2018).
   We find preferences are positively correlated with both peer quality and causal effects on student
outcomes. More effective schools enroll higher-ability students, however, and preferences are unrelated to
school effectiveness after controlling for peer quality. We also find little evidence of selection on match
effects: on balance, parents do not prefer schools that are especially effective for their own children, and
students do not enroll in schools that are a better-than-average match. These patterns are similar for
short-run achievement test scores and longer-run postsecondary outcomes. Looking across demographic
and baseline achievement groups, we find no evidence that any subgroup places positive weight on school
effectiveness once we adjust for peer quality. Our estimates are also similar across applicant cohorts,
suggesting that the relationship between demand and effectiveness is stable over time.
   The factors driving school popularity we uncover are noteworthy, but to translate them into implications
about the incentives schools face from demand-side forces requires isolating the causal impacts of school
attributes on preferences. Since effectiveness and peer quality are not randomly assigned to schools, our


                                                      3
estimates need not capture causal effects of these attributes on preferences if other school characteristics
that influence demand are correlated with effectiveness or peer quality. We assess the potential for such
omitted variables bias by conditioning on other school characteristics that predict demand, including
measures of violent incidents, teacher education, and the school learning environment. This analysis reveals
that parents prefer safer schools and schools with more educated teachers, but adding these covariates does
not alter our main results characterizing the partial correlations between preferences, peer quality, and
school effectiveness. This robustness exercise provides some reassurance that our estimates capture causal
impacts of effectiveness on demand, though we cannot completely rule out the possibility that peer quality
and school effectiveness are correlated with other unobservables.
   It’s worth cautioning that our findings do not mean that parents choose schools irrationally; they may
use peer characteristics to proxy for school effectiveness if the latter is difficult to observe, or value peer
quality independently of impacts on academic outcomes. Either way, our results imply that parents’ choices
penalize schools that enroll low achievers rather than schools that offer poor instruction. As a result, school
choice programs may generate stronger incentives for screening and selection than for improved academic
quality. We provide suggestive evidence that schools have responded to these incentives by increasing
screening in the years following the introduction of centralized assignment in New York City.
   Our analysis complements Rothstein’s (2006) indirect test with a direct assessment of the relationships
among parent preferences, peer quality, and school effectiveness based on unusually rich choice and outcome
data. The results also contribute to a large literature studying preferences for school quality (Black, 1999;
Figlio and Lucas, 2004; Bayer et al., 2007; Hastings and Weinstein, 2008; Burgess et al., 2014; Imberman
and Lovenheim, 2016). These studies show that housing prices and household choices respond to school
performance levels, but they do not typically separate responses to causal school effectiveness and peer
quality. Our findings are also relevant to theoretical and empirical research on the implications of school
choice for sorting and stratification (Epple and Romano, 1998; Epple et al., 2004; Hsieh and Urquiola,
2006; Barseghyan et al., 2014; Altonji et al., 2015; Avery and Pathak, 2015; MacLeod and Urquiola, 2015;
MacLeod et al., 2017). In addition, our results help to reconcile some surprising findings from recent studies
of school choice. Cullen et al. (2006) find limited achievement effects of admission to preferred schools in
Chicago, while Walters (2018) documents that disadvantaged students in Boston are less likely to apply to
charter schools than more advantaged students despite experiencing larger achievement benefits. Angrist
et al. (2013) and Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2018) report on two settings where parents opt for schools that
reduce student achievement. These patterns are consistent with our finding that school choices are not
driven by school effectiveness.
   Finally, our analysis adds to a recent series of studies leveraging preference data from centralized school
assignment mechanisms to investigate school demand (Hastings et al., 2009; Harris and Larsen, 2014; Fack
et al., 2015; Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2017a; Glazerman and Dotter, 2016; Kapor et al., 2017; Agarwal and
Somaini, forthcoming). Some of these studies analyze assignment mechanisms that provide incentives


                                                      4
to strategically misreport preferences, while others measure academic quality using average test scores
rather than distinguishing between peer quality and school effectiveness or looking at longer-run outcomes.
We build on this previous work by using data from a strategy-proof mechanism to separately estimate
preferences for peer quality and causal effects on multiple measures of academic performance.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes school choice in New York
City and the data used for our analysis. Section 3 develops a conceptual framework for analyzing school
effectiveness and peer quality, and Section 4 details our empirical approach. Section 5 summarizes estimated
distributions of student preferences and school treatment effects. Section 6 links preferences to peer quality
and school effectiveness, and Section 7 discusses implications of these relationships. Section 8 concludes
and offers some directions for future research.



2     Setting and Data

2.1    New York City High Schools

The New York City public school district annually enrolls roughly 90,000 ninth graders at more than
400 high schools. Rising ninth graders planning to attend New York City’s public high schools submit
applications to the centralized assignment system. Before 2003 the district used an uncoordinated school
assignment process in which students could receive offers from more than one school. Motivated in part
by insights derived from the theory of market design, in 2003 the city adopted a coordinated single-offer
assignment mechanism based on the student-proposing deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm (Gale and
Shapley, 1962; Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2005, 2009). Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2017a) show that introducing
coordinated assignment reduced the share of administratively assigned students and likely improved average
student welfare.
    Applicants report their preferences for schooling options to the assignment mechanism by submitting
rank-ordered lists of up to 12 academic programs. An individual school may operate more than one
program. To aid families in their decision-making the New York City Department of Education (DOE)
distributes a directory that provides an overview of the high school admission process, key dates, and
an information page for each high school. A school’s information page includes a brief statement of its
mission, a list of offered programs, courses and extracurricular activities, pass rates on New York Regents
standardized tests, and the school’s graduation rate (New York City Department of Education, 2003). DOE
also issues annual schools reports that list basic demographics, teacher characteristics, school expenditures,
and Regents performance levels. During the time period of our study (2003-2007) these reports did not
include measures of test score growth, though such measures have been added more recently (New York
City Department of Education, 2004, 2017).
    Academic programs prioritize applicants in the centralized admission system using a mix of factors.



                                                      5
Priorities depend on whether a program is classified as unscreened, screened, or an educational option
program. Unscreened programs give priority to students based on residential zones and (in some cases)
to those who attend an information session. Screened programs use these factors and may also assign
priorities based on prior grades, standardized test scores, and attendance. Educational option programs
use screened criteria for some of their seats and unscreened criteria for the rest. Random numbers are
used to order applicants with equal priority. A small group of selective high schools, including New York
City’s exam schools, admit students in a parallel system outside the main round of the assignment process
(Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2014).
    The DA algorithm combines student preferences with program priorities to generate a single program
assignment for each student. In the initial step of the algorithm, each student proposes to her first-choice
program. Programs provisionally accept students in order of priority up to capacity and reject the rest.
In subsequent rounds, each student rejected in the previous step proposes to her most-preferred program
among those that have not previously rejected her, and programs reject provisionally accepted applicants
in favor of new applicants with higher priority. This process iterates until all students are assigned to
a program or all unassigned students have been rejected by every program they have ranked. During
our study time period, students left unassigned in the main round participate in a supplementary DA
round in which they rank up to 12 additional programs with available seats. Any remaining students
are administratively assigned by the district. About 82 percent, 8 percent, and 10 percent of applicants
are assigned in the main, supplementary, and administrative rounds, respectively (Abdulkadiroğlu et al.,
2017a).
    An attractive theoretical property of the DA mechanism is that it is strategy-proof: since high-priority
students can displace those with lower priority in later rounds of the process, listing schools in order of true
preferences is a dominant strategy in the mechanism’s canonical version. This property, however, requires
students to have the option to rank all schools (Haeringer and Klijn, 2009; Pathak and Sönmez, 2013).
As we show below, more than 70 percent of students rank fewer than 12 programs, meaning that truthful
ranking of schools is a dominant strategy for the majority of applicants. The instructions provided with
the New York City high school application also directly instruct students to rank schools in order of their
true preferences (New York City Department of Education, 2003). In the analysis to follow, we interpret
students’ rank-ordered lists as truthful reports of their preferences. We also probe the robustness of our
findings to violations of this assumption by reporting results based on students that rank fewer than 12
choices.2




    2 Along similar lines, Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2017a) show that preference estimates using only the top ranked school, the

top three schools, and all but the last ranked school are similar.



                                                             6
2.2    Data and Samples

The data used here are extracted from a DOE administrative information system covering all students
enrolled in New York City public schools between the 2003-2004 and 2012-2013 school years. These data
include school enrollment, student demographics, home addresses, scores on New York Regents standard-
ized tests, Preliminary SAT (PSAT) scores, and high school graduation records, along with preferences
submitted to the centralized high school assignment mechanism. A supplemental file from the National
Student Clearinghouse (NSC) reports college enrollment for students graduating from New York City high
schools between 2009 and 2012. A unique student identifier links records across these files.
   We analyze high school applications and outcomes for four cohorts of students enrolled in New York City
public schools in eighth grade between 2003-2004 and 2006-2007. This set of students is used to construct
several samples for statistical analysis. The choice sample, used to investigate preferences for schools,
consists of all high school applicants with baseline (eighth grade) demographic, test score, and address
information. Our analysis of school effectiveness uses subsamples of the choice sample corresponding to
each outcome of interest. These outcome samples include students with observed outcomes, baseline scores,
demographics, and addresses, enrolled for ninth grade at one of 316 schools with at least 50 students for
each outcome. The outcome samples also exclude students enrolled at the nine selective high schools that
do not admit students via the main DA mechanism. Appendix A and Appendix Table A1 provide further
details on data sources and sample construction.
   Key outcomes in our analysis include Regents math standardized test scores, PSAT scores, high school
graduation, college attendance, and college quality. The high school graduation outcome equals one if a
student graduates within five years of her projected high school entry date given her eighth grade cohort.
Likewise, college attendance equals one for students who enroll in any college (two or four year) within
two years of projected on-time high school graduation. The college quality variable, derived from Internal
Revenue Service tax record statistics reported by Chetty et al. (2017b), equals the mean 2014 income
for children born between 1980 and 1982 who attended a student’s college. The mean income for the
non-college population is assigned to students who do not enroll in a college. While this metric does not
distinguish between student quality and causal college effectiveness, it provides a measure of the selectivity
of a student’s college. It has also been used elsewhere to assess effects of education programs on the
intensive margin of college attendance (Chetty et al., 2011, 2014b). College attendance and quality are
unavailable for the 2003-2004 cohort because the NSC data window does not allow us to determine whether
students in this cohort were enrolled in college within two years of projected high school graduation.
   Descriptive statistics for the choice and outcome samples appear in Table 1. These statistics show that
New York City schools serve a disadvantaged urban population. Seventy-three percent of students are
black or hispanic, and 65 percent are eligible for a subsidized lunch. Data from the 2011-2015 American
Community Surveys shows that the average student in the choice sample lives in a census tract with a




                                                      7
median household income of $50,136 in 2015 dollars. Observed characteristics are generally similar for
students in the choice and outcome samples. The average PSAT score in New York City is 116, about one
standard deviation below the US average (the PSAT is measured on a 240 point scale, normed to have a
mean of 150 and a standard deviation of 30). The five-year high school graduation rate is 61 percent, and
48 percent of students attend some college within two years of graduation.


2.3    Choice Lists

New York City high school applicants tend to prefer schools near their homes, and most do not fill their
choice lists. These facts are shown in Table 2, which summarizes rank-ordered preference lists in the choice
sample. As shown in column (1), 93 percent of applicants submit a second choice, about half submit
eight or more choices, and 28 percent submit the maximum 12 allowed choices. Column (2) shows that
students prefer schools located in their home boroughs: 85 percent of first-choice schools are in the same
borough as the student’s home address, and the fraction of other choices in the home borough are also high.
Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2017a) report that for 2003-04, 193 programs restricted eligibility to applicants who
reside in the same borough. The preference analysis to follow, therefore, treats schools in a student’s home
borough as her choice set and aggregates schools in other boroughs into a single outside option. Column
(3), which reports average distances (measured as great-circle distance in miles) for each choice restricted
to schools in the home borough, shows that students rank nearby schools higher within boroughs as well.
    Applicants also prefer schools with strong academic performance. The last column of Table 2 reports
the average Regents high school math score for schools at each position on the rank list. Regents scores
are normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation one in the New York City population. To earn a
high school diploma in New York state, students must pass a Regents math exam. These results reveal that
higher-ranked schools enroll students with better math scores. The average score at a first-choice school
is 0.2 standard deviations (σ) above the city average, and average scores monotonically decline with rank.
PSAT, graduation, college enrollment, and college quality indicators also decline with rank. Students and
parents clearly prefer schools with high achievement levels. Our objective in the remainder of this paper
is to decompose this pattern into components due to preferences for school effectiveness and peer quality.



3     Conceptual Framework
Consider a population of students indexed by i, each of whom attends one of J schools. Let Yij denote the
potential value of some outcome of interest for student i if she attends school j. The projection of Yij on
a vector of observed characteristics, Xi , is written:


                                            Yij = αj + Xi0 βj + ij ,                                    (1)




                                                         8
where E [ij ] = E [Xi ij ] = 0 by definition of αj and βj . The coefficient vector βj measures the returns to
observed student characteristics at school j, while ij reflects variation in potential outcomes unexplained
by these characteristics. We further normalize E [Xi ] = 0, so αj = E [Yij ] is the population mean potential
                                                                     P
outcome at school j. The realized outcome for student i is Yi = j 1 {Si = j} Yij , where Si ∈ {1...J}
denotes school attendance.
   We decompose potential outcomes into components explained by student ability, school effectiveness,
                                         P
and idiosyncratic factors. Let Ai ≡ (1/J) j Yij denote student i’s general ability, defined as the average
of her potential outcomes across all schools. This variable describes how the student would perform at the
average school. Adding and subtracting Ai on the right-hand side of (1) yields:


                            Yij = ᾱ + Xi0 β̄ + ¯i + (αj − ᾱ) + Xi0 (βj − β̄) + (ij − ¯i ),                    (2)
                                  |     {z        } | {z } |                  {z            }
                                         Ai              AT Ej                 Mij

                   P                       P                             P
where ᾱ = (1/J)     j   αj , β̄ = (1/J)      j   βj , and ¯i = (1/J)   j ij .   Equation (2) shows that student i’s
potential outcome at school j is the sum of three terms: the student’s general ability, Ai ; the school’s
average treatment effect, AT Ej , defined as the causal effect of school j relative to an average school for an
average student; and a match effect, Mij , which reflects student i’s idiosyncratic suitability for school j.
Match effects may arise either because of an interaction between student i’s observed characteristics and
the extra returns to characteristics at school j (captured by Xi0 (βj − β̄)) or because of unobserved factors
that make student i more or less suitable for school j (captured by ij − ¯i ).
    This decomposition allows us to interpret variation in observed outcomes across schools using three
terms. The average outcome at school j is given by:


                                  E [Yi |Si = j] = Qj + AT Ej + E [Mij |Si = j] .                                  (3)


Here Qj ≡ E [Ai |Si = j] is the average ability of students enrolled at school j, a variable we label “peer
quality.” The quantity E [Mij |Si = j] is the average suitability of j’s students for this particular school.
In a Roy (1951)-style model in which students sort into schools on the basis of comparative advantage in
the production of Yi , we would expect this average match effect to be positive for all schools. Parents and
students may also choose schools on the basis of peer quality Qj , overall school effectiveness AT Ej , or the
idiosyncratic match Mij for various outcomes.



4     Empirical Methods
The goal of our empirical analysis is to assess the roles of peer quality, school effectiveness, and academic
match quality in applicant preferences. Our analysis proceeds in three steps. We first use rank-ordered
choice lists to estimate preferences, thereby generating measures of each school’s popularity. Next, we



                                                             9
estimate schools’ causal effects on test scores, high school graduation, college attendance, and college
choice. Finally, we combine these two sets of estimates to characterize the relationships among school
popularity, peer quality, and causal effectiveness.


4.1    Estimating Preferences

Let Uij denote student i’s utility from enrolling in school j, and let J = {1...J} represent the set of
available schools. We abstract from the fact that students rank programs rather than schools by ignoring
repeat occurrences of any individual school on a student’s choice list. Uij may therefore be interpreted as
the indirect utility associated with student i’s favorite program at school j. The school ranked first on a
student’s choice list is

                                                 Ri1 = arg max Uij ,
                                                            j∈J

while subsequent ranks satisfy

                                      Rik = arg         max         Uij , k > 1.
                                                  j∈J \{Rim :m<k}

Student i’s rank-order list is then Ri = (Ri1 ...Ri`(i) )0 , where `(i) is the length of the list submitted by this
student.
   We summarize these preference lists by fitting random utility models with parameters that vary ac-
cording to observed student characteristics. Student i’s utility from enrolling in school j is modeled as:


                                         Uij = δc(Xi )j − τc(Xi ) Dij + ηij ,                                  (4)

where the function c(Xi ) assigns students to covariate cells based on the variables in the vector Xi , and
Dij records distance from student i’s home address to school j. The parameter δcj is the mean utility of
school j for students in covariate cell c, and τc is a cell-specific distance parameter or “cost.” We include
distance in the model because a large body of evidence suggests it plays a central role in school choices
(e.g., Hastings et al., 2009 and Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2017a). We model unobserved tastes ηij as following
independent extreme value type I distributions conditional on Xi and Di = (Di1 ...DiJ )0 . Equation (4) is
therefore a rank-ordered multinomial logit model (Hausman and Ruud, 1987).
   The logit model implies the conditional likelihood of the rank list Ri is:
                                          `(i)                                      
                                          Y          exp δc(Xi )Rik − τc(Xi ) DiRik
                       L (Ri |Xi , Di ) =     P                                               .
                                          k=1   j∈J \{R im :m<k} exp δc(X i )j − τc(X i ) Dij

We allow flexible heterogeneity in tastes by estimating preference models separately for 360 covariate
cells defined by the intersection of borough, sex, race (black, hispanic, or other), subsidized lunch status,
above-median census tract income, and terciles of the mean of eighth grade math and reading scores.
This specification follows several recent studies that flexibly parametrize preference heterogeneity in terms



                                                          10
of observable characteristics (e.g., Hastings et al., 2017 and Langer, 2016). Students rarely rank schools
outside their home boroughs, so covariate cells often include zero students ranking any given out-of-borough
school. We therefore restrict the choice set J to schools located in the home borough and aggregate all
other schools into an outside option with utility normalized to zero. Maximum likelihood estimation of
the preference parameters produces a list of school mean utilities along with a distance coefficient for each
covariate cell.


4.2     Estimating School Effectiveness

Our analysis of school effectiveness aims to recover the parameters of the potential outcome equations
defined in Section 3. We take two approaches to estimating these parameters.


Approach 1: Selection on observables

The first set of estimates is based on the assumption:


                                        E [Yij |Xi , Si ] = αj + Xi0 βj , j = 1...J.                                     (5)


This restriction, often labeled “selection on observables,” requires school enrollment to be as good as
random conditional on the covariate vector Xi , which includes sex, race, subsidized lunch status, the log
of median census tract income, and eighth grade math and reading scores. Assumption (5) implies that
an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of Yi on school indicators interacted with Xi recovers unbiased
estimates of αj and βj for each school. This fully interacted specification is a multiple-treatment extension
of the Oaxaca-Blinder (1973) treatment effects estimator (Kline, 2011).3 By allowing school effectiveness
to vary with student characteristics, we generalize the constant effects “value-added” approach commonly
used to estimate the contributions of teachers and schools to student achievement (Koedel et al., 2015).
    The credibility of the selection on observables assumption underlying value-added estimators is a matter
of continuing debate (Rothstein, 2010, 2017; Kane et al., 2013; Baicher-Hicks et al., 2014; Chetty et al.,
2014a, 2016, 2017a; Guarino et al., 2015). Comparisons to results from admission lotteries indicate that
school value-added models accurately predict the impacts of random assignment but are not perfectly
unbiased (Deming, 2014; Angrist et al., 2016b, 2017). Selection on observables may also be more plausible
for test scores than for longer-run outcomes, for which lagged measures of the dependent variable are not
available (Chetty et al., 2014a). We therefore report OLS estimates as a benchmark and compare these to
estimates from a more general strategy that relaxes assumption (5).




    3 We also include main effects of borough so that the model includes the same variables used to define covariate cells in

the preference estimates.



                                                             11
Approach 2: Rank-ordered control functions

Our second approach is motivated by the restriction:


                       E [Yij |Xi , Di , ηi1 ...ηiJ , Si ] = αj + Xi0 βj + gj (Di , ηi1 , .., ηiJ ), j = 1...J.                 (6)


This restriction implies that any omitted variable bias afflicting OLS value-added estimates is due either to
spatial heterogeneity captured by distances to each school (Di ) or to the preferences underlying the rank-
ordered lists submitted to the assignment mechanism (ηij ). The function gj (·) allows potential outcomes to
vary arbitrarily across students with different preferences over schools. Factors that lead students with the
same observed characteristics, spatial locations, and preferences to ultimately enroll in different schools,
such as school priorities, random rationing due to oversubscription, or noncompliance with the assignment
mechanism, are presumed to be unrelated to potential outcomes.
   Under assumption (6), comparisons of matched sets of students with the same covariates, values of
distance, and rank-ordered choice lists recover causal effects of school attendance. This model is there-
fore similar to the “self-revelation” model proposed by Dale and Krueger (2002; 2014) in the context of
postsecondary enrollment. Dale and Krueger assume that students reveal their unobserved “types” via the
selectivity of their college application portfolios, so college enrollment is as good as random among students
that apply to the same schools. Similarly, (6) implies that high school applicants reveal their types through
the content of their rank-ordered preference lists.
   Though intuitively appealing, full nonparametric matching on rank-ordered lists is not feasible in prac-
tice because few students share the exact same rankings. We therefore use the structure of the logit choice
model in equation (4) to derive a parametric approximation to this matching procedure. Specifically, we
replace equation (6) with the assumption:

                                                                  J
                                                                  X
    E [Yij |Xi , Di , ηi1 ...ηiJ , Si ] = αj + Xi0 βj + Di0 γ +         ψk × (ηik − µη ) + ϕ × (ηij − µη ), j = 1...J,          (7)
                                                                  k=1


where µη ≡ E [ηij ] is Euler’s constant.4 As in the multinomial logit selection model of Dubin and McFadden
(1984), equation (7) imposes a linear relationship between potential outcomes and the unobserved logit
errors. Functional form assumptions of this sort are common in multinomial selection models with many
alternatives, where requirements for nonparametric identification are very stringent (Lee, 1983; Dahl, 2002;
Heckman et al., 2008).5
   Equation (7) accommodates a variety of forms of selection on unobservables. The coefficient ψk rep-
resents an effect of the preference for school k common to all potential outcomes. This permits students
with strong preferences for particular schools to have higher or lower general ability Ai . The parameter ϕ
   4 The   means of both Xi and Di are normalized to zero to maintain the interpretation that αj = E[Yij ].
   5 As   discussed in Section 6, we also estimate an alternative model that includes fixed effects for first choice schools.



                                                                  12
captures an additional match effect of the preference for school j on the potential outcome at this specific
school. The model therefore allows for “essential” heterogeneity linking preferences to unobserved match
effects in student outcomes (Heckman et al., 2006). A Roy (1951)-style model of selection on gains would
imply ϕ > 0, but we do not impose this restriction.
    By iterated expectations, equation (7) implies that mean observed outcomes at school j are:

                                                                    J
                                                                    X
            E [Yi |Xi , Di , Ri , Si = j] = αj + Xi0 βj + Di0 γ +         ψk λk (Xi , Di , Ri ) + ϕλj (Xi , Di , Ri ),     (8)
                                                                    k=1


where λk (Xi , Di , Ri ) ≡ E [ηik − µη |Xi , Di , Ri ] gives the mean preference for school k conditional on a
student’s characteristics, spatial location, and preference list. The λk (·)’s serve as “control functions” cor-
recting for selection on unobservables (Heckman and Robb, 1985; Blundell and Matzkin, 2014; Wooldridge,
2015). As shown in Appendix B.1, these functions are generalizations of the formulas derived by Dubin
and McFadden (1984), extended to account for the fact that we observe a list of several ranked alternatives
rather than just the most preferred choice.
    Note that equation (8) includes main effects of distance to each school; we do not impose an exclusion
restriction for distance. Identification of the selection parameters ψk and ϕ comes from variation in prefer-
ence rankings for students who enroll at the same school conditional on covariates and distance. Intuitively,
if students who rank school j highly do better than expected given their observed characteristics at all
schools, we will infer that ψj > 0. If these students do better than expected at school j but not elsewhere,
we will infer that ϕ > 0.
    We use the choice model parameters to build first-step estimates of the control functions, then estimate
equation (8) in a second-step OLS regression of Yi on school indicators and their interactions with Xi ,
controlling for Di and the estimated λk (·) functions.6 We adjust inference for estimation error in the
control functions via a two-step extension of the score bootstrap procedure of Kline and Santos (2012). As
detailed in Appendix B.2, the score bootstrap avoids the need to recalculate the first-step logit estimates
or the inverse variance matrix of the second-step regressors in the bootstrap iterations.


The joint distribution of peer quality and school effectiveness

Estimates of equations (5) and (7) may be used to calculate each school’s peer quality. A student’s predicted
ability in the value-added model is
                                                           J
                                                        1Xh                i
                                                Âi =         α̂j + Xi0 β̂j ,                                              (9)
                                                        J j=1


   6 The  choice model uses only preferences over schools in students’ home boroughs, so λk (·) is undefined for students
outside school k’s borough. We therefore include dummies for missing values and code the control functions to zero for these
students. We similarly code Dik to zero for students outside of school k’s borough and include borough indicators so that the
distance coefficients are estimated using only within-borough variation. Our key results are not sensitive to dropping students
attending out-of-borough schools from the sample.



                                                               13
where α̂j and β̂j are OLS value-added coefficients. Predicted ability in the control function model adds
estimates of the distance and control function terms in equation (8). Estimated peer quality at school j is
           P                P
then Q̂j = i 1{Si = j}Âi / i 1{Si = j}, the average predicted ability of enrolled students.
    The end result of our school quality estimation procedure is a vector of estimates for each school,
θ̂j = (α̂j , β̂j0 , Q̂j )0 . The vector of parameters for the control function model also includes an estimate of the
selection coefficient for school j, ψ̂j . These estimates are unbiased but noisy measures of the underlying
school-specific parameters θj . We investigate the distribution of θj using the following hierarchical model:
                                                   θ̂j |θj ∼ N (θj , Ωj ),
                                                                                                                        (10)
                                                      θj ∼ N (µθ , Σθ ).

Here Ωj is the sampling variance of the estimator θ̂j , while µθ and Σθ govern the distribution of latent
parameters across schools. In a hierarchical Bayesian framework µθ and Σθ are hyperparameters describing
a prior distribution for θj . We estimate these hyperparameters by maximum likelihood applied to model
(10), approximating Ωj with an estimate of the asymptotic variance of θ̂j .7 The resulting estimates of µθ
and Σθ characterize the joint distribution of peer quality and school treatment effect parameters, purged
of the estimation error in θ̂j .
    This hierarchical model can also be used to improve estimates of parameters for individual schools. An
empirical Bayes (EB) posterior mean for θj is given by
                                                 −1                      
                               θj∗ = Ω̂−1
                                       j   + Σ̂−1
                                               θ        Ω̂−1
                                                          j  θ̂ j + Σ̂−1
                                                                      θ  µ̂θ ,


where Ω̂j , µ̂θ and Σ̂θ are estimates of Ωj , µθ and Σθ . Relative to the unbiased but noisy estimate θ̂j , this
EB shrinkage estimator uses the prior distribution to reduce sampling variance at the cost of increased
bias, yielding a minimum mean squared error (MSE) prediction of θj (Robbins, 1956; Morris, 1983). This
approach parallels recent work applying shrinkage methods to estimate causal effects of teachers, schools,
neighborhoods, and hospitals (Chetty et al., 2014a; Hull, 2016; Angrist et al., 2017; Chetty and Hendren,
2017; Finkelstein et al., 2017). Appendix B.3 further describes our EB estimation strategy. In addition
to reducing MSE, empirical Bayes shrinkage eliminates attenuation bias that would arise in models using
elements of θ̂j as regressors (Jacob and Lefgren, 2008). We exploit this property by regressing estimates
of school popularity on EB posterior means in the final step of our empirical analysis.


4.3     Linking Preferences to School Effectiveness

We relate preferences to peer quality and causal effects with regressions of the form:


                                     δ̂cj = κc + ρ1 Q∗j + ρ2 AT Ej∗ + ρ3 Mcj
                                                                          ∗
                                                                             + ξcj ,                                    (11)


     7 The peer quality estimates Q̂ are typically very precise, so we treat peer quality as known rather than estimated when
                                    j
fitting the hierarchical model.



                                                             14
where δ̂cj is an estimate of the mean utility of school j for students in covariate cell c, κc is a cell fixed effect,
and Q∗j and AT Ej∗ are EB posterior mean predictions of peer quality and average treatment effects. The
          ∗
variable Mcj is an EB prediction of the mean match effect of school j for students in cell c. Observations in
equation (11) are weighted by the inverse sampling variance of δ̂cj . We use the variance estimator proposed
by Cameron et al. (2011) to double-cluster inference by cell and school. Two-way clustering accounts for
correlated estimation errors in δ̂cj across schools within a cell as well as unobserved determinants of
popularity common to a given school across cells. We estimate equation (11) separately for Regents test
scores, PSAT scores, high school graduation, college attendance, and college quality. The parameters ρ1 ,
ρ2 , and ρ3 measure how preferences relate to peer quality, school effectiveness, and match quality.8



5     Parameter Estimates

5.1     Preference Parameters

Table 3 summarizes the distribution of household preference parameters across the 316 high schools and
360 covariate cells in the choice sample. The first row reports estimated standard deviations of the mean
utility δcj across schools and cells, while the second row displays the mean and standard deviation of
the cell-specific distance cost τc . School mean utilities are deviations from cell averages to account for
differences in the reference category across boroughs, and calculations are weighted by cell size. We adjust
these standard deviations for sampling error in the estimated preference parameters by subtracting the
average squared standard error from the sample variance of mean utilities.
    Consistent with the descriptive statistics in Table 1, the preference estimates indicate that households
dislike more distant schools. The mean distance cost is 0.33. This implies that increasing the distance to a
particular school by one mile reduces the odds that a household prefers this school to another in the same
borough by 33 percent. The standard deviation of the distance cost across covariate cells is 0.12. While
there is significant heterogeneity in distastes for distance, all of the estimated distance costs are positive,
suggesting that all subgroups prefer schools closer to home.
    The estimates in Table 3 reveal significant heterogeneity in tastes for schools both within and between
subgroups. The within-cell standard deviation of school mean utilities, which measures the variation in δcj
across schools j for a fixed cell c, equals 1.12. This is equivalent to roughly 3.4 (1.12/0.33) miles of distance,
implying that households are willing to travel substantial distances to attend more popular schools. The
between-cell standard deviation, which measures variation in δcj across c for a fixed j, is 0.50, equivalent to
about 1.5 (0.50/0.33) miles of distance. The larger within-cell standard deviation indicates that students
    8 The control function version of our estimation procedure is closely related to classic selection-correction methods from

studies of labor supply decisions. In their review of identification of labor supply models, French and Taber (2011) detail a
procedure that estimates labor market participation probabilities in a first step, uses these probabilities to selection-correct a
wage equation in a second step, then relates participation to the unselected wage equation parameters in a third “structural
probit” step. Similarly, we use preference estimates to selection-correct equations for student outcomes, then link the selection-
corrected outcome estimates back to preferences to understand relationships between choices and treatment effects.



                                                               15
in different subgroups tend to prefer the same schools.


5.2     School Effectiveness and Peer Quality

Our estimates of school treatment effects imply substantial variation in both causal effects and sorting
across schools. Table 4 reports estimated means and standard deviations of peer quality Qj , average
treatment effects AT Ej , and slope coefficients βj . We normalize the means of Qj and AT Ej to zero and
quantify the variation in these parameters relative to the average school. As shown in column (2), the
value-added model produces standard deviations of Qj and AT Ej for Regents math scores equal to 0.29σ.
This is somewhat larger than corresponding estimates of variation in school value-added from previous
studies (usually around 0.15 − 0.2σ; see, e.g., Angrist et al., 2017). One possible reason for this difference
is that most students in our sample attend high school for two years before taking Regents math exams,
while previous studies look at impacts after one year.
   As shown in columns (3) and (4) of Table 4, the control function model attributes some of the variation
in Regents math value-added parameters to selection bias. Adding controls for unobserved preferences and
distance increases the estimated standard deviation of Qj to 0.31σ and reduces the estimated standard
deviation of AT Ej to 0.23σ. Figure 1, which compares value-added and control function estimates for
all five outcomes, demonstrates that this pattern holds for other outcomes as well: adjusting for selection
on unobservables compresses the estimated distributions of treatment effects. This compression is more
severe for high school graduation, college attendance, and college quality than for Regents math and PSAT
scores. Our findings are therefore consistent with previous evidence that bias in OLS value-added models
is more important for longer-run and non-test score outcomes (see, e.g., Chetty et al., 2014b).
   The bottom rows of Table 4 show evidence of substantial treatment effect heterogeneity across students.
For example, the standard deviation of the slope coefficient on a black indicator equals 0.12σ in the control
function model. This implies that holding the average treatment effect AT Ej fixed, a one standard deviation
improvement in a school’s match quality for black students boosts scores for these students by about a
tenth of a standard deviation relative to whites. We also find significant variation in slope coefficients for
gender (0.06σ), hispanic (0.11σ), subsidized lunch status (0.05σ), the log of median census tract income
(0.05σ), and eighth grade math and reading scores (0.11σ and 0.05σ). The final row of column (3) reports
a control function estimate of ϕ, the parameter capturing matching between unobserved preferences and
Regents scores. This estimate indicates a positive relationship between preferences and the unobserved
component of student-specific test score gains, but the magnitude of the coefficient is very small.9
   Our estimates imply that high-ability students tend to enroll in more effective schools. Table 5 reports
correlations between Qj and school treatment effect parameters based on control function estimates for

    9 The average predicted value of (η
                                        ij − µη ) for a student’s enrolled school in our sample is 2.0. Our estimate of ϕ
therefore implies that unobserved match effects increase average test scores by about one percent of a standard deviation
(0.006σ × 2.0 = 0.012σ).



                                                           16
Regents math scores. Corresponding value-added estimates appear in Appendix Table A2. The estimated
correlation between peer quality and average treatment effects is 0.59. This may reflect either positive
peer effects or higher-achieving students’ tendency to enroll in schools with better inputs. Our finding that
schools with high-ability peers are more effective contrasts with recent studies of exam schools in New York
City and Boston, which show limited treatment effects for highly selective public schools (Abdulkadiroğlu
et al., 2014; Dobbie and Fryer, 2014). Within the broader New York public high school system, we find a
strong positive association between school effectiveness and average student ability.
   Table 5 also reports estimated correlations of Qj and AT Ej with the slope coefficients βj . Schools with
larger average treatment effects tend to be especially good for girls: the correlation between AT Ej and
the female slope coefficient is positive and statistically significant. This is consistent with evidence from
Deming et al. (2014) showing that girls’ outcomes are more responsive to school value-added. We estimate
a very high positive correlation between black and hispanic coefficients, suggesting that match effects tend
to be similar for these two groups.
   The slope coefficient on eighth grade reading scores is negatively correlated with peer quality and the
average treatment effect. Both of these estimated correlations are below -0.4 and statistically significant. In
other words, schools that enroll higher-ability students and produce larger achievement gains are especially
effective at teaching low-achievers. In contrast to our estimate of the parameter ϕ, this suggests negative
selection on the observed component of match effects in student achievement. A similar selection pattern
is documented by Walters (2018), who shows that lower-scoring students in Boston are less likely to apply
to charter schools despite receiving larger achievement benefits. Section 6 presents a more systematic
investigation of relationships between preferences and match effects.
   Patterns of estimates for PSAT scores, high school graduation, college attendance, and college quality
are generally similar to results for Regents math scores. Appendix Tables A3-A6 present estimated distri-
butions of peer quality and school effectiveness for these longer-run outcomes. For all five outcomes, we
find substantial variation in peer quality and average treatment effects, a strong positive correlation be-
tween these variables, and significant effect heterogeneity with respect to student characteristics. Overall,
causal effects for the longer-run outcomes are highly correlated with effects on Regents math scores. This
is evident in Figure 2, which plots EB posterior mean predictions of average treatment effects on Regents
scores against corresponding predictions for the other four outcomes. These results are consistent with
recent evidence that short-run test score impacts reliably predict effects on longer-run outcomes (Chetty
et al., 2011; Dynarski et al., 2013; Angrist et al., 2016a).


5.3    Decomposition of School Average Outcomes

We summarize the joint distribution of peer quality and school effectiveness by implementing the decom-
position introduced in Section 3. Table 6 uses the control function estimates to decompose variation in




                                                      17
school averages for each outcome into components explained by peer quality, school effectiveness, average
match effects, and covariances of these components.
   Consistent with the estimates in Table 4, both peer quality and school effectiveness play roles in
generating variation in school average outcomes, but peer quality is generally more important. Peer quality
explains 47 percent of the variance in average Regents scores (0.093/0.191), while average treatment effects
explain 28 percent (0.054/0.191). The explanatory power of peer quality for other outcomes ranges from 49
percent (PSAT scores) to 83 percent (high school graduation), while the importance of average treatment
effects ranges from 10 percent (PSAT scores) to 19 percent (log college quality).
   Despite the significant variation in slope coefficients documented in Table 4, match effects are unim-
portant in explaining dispersion in school average outcomes. The variance of match effects accounts for
only five percent of the variation in average Regents scores, and corresponding estimates for the other
outcomes are also small. Although school treatment effects vary substantially across subgroups, there is
not much sorting of students to schools on this basis, so the existence of potential match effects is of little
consequence for realized variation in outcomes across schools.
   The final three rows of Table 6 quantify the contributions of covariances among peer quality, treat-
ment effects, and match effects. As a result of the positive relationship between peer quality and school
effectiveness, the covariance between Qj and AT Ej substantially increases cross-school dispersion in mean
outcomes. The covariances between match effects and the other variance components are negative. This
indicates that students at highly effective schools and schools with higher-ability students are less appro-
priately matched on the heterogeneous component of treatment effects, slightly reducing variation in school
average outcomes.


5.4    Testing for Bias in Estimates of School Effectiveness

As described in Section 2, New York City’s centralized assignment mechanism breaks ties at random for
students with the same preferences and priorities. Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2017b; 2019) derive methods for
using the random assignment implicit in such tie-breaking systems for impact evaluation. The core of this
approach uses student preferences and priorities along with the structure of the assignment mechanism
to derive a probability of assignment (propensity score) for each student to each school where random
tie-breaking occurs. Conditioning on the propensity score is sufficient to isolate the random component of
school assignment, generating valid instruments for school enrollment (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). The
priority information necessary to produce lottery propensity scores is only available for the 2003 New York
City high school applicant cohort, and random assignment occurs for only a minority of schools. While
these data constraints prevent us from producing a lottery-based estimate of effectiveness for every school,
we can use the shifts in school attendance resulting from these lottery assignments to test the accuracy of
our value-added and control function estimates.




                                                      18
    To implement these tests we first construct DA mechanism-based propensity scores and then apply the
lottery-based test for bias in non-experimental estimators of school effectiveness proposed by Angrist et al.
(2016b; 2017). For a set of L lotteries, this test is implemented by estimating the following two-stage least
squares (2SLS) system:
                                                                     L
                                                                     X
                                             Yi = κ0 + φŶi +              κ` pi` + ei ,                                   (12)
                                                                     `=1

                                                        L
                                                        X
                                           Ŷi = π0 +         [π` Zi` + ω` pi` ] + υi ,                                    (13)
                                                        `=1

where Ŷi is the fitted value generated by a non-experimental estimation procedure (either value-added
or control function), Zi` is an indicator equal to one if student i is assigned to school `, and pi` is the
propensity score measuring student i’s probability of assignment to school `. The first stage coefficients
π` describe the non-experimental estimator’s predicted effects of assignment in each lottery, which are
non-zero because lottery offers shift students across schools. As described in Angrist et al. (2017), the
“forecast coefficient” φ should equal one if the estimator used to generate Ŷi correctly predicts the effects
of random lottery assignments on average, while the overidentification test for the system defined by (12)
and (13) measures whether the estimator has the same predictive validity in every lottery.
    As shown in Table 7, this lottery-based test suggests that our value-added and control function esti-
mates accurately capture the causal effects of schools on student outcomes.10 Column (1) reports tests of
an “uncontrolled” model that measures school effectiveness as the unadjusted mean outcome at the school.
This model generates forecast coefficients far from one and decisive rejections of the overidentification test
for all three outcomes available for the 2003 cohort (Regents math, PSAT scores, and high school gradua-
tion), indicating that the available lotteries have power to detect bias in the most naive nonexperimental
estimators. Columns (2) and (3) show that the addition of controls for observed student characteristics
generates forecast coefficients much closer to one and overidentification tests that generally do not reject
at conventional levels. Unfortunately, we cannot use lotteries to validate our estimates for postsecondary
outcomes since college attendance data are not available for the 2003 applicant cohort, so estimates for
these outcomes should be viewed more cautiously.
    While the estimates in Table 7 are encouraging, it’s worth noting that the lotteries available in New York
may have weak power to detect bias in our value-added and control function models. Specifically, the first
stage F-statistics for equation (13) are below the rule-of-thumb value of 10 commonly used to diagnose
weak instruments (Staiger and Stock, 1997), implying that the lotteries tend to shift students across
schools with similar estimated effectiveness. Columns (4)-(6) demonstrate that we obtain similar results
based on the Unbiased Jackknife Instrumental Variables (UJIVE) estimator proposed by Kolesar (2013).

   10 We validate our approach to reconstructing school lotteries by reporting relationships between lottery offers and students

characteristics in Table A7. Without controls for propensity scores, school offers are strongly correlated with baseline test
scores and other observables, but we cannot reject that offers at all schools are independent of observed characteristics after
controlling for the propensity scores. This indicates that our strategy successfully isolates randomized lottery assignments.



                                                                19
The UJIVE estimator performs well with weak instruments and (unlike other common approaches such
as limited information maximum likelihood) it is robust to the presence of treatment effect heterogeneity.
The UJIVE estimates suggest that our non-experimental estimators are accurate, particularly the control
function estimator, for which we cannot reject forecast unbiasedness or the overidentifying restrictions
for any outcome (we reject forecast unbiasedness for the value-added estimator for PSAT scores). The
similarity of 2SLS and UJIVE also eases concerns about weak instrument bias in 2SLS, though the weak
first stage also indicates that tests based on both estimators are likely to have low power. Taken together,
the results in Table 7 suggest that our estimation strategies generate reliable measures of causal effects,
though the available lottery variation may be insufficient to detect modest violations.



6     Preferences, Peer Quality, and School Effectiveness

6.1    Productivity vs. Peers

The last step of our analysis compares the relative strength of peer quality and school effectiveness as
predictors of parent preferences. Table 8 reports estimates of equation (11) for Regents math scores, first
including Q∗j and AT Ej∗ one at a time and then including both variables simultaneously. Mean utilities, peer
quality, and treatment effects are scaled in standard deviations of their respective school-level distributions,
so the estimates can be interpreted as the standard deviation change in mean utility associated with a one
standard deviation increase in Qj or AT Ej .
    Bivariate regressions show that school popularity is positively correlated with both peer quality and
school effectiveness. Results based on the OLS value-added model, reported in columns (1) and (2), imply
that a one standard deviation increase in Qj is associated with a 0.42 standard deviation increase in mean
utility, while a one standard deviation increase in AT Ej is associated with a 0.24 standard deviation
increase in mean utility. The latter result contrasts with studies reporting no average test score impact
of attending preferred schools (Cullen et al., 2006; Hastings et al., 2009). These studies rely on admission
lotteries that shift relatively small numbers of students across a limited range of schools. Our results show
that looking across all high schools in New York City, more popular schools tend to be more effective on
average.
    While preferences are positively correlated with school effectiveness, however, this relationship is entirely
explained by peer quality. Column (3) shows that when both variables are included together, the coefficient
on peer quality is essentially unchanged, while the coefficient on the average treatment effect is rendered
small and statistically insignificant. The AT Ej coefficient also remains precise: we can rule out increases
in mean utility on the order of 0.06 standard deviations associated with a one standard deviation change
in school value-added at conventional significance levels. The control function estimates in columns (5)-(7)
are similar to the value-added estimates; in fact, the control function results show a small, marginally



                                                       20
statistically significant negative association between school effectiveness and popularity after controlling
for peer quality.
    Columns (4) and (8) of Table 8 explore the role of treatment effect heterogeneity by adding posterior
mean predictions of match quality to equation (11), also scaled in standard deviation units of the distribu-
tion of match effects across schools and cells.11 The match coefficient is negative for both the value-added
and control function models, and the control function estimate is statistically significant. This reflects
the negative correlation between baseline test score slope coefficients and peer quality reported in Table
5: schools that are especially effective for low-achieving students tend to be more popular among high-
achievers and therefore enroll more of these students despite their lower match quality. This is consistent
with recent studies of selection into early-childhood programs and charter schools, which also find negative
selection on test score match effects (Cornelissen et al., 2016; Kline and Walters, 2016; Walters, 2018).
    Figure 3 presents a graphical summary of the links among preferences, peer quality, and treatment
effects by plotting bivariate and multivariate relationships between mean utility (averaged across covariate
cells) and posterior predictions of Qj and AT Ej from the control function model. Panel A shows strong
positive bivariate correlations for both variables. Panel B plots mean utilities against residuals from a
regression of Q∗j on AT Ej∗ (left-hand panel) and residuals from a regression of AT Ej∗ on Q∗j (right-hand
panel). Adjusting for school effectiveness has little effect on the relationship between preferences and peer
quality. In contrast, partialing out peer quality eliminates the positive association between popularity and
effectiveness.


6.2     Controls for Other School Attributes

The results in Table 8 show that reported preferences are uncorrelated with causal effects on test scores
after controlling for peer quality. Correlations between popularity and effectiveness may fail to capture
the causal effects of school effectiveness on parent demand if other determinants of parent preferences are
correlated with school effectiveness.12 It’s worth noting that for omitted variables bias to explain our
finding that parents do not place positive weight on effectiveness conditional on peer quality, an omitted
amenity that parents value would need to be negatively correlated with effectiveness after controlling for
Qj . Since we might expect any omitted variables to be positively correlated with both effectiveness and
demand (as is the case with peer quality itself), this sort of selection bias seems implausible. Nevertheless,
we investigate the potential for such omitted variable bias by adding controls for other important school
attributes to equation (11). The sensitivity of regression coefficients to controls for observables is a common

   11 Equation (11) captures the projection of cell mean utility on peer quality and cell mean treatment effects. In the control

function model the projection of student-specific utility on student-specific treatment effects also includes the idiosyncratic
match component ϕηij . Our small estimate of the matching coefficient ϕ implies this term is negligible, so we focus on
relationships at the cell mean level for both the value-added and control function models.
   12 An analogous problem arises in studies of teacher and school value-added, which often analyze relationships between

teacher or school effects and observed characteristics without quasi-experimental variation in the characteristics (see, e.g.,
Kane et al., 2008 and Angrist et al., 2013).



                                                              21
diagnostic for assessing the scope for selection on unobservables (Altonji et al., 2005; Oster, forthcoming).
   We explore the impact of controlling for three school covariates. The first is a measure of the quality
of the school environment derived from New York City’s Learning Environments Survey. This survey is
taken each year by New York City students in grades 6 through 12 as well as parents and teachers. We
construct an overall school environment score by taking the first principle component of the Safety and
Respect, Communication, Engagement, and Academic Expectations summary measures from the school
survey. Second, we add a measure of violent and disruptive incidents (VADI) per student reported by the
New York State Department of Education. Finally, we control for the fraction of teachers with Master’s
degrees as reported on New York school report cards distributed between 2005 and 2007.
   As shown in Table 9, our main conclusions are unaffected by the addition of these control variables.
Column (1) reports coefficients from a regression that includes only the three covariates and cell indicators.
Results from this model show that parents prefer schools with fewer violent incidents and those with more
teachers with Master’s degrees. Perhaps surprisingly, the summary school environment score is uncorrelated
with parent demand. The remaining columns add our measures of peer quality and school treatment effects.
Columns (2) and (8) show that adding a control for peer quality reduces the magnitude of the VADI and
Master’s degree coefficients, though these remain statistically significant. The coefficient on the school
environment score is slightly negative in models that include peer quality, reflecting this variable’s negative
correlation with peer quality. Columns (6) and (10) demonstrate that the coefficient on school average
treatment effects remains close to zero in models that control for school covariates, while the peer quality
coefficient remains large and positive. While we cannot control for all unobserved factors that influence
preferences for schools, the robustness of our results to controls for observed characteristics suggests that
our key findings are unlikely to be driven by omitted variable bias.


6.3    Preferences and Effects on Longer-run Outcomes

Parents may care about treatment effects on outcomes other than short-run standardized test scores. We
explore this by estimating equation (11) for PSAT scores, high school graduation, college attendance, and
log college quality.
   Results for these outcomes are similar to the findings for Regents math scores: preferences are positively
correlated with average treatment effects in a bivariate sense but are uncorrelated with treatment effects
conditional on peer quality. Table 10 reports results based on control function estimates of treatment effects.
The magnitudes of all treatment effect coefficients are small, and the overall pattern of results suggests
no systematic relationship between preferences and school effectiveness conditional on peer composition.
We find a modest positive relationship between preferences and match effects for log college quality, but
corresponding estimates for PSAT scores, high school graduation, and college attendance are small and
statistically insignificant. This pattern contrasts with results for the Norwegian higher education system,




                                                      22
reported by Kirkebøen et al. (2016), which show sorting into fields of study based on heterogeneous earnings
gains. Unlike Norwegian college students, New York City’s high school students do not prefer schools with
higher academic match quality.


6.4    Heterogeneity in Preferences for Peer and School Quality

Previous evidence suggests that parents of higher-income, higher-achieving students place more weight
on academic performance levels when choosing schools (Hastings et al., 2009). This pattern may reflect
either greater responsiveness to peer quality or more sensitivity to causal school effectiveness. If parents
of high-achievers value school effectiveness, choice may indirectly create incentives for schools to improve
because better instruction will attract high-ability students, raising peer quality and therefore demand
from other households. In Table 11 we investigate this issue by estimating equation (11) separately by sex,
race, subsidized lunch status, and baseline test score category.
   We find that no subgroup of households responds to causal school effectiveness. Consistent with previous
work, we find larger coefficients on peer quality among non-minority students, richer students (those
ineligible for subsidized lunches), and students with high baseline achievement. We do not interpret this
as direct evidence of stronger preferences for peer ability among higher-ability students; since students are
more likely to enroll at schools they rank highly, any group component to preferences will lead to a positive
association between students’ rankings and the enrollment share of others in the same group.13 The key
pattern in Table 11 is that, among schools with similar peer quality, no group prefers schools with greater
causal impacts on academic achievement.


6.5    Changes in Demand Over Time

If parents do not have perfect information about school quality we might expect changes in demand over
time as parents learn more about which schools are effective. The evolution of choice behavior is of
particular interest in our sample since New York City changed from an uncoordinated assignment process
to a coordinated single-offer system in 2003, the first year of our data (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2017a). Table
A8 assesses whether parents systematically select more effective schools over time by reporting estimates
of equation (11) based on preference models fit separately for each of the four applicant cohorts in our
sample. The results reveal remarkably stable patterns of choice: in each year the coefficient on peer quality
is large and positive, the coefficient on the average treatment effect is a precise zero, and the match effect
coefficient is zero or negative. Evidently, more experience with the centralized matching process did not
lead to a stronger relationship between preferences and effectiveness for parents in New York City. This
suggests that either parents do not learn much about school effectiveness over time, or the patterns we
identify reflect preferences for other school attributes rather than a lack of information about effectiveness.

  13 This   is a version of the “reflection problem” that plagues econometric investigations of peer effects (Manski, 1993).



                                                               23
6.6    Alternative Specifications

We investigate the robustness of our key results by estimating a variety of alternative specifications, reported
in Appendix Tables A9 and A10. To assess the sensitivity of our estimates to reasonable changes in our
measure of school popularity, columns (1)-(4) of Appendix Table A9 display results from models replacing
δ̂cj in equation (11) with the log share of students in a cell ranking a school first or minus the log sum of
ranks in the cell (treating unranked schools as tied). These alternative measures of demand produce very
similar results to the rank-ordered logit results in Table 8.
    Estimates based on students’ submitted rankings may not accurately describe demand if students
strategically misreport their preferences in response to the 12-choice constraint on list length. As noted
in Section 2, truthful reporting is a dominant strategy for the 72 percent of students that list fewer than
12 choices. Columns (5) and (6) of Appendix Table A9 report results based on rank-ordered logit models
estimated in the subsample of unconstrained students. Results here are again similar to the full sample
estimates, suggesting that strategic misreporting is not an important concern in our setting.
    Our preference estimation approach models students’ choices among all schools in their home boroughs.
Students may be unaware of some schools and therefore consider only a subset of the available alternatives.
A conservative approach to defining consideration sets is to assume students are only aware of the schools
ranked on their preference lists. Columns (7) and (8) of Appendix Table A9 show results based on preference
estimates that omit all unranked alternatives from the choice set. This approach produces similar estimates
as well.
    Equation (8) parameterizes the relationship between potential outcomes and preference rankings through
the control functions λk (·). Columns (1)-(4) of Appendix Table A10 present an alternative parameteriza-
tion that replaces the control functions with fixed effects for first choice schools. This approach ignores
information on lower-ranked schools but more closely parallels the application portfolio matching approach
in Dale and Krueger (2002; 2014). As a second alternative specification, columns (5)-(8) report estimates
from a control function model that drops the distance control variables from equation (8). This model relies
on an exclusion restriction for distance, a common identification strategy in the literature on educational
choice (Card, 1995; Neal, 1997; Booker et al., 2011; Mountjoy, 2017; Walters, 2018). These alternative
approaches to estimating school effectiveness produce no meaningful changes in the results.



7     Discussion
The findings reported here inform models of school choice commonly considered in the literature. Theo-
retical analyses often assume parents know students’ potential achievement outcomes and choose between
schools on this basis. For example, Epple et al. (2004) and Epple and Romano (2008) study models in
which parents value academic achievement and consumption of other goods, and care about peer quality




                                                      24
only insofar as it produces higher achievement through peer effects. Hoxby (2000) argues that school choice
may increase achievement by allowing students to sort on match quality. Such models imply that demand
should be positively correlated with both average treatment effects and match effects conditional on peer
quality, a prediction that is inconsistent with the pattern in Table 8.
   Parents may choose between schools based on test score levels rather than treatment effects. Cullen
et al. (2006) suggest confusion between levels and gains may explain limited effects of admission to preferred
schools in Chicago. Since our setting has substantial variation in both levels and value-added, we can more
thoroughly investigate this model of parent decision-making. If parents choose between schools based on
average outcomes, increases in these outcomes due to selection and causal effectiveness should produce
equal effects on popularity. In contrast, we find that demand only responds to the component of average
outcomes that is due to enrollment of higher-ability students. That is, we can reject the view that parental
demand is driven by performance levels: demand places no weight on the part of performance levels
explained by value-added but significant weight on the part explained by peer quality.
   It is important to note that our findings do not imply parents are uninterested in school effectiveness.
Without direct information about treatment effects, for example, parents may use peer characteristics as
a proxy for school quality, as in MacLeod and Urquiola (2015). In view of the positive correlation between
peer quality and school effectiveness, this is a reasonable strategy for parents that cannot observe treatment
effects and wish to choose effective schools. Effectiveness varies widely conditional on peer quality, however,
so parents make substantial sacrifices in academic quality by not ranking schools based on effectiveness.
Table 12 compares Regents math effects for observed preference rankings vs. hypothetical rankings in
which parents order schools according to their effectiveness. The average treatment effect of first-choice
schools would improve from 0.07σ to 0.43σ if parents ranked schools based on effectiveness, and the average
match effect would increase from −0.04σ to 0.16σ. This implies that the average student loses more than
half a standard deviation in math achievement by enrolling in her first-choice school rather than the most
effective option.
   The statistics in Table 12 suggest that if information frictions prevent parents from ranking schools based
on effectiveness, providing information about school effectiveness could alter school choices considerably.
These changes may be particularly valuable for disadvantaged students. As shown in Appendix Table A11,
gaps in effectiveness between observed first-choice schools and achievement-maximizing choices are larger for
students with lower baseline achievement. This is driven by the stronger relationship between peer quality
and preferences for more-advantaged parents documented in Table 11. These results suggest reducing
information barriers could lead to differential increases in school quality for disadvantaged students and
reduce inequality in student achievement. On the other hand, the patterns documented here may also reflect
parents’ valuation of school amenities other than academic effectiveness rather than a lack of information
about treatment effects. It is also important to note that our estimates capture average impacts of changing
an individual student’s rankings, holding fixed the behavior of other students; we might expect schools’


                                                      25
treatment effect parameters to change if all students changed behavior simultaneously due to changes in
peer effects or other inputs.
    Regardless of why parents respond to peer quality rather than school effectiveness, our results have
important implications for the incentive effects of school choice programs. Since parents only respond to
the component of school average outcomes that can be predicted by the ability of enrolled students, our
estimates imply a school wishing to boost its popularity must recruit better students; improving outcomes
by increasing causal effectiveness for a fixed set of students will have no impact on parent demand. Our
results therefore suggest that choice may create incentives for schools to invest in screening and selection.
    The evolution of admissions criteria used at New York City’s high schools is consistent with the impli-
cation that schools have an increased incentive to screen applicants due to parents’ demand for high-ability
peers. After the first year of the new assignment mechanism, several school programs eliminated all
lottery-based admissions procedures and became entirely screened. In the 2003-04 high school brochure,
36.8 percent of programs are screened, and this fraction jumps to 40.3 percent two years later. The Beacon
High School in Manhattan, for example, switched from a school where half of the seats were assigned
via random lottery in 2003-04 to a screened school the following year, where admissions is based on test
performance, an interview and a portfolio of essays. Leo Goldstein High School for Sciences in Brooklyn
underwent a similar transition. Both high schools frequent lists of New York City’s best public high schools
(Linge and Tanzer, 2016). Compared to the first years of the new system, there has also been growth in the
number of limited unscreened programs, which use a lottery but also give priority to students who attend
an open house or high school fair. Compared to unscreened programs, prioritizing applicants who attend
an information session provides an ordeal that favors applicants with time and resources thus resulting in
positive selection (Disare, 2017). The number of limited unscreened programs nearly doubled from 106 to
210 from 2005 to 2012 (Nathanson et al., 2013).



8     Conclusion
A central motivation for school choice programs is that parents’ choices generate demand-side pressure for
improved school productivity. We investigate this possibility by comparing estimates of school popularity
and treatment effects based on rank-ordered preference data for applicants to public high schools in New
York City. Parents prefer schools that enroll higher-achieving peers. Conditional on peer quality, however,
parents’ choices are unrelated to causal school effectiveness. Moreoever, no subgroup of parents systemat-
ically responds to causal school effectiveness. We also find no relationship between preferences for schools
and estimated match quality. This indicates that choice does not lead students to sort into schools on the
basis of comparative advantage in academic achievement.
    This pattern of findings has important implications for the expected effects of school choice programs.
Our results on match quality suggest choice is unlikely to increase allocative efficiency. Our findings



                                                     26
regarding peer quality and average treatment effects suggest choice may create incentives for increased
screening rather than academic effectiveness. If parents respond to peer quality but not causal effects, a
school’s easiest path to boosting its popularity is to improve the average ability of its student population.
Since peer quality is a fixed resource, this creates the potential for socially costly zero-sum competition
as schools invest in mechanisms to attract the best students. MacLeod and Urquiola (2015) argue that
restricting a school’s ability to select pupils may promote efficiency when student choices are based on
school reputation. The impact of school choice on effort devoted to screening is an important empirical
question for future research.
   While we have shown that parents do not choose schools based on causal effects for a variety of educa-
tional outcomes, we cannot rule out the possibility that preferences are determined by effects on unmeasured
outcomes. Our analysis also does not address why parents put more weight on peer quality than on treat-
ment effects. If parents rely on student composition as a proxy for effectiveness, coupling school choice with
credible information on causal effects may strengthen incentives for improved productivity and weaken the
association between preferences and peer ability. Distinguishing between true tastes for peer quality and
information frictions is another challenge for future work.




                                                     27
                                                                                                        Figure 1: Comparison of value-added and control function estimates of school average treatment effects
                                       A. Regents math scores                                                                                B. PSAT scores                                                                                                                                   C. High school graduation
                 1




                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                             .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .1
     Control function estimate




                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Control function estimate
                                                                                                                             Control function estimate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                 0




                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −.1
   −.5




                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −.2
                 −1




                                                                                                                                          −10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −.3
                                  −1     −.5             0                                         .5           1                                                                                                                                                                −.3   −.2         −.1          0         .1   .2
                                                Value−added estimate                                                                                      −10        0            10                                          20          30
                                                                                                                                                                         Value−added estimate                                                                                                      Value−added estimate


                                                                                                              D. College attendance                                                                                                            E. Log college quality
                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                              Control function estimate




                                                                                                                                                                                                Control function estimate
                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                            −.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                              −.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              −.2
                                                                            −.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −.2   −.1         0           .1                           .2          .3
                                                                                             −.2        −.1            0            .1                          .2         .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Value−added estimate
                                                                                                                    Value−added estimate


Notes: This figure plots school average treatment effect (ATE) estimates from value-added models against corresponding estimates from models including control functions that adjust for selection on unobservables. Value-added
estimates come from regressions of outcomes on school indicators interacted with gender, race, subsidized lunch status, the log of census tract median income, and eighth grade math and reading scores. Control function models add
distance to school and predicted unobserved tastes from the choice model. Points in the figure are empirical Bayes posterior means from models fit to the distribution of school-specific estimates. Dashed lines show the 45-degree line.
                                                            Figure 2: Relationships between effects on test scores and effects on long run outcomes
                                           A. Regents math scores and PSAT scores                                     B. Regents math scores and high school graduation




                                                                                                                                        .15
             10




                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                          High school graduation effect
             5
   PSAT effect




                                                                                                                                           .05
     0




                                                                                                                                  0
             −5




                                                                                                                       −.05
             −10




                                                                                                                                        −.1
                                   −.5                  0                          .5            1                                                           −.5                      0                          .5   1
                                                             Regents math effect                                                                                                          Regents math effect


                                         C. Regents math scores and college attendance                                                                             D. Regents math scores and log college quality
                   .2




                                                                                                                         .1          .05
                              .1
      College attendance effect




                                                                                                             Log college quality effect
                  0




                                                                                                          −.05          0
     −.1           −.2




                                                                                                                         −.1




                                   −.5                   0                         .5            1                                                          −.5                   0                             .5    1
                                                             Regents math effect                                                                                                      Regents math effect


Notes: This figure plots estimates of causal effects on Regents math scores against estimates of effects on longer-run outcomes. Treatment effects are empirical Bayes posterior
mean estimates of school average treatment effects from control function models. Panel A plots the relationship between Regents math effects and effects on PSAT scores.
Panels B, C, and D show corresponding results for high school graduation, college attendance, and log college quality.
                                           Figure 3: Relationships among preferences, peer quality, and Regents math effects
                                                                      A. Bivariate relationships




        4




                                                                                                      4
        2




                                                                                                      2
  Mean utility




                                                                                                Mean utility
                                                                                                    0
      0




                                                                                                      −2
        −2




                                                                                                      −4
        −4




                                                                                                               −.75   −.5   −.25      0        .25       .5       .75        1
                  −.5   −.25     0       .25       .5       .75        1        1.25                                               Regents math effect
                                          Peer quality


                                                                           B. Multivariate relationships
         4




                                                                                                    4
         2




                                                                                                    2
   Mean utility




                                                                                              Mean utility
       0




                                                                                                  0
         −2




                                                                                                    −2
         −4




                                                                                                    −4




                  −.5     −.25       0         .25          .5         .75             1
                                         Peer quality                                                        −.75     −.5   −.25      0        .25       .5        .75           1
                                                                                                                                   Regents math effect


Notes: This figure plots school mean utility estimates against estimates of peer quality and Regents math average treatment effects. Mean utilities are school average residuals
from a regression of school-by-covariate cell mean utility estimates on cell indicators. Peer quality is defined as the average predicted Regents math score for enrolled students.
Regents math effects are empirical Bayes posterior mean estimates of school average treatment effects from control function models. The left plot in Panel A displays the
bivariate relationship between mean utility and per quality, while the right plot shows the bivariate relationship between mean utility and Regents math effects. The left plot in
Panel B displays the relationship between mean utility and residuals from a regression of peer quality on Regents math effects, while the right plot shows the relationship
between mean utility and residuals from a regression of Regents math effects on peer quality. Dashed lines are ordinary least squares regression lines.
                            Table 1. Descriptive statistics for New York City eighth graders
                                                                            Outcome samples
                                  Choice sample Regents math            PSAT         HS graduation               College
                                        (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)                     (5)
Female                                0.497               0.518         0.532            0.500                    0.500

Black                                   0.353              0.377            0.359              0.376              0.372

Hispanic                                0.381              0.388            0.384              0.399              0.403

Subsidized lunch                        0.654              0.674            0.667              0.680              0.700

Census tract median income             $50,136           $50,004           $49,993           $49,318             $49,243

Bronx                                   0.231              0.221            0.226              0.236              0.239

Brooklyn                                0.327              0.317            0.335              0.339              0.333

Manhattan                               0.118              0.118            0.119              0.116              0.116

Queens                                  0.259              0.281            0.255              0.250              0.253

Staten Island                           0.065              0.063            0.064              0.059              0.059

Regents math score                      0.000             -0.068            0.044              -0.068             -0.044

PSAT score                               120                116              116                116                115

High school graduation                  0.587              0.763            0.789              0.610              0.624

Attended college                        0.463              0.588            0.616              0.478              0.478

College quality                        $31,974           $33,934           $35,010           $31,454             $31,454

                              N        270157             155850           149365             230087             173254
Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for applicants to New York City public high schools between the 2003-2004 and
2006-2007 school years. Column (1) reports average characteristics and outcomes for all applicants with complete
information on preferences, demographics, and eighth-grade test scores. Columns (2)-(5) display characteristics for the
Regents math, PSAT, high school graduation, and college outcome samples. Outcome samples are restricted to students with
data on the relevant outcome, enrolled in for ninth grade at schools with at least 50 students for each outcome. Regents math
scores are normalized to mean zero and standard deviation one in the choice sample. High school graduation equals one for
students who graduate from a New York City high school within five years of the end of their eighth grade year. College
attendance equals one for students enrolled in any college within two years of projected high school graduation. College
quality is the mean 2014 income for individuals in the 1980-1982 birth cohorts who attended a student's college. This variable
equals the mean income in the non-college population for students who did not attend college. The college outcome sample
excludes students in the 2003-2004 cohort. Census tract median income is median household income measured in 2015
dollars using data from the 2011-2015 American Community Surveys. Regents math, PSAT, graduation, and college outcome
statistics exclude students with missing values.
    Table 2. Correlates of preference rankings for New York City high schools
                     Fraction         Same                           Regents
                    reporting        borough         Distance       math score
                       (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
Choice 1              1.000           0.849            2.71            0.200

Choice 2                0.929             0.844              2.94               0.149

Choice 3                0.885             0.839              3.04               0.116

Choice 4                0.825             0.828              3.12               0.085

Choice 5                0.754             0.816              3.18               0.057

Choice 6                0.676             0.803              3.23               0.030

Choice 7                0.594             0.791              3.28               0.009

Choice 8                0.523             0.780              3.29               -0.013

Choice 9                0.458             0.775              3.31               -0.031

Choice 10               0.402             0.773              3.32               -0.051

Choice 11               0.345             0.774              3.26               -0.071

Choice 12               0.278             0.787              3.04               -0.107
Notes: This table reports average characteristics of New York City high schools by student
preference rank. Column (1) displays fractions of student applications listing each choice.
Column (2) reports the fraction of listed schools located in the same borough as a student's
home address. Column (3) reports the mean distance between a student's home address and
each ranked school, measured in miles. This column excludes schools outside the home
borough. Column (4) shows average Regents math scores in standard deviation units
relative to the New York City average.
                         Table 3. Variation in student preference parameters
                                                                Standard deviations
                                    Mean           Within cells Between cells                   Total
                                      (1)               (2)              (3)                     (4)
School mean utility                    -               1.117            0.500                   1.223
                                                      (0.045)          (0.003)                 (0.018)

Distance cost                         0.330                  -                0.120              0.120
                                     (0.006)                                 (0.005)            (0.005)

Number of students                                                270157
Number of schools                                                   316
Number of covariate cells                                           360
Notes: This table summarizes variation in school value-added and utility parameters across schools and
covariate cells. Utility estimates come from rank-ordered logit models fit to student preference rankings.
These models include school indicators and distance to school and are estimated separately in covariate
cells defined by borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, an indicator for above or below the
median of census tract median income, and tercile of the average of eighth grade math and reading
scores. Column (1) shows the mean of the distance coefficient across cells weighted by cell size.
Column (2) shows the standard deviation of school mean utilities across schools within a cell, and
column (3) shows the standard deviation of a given school's mean utility across cells. School mean
utilities are deviated from cell averages to account for differences in the reference category across cells.
Estimated standard deviations are adjusted for sampling error by subtracting the average squared
standard error of the parameter estimates from the total variance.
   Table 4. Distributions of peer quality and treatment effect parameters for Regents math scores
                                         Value-added model                Control function model
                                        Mean           Std. dev.           Mean          Std. dev.
                                          (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
Peer quality                               0             0.288               0             0.305
                                           -            (0.012)              -            (0.012)
ATE                                           0               0.290                 0               0.233
                                              -              (0.012)                -              (0.014)
Female                                      -0.048            0.062               -0.029            0.062
                                           (0.005)           (0.006)             (0.005)           (0.006)
Black                                       -0.112            0.130               -0.108            0.120
                                           (0.011)           (0.011)             (0.010)           (0.011)
Hispanic                                   -0.097             0.114               -0.085            0.105
                                           (0.010)           (0.011)             (0.010)           (0.012)
Subsidized lunch                            0.001             0.052               0.026             0.054
                                           (0.005)           (0.006)             (0.005)           (0.006)
Log census tract median income              0.020             0.037               0.013             0.045
                                           (0.005)           (0.007)             (0.005)           (0.006)
Eighth grade math score                     0.622             0.105               0.599             0.105
                                           (0.007)           (0.006)             (0.007)           (0.006)
Eighth grade reading score                  0.159             0.048               0.143             0.052
                                           (0.004)           (0.004)             (0.004)           (0.004)

Preference coefficient (𝜓j)                   -                  -                -0.001            0.007
                                                                                 (0.001)           (0.000)
Match coefficient (𝜑)                         -                  -                0.006               -
                                                                                 (0.001)
Notes: This table reports estimated means and standard deviations of peer quality and school treatment effect
parameters for Regents math scores. Peer quality is a school's average predicted test score given the
characteristics of its students. The ATE is a school's average treatment effect, and other treatment effect
parameters are school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum
likelihood models fit to school-specific regression coefficients. Columns (1) and (2) report estimates from an
OLS regression that includes interactions of school indicators with sex, race, subsidized lunch, the log of the
median income in a student's census tract, and eighth grade reading and math scores. This model also includes
main effects of borough. Columns (3) and (4) show estimates from a control function model that adds distance
to each school and predicted unobserved preferences from the choice model. Control functions and distance
variables are set to zero for out-of-borough schools and indicators for missing values are included.
                                 Table 5. Correlations of peer quality and treatment effect parameters for Regents math scores
                                    Peer                                                Control function parameters
                                  quality        ATE         Female         Black       Hispanic     Sub. lunch Log tract inc. Math score Reading score
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)        (8)          (9)
ATE                                0.588
                                  (0.052)
Female                              0.078         0.299
                                   (0.078)       (0.101)
Black                               0.006         0.107          -0.177
                                   (0.077)       (0.106)        (0.142)
Hispanic                            -0.013        0.115          -0.235        0.922
                                   (0.080)       (0.112)        (0.150)       (0.028)
Subsidized lunch                    0.045         -0.168         0.066         -0.038         0.004
                                   (0.086)       (0.117)        (0.140)       (0.153)        (0.159)
Log census tract income             0.035         0.068          -0.010        -0.239         -0.045         -0.280
                                   (0.099)       (0.134)        (0.162)       (0.176)        (0.188)        (0.183)
Eighth grade math score             -0.075        0.037          -0.074        -0.005         -0.007         0.060           0.027
                                   (0.064)       (0.083)        (0.099)       (0.102)        (0.109)        (0.113)         (0.130)
Eighth grade reading score          -0.418        -0.452         -0.193        -0.090         -0.078         0.004           0.086           0.256
                                   (0.068)       (0.094)        (0.117)       (0.130)        (0.138)        (0.135)         (0.155)         (0.099)
Preference coefficient (𝜓j)         0.429         0.247          0.212         -0.083         -0.058         -0.127          0.316           -0.241          -0.281
                                   (0.063)       (0.092)        (0.104)       (0.106)        (0.111)        (0.116)         (0.130)         (0.083)         (0.099)
Notes: This table reports estimated correlations between peer quality and school treatment effect parameters for Regents math scores. The ATE is a school's average
treatment effect, and other treatment effect parameters are school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum likelihood models fit
to school-specific regression coefficients from a control function model controlling for observed characteristics, distance to school and unobserved tastes from the
choice model.
                                          Table 6. Decomposition of school average outcomes
                                                                             High school
                                         Regents math    PSAT score/10        graduation    College attendance Log college quality
                                             (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)
Total variance of average outcome           0.191             1.586             0.012             0.016              0.021

Variance of peer quality                      0.093               0.781                0.010                0.010                 0.009

Variance of ATE                               0.054               0.160                0.002                0.003                 0.004

Variance of match                             0.008               0.027                0.002                0.002                 0.001

2Cov(peer quality, ATE)                       0.081               0.745                0.005                0.008                 0.011

2Cov(peer quality, match)                    -0.023               -0.061              -0.003               -0.003                 -0.002

2Cov(ATE, match)                             -0.022               -0.068              -0.004               -0.005                 -0.003
Notes: This table decomposes variation in average outcomes across schools into components explained by student characteristics, school
average treatment effects (ATE), and the match between student characteristics and school effects. Estimates come from control function
models adjusting for selection on unobservables. Column (1) shows results for Regents math scores in standard deviation units, column (2)
reports estimates for PSAT scores, column (3) displays estimates for high school graduation, column (4) reports results for college attendance,
and column (5) shows results for log college quality. The first row reports the total variance of average outcomes across schools. The second
row reports the variance of peer quality, defined as the average predicted outcome as a function of student characteristics and unobserved
tastes. The third row reports the variance of ATE, and the fourth row displays the variance of the match effect. The remaining rows show
covariances of these components.
                                      Table 7. Lottery-based tests for bias in estimates of school effectiveness
                                                        2SLS                                                       UJIVE
                                   Uncontrolled      Value-added Control function             Uncontrolled       Value-added    Control function
                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)                   (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                                   Panel A. Math
Forecast coefficient                  0.599             0.965              0.967                0.598             0.961              0.963
                                     (0.040)           (0.038)            (0.038)              (0.040)           (0.046)            (0.045)
                       p -value:      0.000             0.354              0.388                0.000             0.343              0.376
          2                           174.1             84.88              86.50                174.1             84.88              86.50
Overid. 𝜒 (123) stat.
                  p -value:           0.000             0.996              0.995                0.002             0.996              0.995
First stage F -stat.                   91.1               6.1               5.9                  91.1               6.1                5.9
Number of lotteries                                      124                                                       124
Number of students                                      22515                                                     22515
                                                                   Panel B. PSAT
Forecast coefficient                  0.306             0.879              0.912                0.296             0.815              0.862
                                     (0.049)           (0.048)            (0.048)              (0.050)           (0.083)            (0.084)
                       p -value:      0.000             0.012              0.066                0.000             0.025              0.101
Overid. 𝜒2(123) stat.                 145.8             112.9              106.8                145.7             111.7              106.1
                  p -value:           0.079             0.732              0.851               0.0792             0.759              0.861
First stage F -stat.                   62.9               2.3               2.1                  62.9               2.3                2.1
Number of lotteries                                      124                                                       124
Number of students                                      16554                                                     16554
                                                         Panel C. High School Graduation
Forecast coefficient                  0.333             0.905              0.914                0.329             0.893              0.901
                                     (0.063)           (0.076)            (0.076)              (0.064)           (0.093)            (0.094)
                       p -value:      0.000             0.214              0.262                0.000             0.245              0.295
Overid. 𝜒2(123) stat.                 205.1             145.6              147.7                205.1             145.6              147.7
                     p -value:        0.000             0.080              0.064                0.000             0.080              0.064
First stage F -stat.                   92.1              5.4                5.0                 92.1               5.4                5.0
Number of lotteries                                      124                                                        124
Number of students                                     32131                                                      32131
Notes: This table reports the results of lottery-based tests for bias in estimates of school effectiveness. The sample is restricted to students
who have non-degenerate risk for at least one school and lotteries with 100 or more students at risk. Students are considered to have risk
at a given school if their propensity score is strictly between zero and one and they are in a score cell with variation in school offers.
Columns (1) and (4) measure school effectiveness as the school mean outcome, columns (2) and (5) use value-added estimates, and
columns (3) and (6) use control function estimates. Forecast coefficients and overidentification tests in columns (1)-(3) come from two-
stage least squares regressions of test scores on the fitted values from the non-lottery estimation procedure, instrumenting with school-
specific lottery offer indicators and controlling for school-specific propensity scores. Columns (4)-(6) use the Unbiased Jackknife
Instrumental Variables (UJIVE) estimator of Kolesar (2013) instead of 2SLS.
                              Table 8. Preferences for peer quality and Regents math effects
                                 Value-added models                                 Control function models
                        (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)                (8)
Peer quality           0.416                    0.438        0.406         0.407                   0.439              0.437
                      (0.061)                  (0.063)      (0.067)       (0.057)                 (0.059)            (0.059)

ATE                                 0.244         -0.033       -0.022                     0.219        -0.051         -0.047
                                   (0.047)       (0.046)      (0.047)                    (0.046)      (0.043)        (0.043)

Match effect                                                   -0.072                                                 -0.172
                                                              (0.047)                                                (0.054)

                N                                                       21684
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions of school popularity on peer quality and school effectiveness. School
popularity is measured as the estimated mean utility for each school and covariate cell in the choice model from Table 4.
Covariate cells are defined by borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, an indicator for students above the median of
census tract median income, and tercile of the average of eighth grade math and reading scores. Peer quality is constructed
as the average predicted Regents math score for enrolled students. Treatment effect estimates are empirical Bayes posterior
mean predictions of Regents math effects. Mean utilities, peer quality, and treatment effects are scaled in standard deviation
units. Columns (1)-(4) report results from value-added models, while columns (5)-(8) report results from control function
models. All regressions include cell indicators and weight by the inverse of the squared standard error of the mean utility
estimates. Standard errors are double-clustered by school and covariate cell.
                        Table 9. Preferences for peer quality and Regents math effects with controls for additional school characteristics
                                                                 Value-added models                                      Control function models
                                   (1)              (2)           (3)          (5)            (6)              (7)           (8)            (9)             (10)
Peer quality                                       0.310                      0.314         0.286             0.299                        0.303           0.308
                                                  (0.060)                    (0.059)       (0.060)          (0.056)                       (0.056)         (0.056)

ATE                                                               0.157         -0.005         0.005                          0.144         -0.008         -0.003
                                                                 (0.042)       (0.039)        (0.040)                        (0.040)       (0.035)        (0.035)

Match effect                                                                                   -0.068                                                      -0.142
                                                                                              (0.039)                                                     (0.044)

School Environment Score          0.015             -0.123        -0.037        -0.123         -0.128           -0.122        -0.034        -0.121         -0.118
                                 (0.042)           (0.044)       (0.044)       (0.044)        (0.045)          (0.045)       (0.044)       (0.045)        (0.046)

VADI Per Student                  -0.331            -0.222        -0.284        -0.223         -0.223           -0.226        -0.288        -0.227         -0.213
                                 (0.042)           (0.038)       (0.039)       (0.039)        (0.039)          (0.038)       (0.039)       (0.038)        (0.038)

% Teachers with Masters +         0.418             0.347         0.400         0.347          0.344            0.347         0.406         0.346          0.336
                                 (0.040)           (0.036)       (0.039)       (0.036)        (0.038)          (0.037)       (0.039)       (0.037)        (0.042)
                           N                                                                  20200
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions of school popularity on peer quality and school effectiveness along with controls for other school attributes.
School popularity is measured as the estimated mean utility for each school and covariate cell in the choice model from Table 4. Covariate cells are defined by
borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, an indicator for students above the median of census tract median income, and tercile of the average of eighth
grade math and reading scores. Peer quality is constructed as the average predicted Regents math score for enrolled students. Treatment effect estimates are
empirical Bayes posterior mean predictions of Regents math effects. Mean utilities, peer quality, and treatment effects are scaled in standard deviation units.
Columns (2)-(5) report results from value-added models, while columns (6)-(9) report results from control function models. All regressions include cell
indicators and include the following school controls: school environment score, VADI per student, and percent of teachers with master’s degrees plus. The
school environment score is a measure that combines the following school survey summary scores from the NYC Learning Environments Survey: Safety and
Respect, Communication, Engagement and Academic Expectations using principle components analysis. VADI (Violent and Disruptive incidents) per student is
constructed using Violent and Disruptive Incident Reporting data from the NYS department of education. Percent of teachers with master’s degrees plus comes
from the NY school report cards from 2005-2007. We use the latest year of data available. School environment scores, VADI per student, and percent of
teachers with masters degrees are scaled in standard deviation units. All regressions weight by the inverse of the squared standard error of the mean utility
estimates. Standard errors are double-clustered by school and covariate cell.
                                   Table 10. Preferences for peer quality and school effectiveness by outcome
                             PSAT score              High school graduation              College attendance                   Log college quality
                         (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)                  (7)            (8)
Peer quality                          0.467                           0.430                             0.235                               0.322
                                     (0.070)                         (0.070)                           (0.054)                             (0.065)

ATE                    0.325            -0.092           0.103           -0.174            0.273            0.132            0.199           0.029
                      (0.056)          (0.074)          (0.045)         (0.054)           (0.048)          (0.054)          (0.059)         (0.080)

Match effect                            -0.049                           -0.065                             -0.017                           0.053
                                       (0.047)                          (0.044)                            (0.050)                          (0.061)

               N                                                                  21684
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions of school popularity on peer quality and school effectiveness separately by outcome. School
popularity is measured as the estimated mean utility for each school and covariate cell in the choice model from Table 4. Covariate cells are
defined by borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, an indicator for students above the median of census tract median income, and tercile of
the average of eighth grade math and reading scores. Peer quality is constructed as the average predicted outcome for enrolled students. Treatment
effect estimates are empirical Bayes posterior mean predictions from control function models. Mean utilities, peer quality, and treatment effects are
scaled in standard deviation units. All regressions include cell indicators and weight by the inverse of the squared standard error of the mean utility
estimates. Standard errors are double-clustered by school and covariate cell.
                                        Table 11. Heterogeneity in preferences for peer quality and Regents math effects
                            By sex                              By race                        By subsidized lunch              By eighth grade test score tercile
                     Male         Female           Black      Hispanic         Other           Eligible    Ineligible          Lowest      Middle         Highest
                      (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)                (8)         (9)            (10)
Peer quality         0.432         0.441           0.396        0.370          0.705            0.410        0.501              0.251       0.395          0.686
                    (0.060)       (0.064)         (0.060)      (0.063)        (0.128)          (0.057)      (0.077)            (0.055)     (0.062)        (0.092)

ATE                  -0.075         -0.021          -0.047         -0.011         -0.192          -0.036         -0.076         -0.015       -0.029         -0.117
                    (0.047)        (0.043)         (0.045)        (0.044)        (0.094)         (0.042)        (0.050)        (0.042)      (0.042)        (0.059)

Match effect         -0.177         -0.169          -0.200         -0.144         -0.149          -0.180         -0.155         -0.166       -0.169         -0.125
                    (0.054)        (0.054)         (0.056)        (0.066)        (0.061)         (0.054)        (0.054)        (0.061)      (0.058)        (0.055)

               N     10795          10889           7467           7433           6784            11043         10641           7264         7286           7134
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions of school popularity on peer quality and school effectiveness separately by student subgroup. School
popularity is measured as the estimated mean utility for each school and covariate cell in the choice model from Table 4. Peer quality is constructed as the average
predicted Regents math score for enrolled students. Treatment effect estimates are empirical Bayes posterior mean predictions of Regents math effects from control
function models. Mean utilities, peer quality, and treatment effects are scaled in standard deviation units. Peer quality is constructed as the average predicted
Regents math score for enrolled students. All regressions include cell indicators and weight by the inverse of the squared standard error of the mean utility
estimates. Standard errors are double-clustered by school and covariate cell.
         Table 12. Potential achievement gains from ranking schools by effectiveness
                       Observed rankings                   Rankings based on effectiveness
             Peer quality      ATE         Match        Peer quality      ATE        Match
                  (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)
Choice 1        0.112          0.071       -0.037          0.286         0.427       0.162

Choice 2            0.057         0.055         -0.020            0.182          0.352         0.108

Choice 3            0.021         0.045         -0.012            0.087          0.275         0.113

Choice 4            -0.013        0.036         -0.006            0.105          0.247         0.103

Choice 5            -0.046        0.027         -0.002            0.124          0.228         0.092

Choice 6            -0.074        0.019         -0.001            0.103          0.209         0.085

Choice 7            -0.097        0.014          0.001            0.118          0.197         0.075

Choice 8            -0.114        0.012          0.001            0.099          0.169         0.066

Choice 9            -0.127        0.007          0.001            0.064          0.333         0.111

Choice 10           -0.139        0.004          0.003            0.046          0.165         0.063

Choice 11           -0.146        0.003          0.003            0.028          0.157         0.056

Choice 12           -0.156        -0.002         0.002            0.013          0.146         0.053
Notes: This table summarizes Regents math score gains that parents could achieve by ranking
schools based on effectiveness. Columns (1)-(3) report average peer quality, average treatment
effects, and average match quality for students' observed preference rankings. Columns (4)-(6)
display corresponding statistics for hypothetical rankings that list schools in order of their treatment
effects. Treatment effect estimates come from control function models. All calculations are restricted
to ranked schools within the home borough.
References
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., N. Agarwal, and P. A. Pathak (2017a): “The welfare effects of coordinated
  assignment: evidence from the New York City high school match,” American Economic Review, 107,
  3635–3689.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. D. Angrist, Y. Narita, and P. A. Pathak (2017b): “Market design meets
  research design: using centralized assignment for impact evaluation,” Econometrica, 85, 1373–1432,
  working Paper.

——— (2019): “Breaking ties: regression discontinuity design meets market design,” Cowles Foundation
  discussion paper no. 2170.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. D. Angrist, and P. A. Pathak (2014): “The elite illusion: achievement
  effects at Boston and New York exam schools,” Econometrica, 82, 137–196.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, and A. E. Roth (2005): “The New York City high school
  match,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 95, 364–367.

——— (2009): “Strategy-proofness versus efficiency in matching with indifferences: redesigning the NYC
  high school match,” American Economic Review, 99, 1954–78.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2018): “Free to choose: can school choice
  reduce student achievement?” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10.

Agarwal, N. and P. Somaini (forthcoming): “Demand analysis using strategic reports: an application
  to a school choice mechanism,” Econometrica.

Altonji, J. G., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber (2005): “Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
  Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 151–184.

Altonji, J. G., C.-I. Huang, and C. R. Taber (2015): “Estimating the cream skimming effect of
  school choice,” Journal of Political Economy, 123, 266–324.

Angrist, J. D., S. R. Cohodes, S. M. Dynarski, P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2016a):
  “Stand and deliver: effects of Boston’s charter high schools on college preparation, entry and choice,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 34, 275–318.

Angrist, J. D., P. D. Hull, P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2016b): “Interpreting tests of school
  VAM validity,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106, 388–392.

——— (2017): “Leveraging lotteries for school value-added: testing and estimation,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 132, 871–919.



                                                   43
Angrist, J. D., P. A. Pathak., and C. R. Walters (2013): “Explaining charter school effectiveness,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 1–27.

Avery, C. N. and P. A. Pathak (2015): “The distributional consequences of public school choice,”
  NBER Working Paper 21525.

Baicher-Hicks, A., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014): “Validating teacher effect estimates using
  changes in teacher assignments in Los Angeles,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Barseghyan, L., D. Clark, and S. Coate (2014): “Public school choice: an economic analysis,” NBER
  working paper no. 20701.

Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2007): “A unified framework for measuring preferences
  for schools and neighborhoods,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 588–638.

Beuermann, D., C. K. Jackson, L. Navarro-Sola, and F. Pardo (2018): “What is a good school,
  and can parents tell? Evidence on the multidimensionality of school output,” NBER working paper no.
  25342.

Black, S. E. (1999): “Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary education,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 14, 577–599.

Blinder, A. S. (1973): “Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural estimates,” Journal of Human
  Resources, 8, 436–455.

Blundell, R. and R. L. Matzkin (2014): “Control functions in nonseparable simultaneous equations
  models,” Quantitative Economics, 5, 271–295.

Booker, K., T. R. Sass, B. Gill, and R. Zimmer (2011): “The effects of charter high schools on
  educational attainment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 29, 377–415.

Burgess, S., E. Greaves, A. Vignoles, and D. Wilson (2014): “What parents want: school prefer-
  ences and school choice,” The Economic Journal, 125, 1262–1289.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2011): “Robust inference with multiway cluster-
  ing,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29, 238–249.

Card, D. (1995): “Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the return to schooling,”
  in Aspects of Labor Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp, ed. by L. Christofides,
  E. Grant, and R. Swidinsky, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan (2011):
  “How does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 126, 1593–1660.


                                                  44
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014a): “Measuring the impact of teachers I:
  evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates,” American Economic Review, 104, 2593–2563.

——— (2014b): “Measuring the impact of teachers II: teacher value-added and student outcomes in adult-
  hood,” American Economic Review, 104, 2633–2679.

——— (2016): “Using lagged outcomes to evaluate bias in value-added models,” American Economic
  Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106, 393–399.

——— (2017a): “Measuring the impacts of teachers: reply,” American Economic Review, 107, 1685–1717.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, E. Saez, N. Turner, and D. Yagan (2017b): “Mobility report cards:
  the role of colleges in intergenerational mobility,” The Equality of Opportunity Project, January.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2017): “The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility II:
  county-level estimates,” NBER working paper no. 23002.

Chubb, J. E. and T. M. Moe (1990): Politics, Markets, and America’s Schools, Washington, DC:
  Brookings Institutution Press.

Cornelissen, T., C. Dustmann, A. Raute, and U. Schönberg (2016): “Who benefits from universal
  childcare? Estimating marginal returns to early childcare attendance,” Working paper.

Cullen, J. B., B. A. Jacob, and S. D. Levitt (2006): “The effect of school choice on participants:
  evidence from randomized lotteries,” Econometrica, 74, 1191–1230.

Dahl, G. B. (2002): “Mobility and the return to education: testing a Roy model with multiple markets,”
  Econometrica, 70, 2367–2420.

Dale, S. B. and A. B. Krueger (2002): “Estimating the payoff to attending a more selective college:
  an application of selection on observables and unobservables,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
  1491–1527.

——— (2014): “Estimating the effects of college characteristics over the career using administrative earn-
  ings data,” Journal of Human Resources, 49, 323–358.

Deming, D. (2014): “Using school choice lotteries to test measures of school effectiveness,” American
  Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 104, 406–411.

Deming, D. J., J. S. Hastings, T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014): “School choice, school quality,
  and postsecondary attainment,” American Economic Review, 104, 991–1013.

DeVos, B. (2017): Comments at Brookings Institution event on the 2016 Education Choice and Competi-
  tion Index, March 29th. https://www.brookings.edu/events/the-2016-education-choice-and-competition-
  index.


                                                   45
Disare, M. (2017): “City to eliminate high school admissions method that favored families with time and
  resources,” Chalkbeat, June 6. Available at: https://www.chalkbeat.org/posts/ny/2017/06/06/city-to-
  eliminate-high-school-admissions-method-that-favored-families-with-time-and-resources/, Last accessed
  December 2017.

Dobbie, W. and R. G. Fryer (2014): “The impact of attending a school with high-achieving peers:
  evidence from the New York City exam schools,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6,
  58–75.

Dubin, J. A. and D. L. McFadden (1984): “An econometric analysis of residential electric appliance
  holdings and consumption,” Econometrica, 52, 345–362.

Dubins, L. E. and D. A. Freedman (1981): “Machiavelli and the Gale-Shapley algorithm,” 88, 485–494.

Dynarski, S., J. Hyman, and D. W. Schanzenbach (2013): “Experimental evidence on the effect of
  childhood investments on postsecondary attainment and degree completion,” Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management, 32, 692–717.

Epple, D., D. N. Figlio, and R. Romano (2004): “Competition between private and public schools:
  testing stratification and pricing predictions,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 1215–1245.

Epple, D. and R. Romano (1998): “Competition between private and public schools, vouchers, and
  peer-group effects,” American Economic Review, 62, 33–62.

——— (2008): “Educational vouchers and cream skimming,” International Economic Review, 49, 1395–
  1435.

Fack, G., J. Grenet, and Y. He (2015): “Beyond truth-telling: preference estimation with centralized
  school choice,” Working Paper, Paris School of Economics.

Figlio, D. N. and M. E. Lucas (2004): “What’s in a grade? School report cards and the housing
  market,” American Economic Review, 94, 591–604.

Finkelstein, A., M. Gentzkow, P. Hull, and H. Williams (2017): “Adjusting risk adjustment -
  accounting for variation in diagnostic intensity,” New England Journal of Medicine, 376, 608–610.

French, E. and C. Taber (2011): “Identification of models of the labor market,” in Handbook of Labor
  Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Amsterdam: Elsevier, vol. 4a, 537–617.

Friedman, M. (1962): Capitalism and Freedom, Cambridge University Press.

Gale, D. and L. S. Shapley (1962): “College admissions and the stability of marriage,” The American
  Mathematical Monthly, 69, 9–15.



                                                   46
Glazerman, S. and D. Dotter (2016): “Market signals: evidence on the determinants and consequences
  of school choice from a citywide lottery,” Mathematica Policy Research working paper.

Guarino, C. M., M. D. Reckase, and J. M. Wooldridge (2015): “Can value-added measures of
  teacher performance be trusted?” Education Finance and Policy, 10, 117–156.

Haeringer, G. and F. Klijn (2009): “Constrained school choice,” Journal of Economic Theory, 144,
  1921–1947.

Hanushek, E. A. (1981): “Throwing money at schools,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1,
  19–41.

Harris, D. N. and M. Larsen (2014): “What schools do families want (and why)?” Technical report,
  Education Research Alliance for New Orleans.

Hastings, J., A. Hortac̆su, and C. Syverson (2017): “Sales Force and Competition in Financial
  Product Markets: The Case of Mexico’s Social Security Privatization,” Econometrica, 85, 1723–1761.

Hastings, J. S., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2009): “Heterogeneous preferences and the efficacy
  of public school choice,” Working paper.

Hastings, J. S. and J. M. Weinstein (2008): “Information, school choice, and academic achievement:
  evidence from two experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1373–1414.

Hausman, J. A. and P. A. Ruud (1987): “Specifying and testing econometric models for rank-ordered
  data,” Journal of Econometrics, 34(1-2), 83–104.

Heckman, J. J. and R. Robb (1985): “Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of interventions:
  an overview,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 30, 239–267.

Heckman, J. J., S. Urzua, and E. Vytlacil (2006): “Understanding instrumental variables estimates
  in models with essential heterogeneity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 389–432.

——— (2008): “Instrumental variables in models with multiple outcomes: the general unordered case,”
  Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 91-92, 151–174.

Hoxby, C. M. (2000): “Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers?” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 90, 1209–1238.

——— (2003): “School choice and school productivity: could school choice be a tide that lifts all boats?”
  in The Economics of School Choice, ed. by C. M. Hoxby, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Hsieh, C. and M. Urquiola (2006): “The effects of generalized school choice on achievement and
  stratification: evidence from Chile’s voucher program,” Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1477–1503.


                                                     47
Hull, P. D. (2016): “Estimating hospital quality with quasi-experimental data,” Working paper.

Imberman, S. A. and M. F. Lovenheim (2016): “Does the market value value-added? Evidence from
  housing prices after a public release of school and teacher value-added,” Journal of Urban Economics,
  91, 104–121.

Jacob, B. A. and L. Lefgren (2007): “What do parents value in education? An empirical investigation
  of parents’ revealed preferences for teachers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1603–1637.

——— (2008): “Principals as agents: subjective performance assessment in education,” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 26, 101–136.

Kane, T. J., D. F. McCaffrey, and D. O. Staiger (2013): “Have we identified effective teachers?
  Validating measures of effective teaching using random assignment,” Gates Foundation Report.

Kane, T. J., J. E. Rockoff, and D. O. Staiger (2008): “What does certification tell us about teacher
  effectiveness? Evidence from New York City,” Economics of Education Review, 27, 615–631.

Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2002): “The promise and pitfalls of using imprecise school accountability
  measures,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16, 91–114.

Kapor, A., C. A. Neilson, and S. D. Zimmerman (2017): “Heterogeneous beliefs and school choice
  mechanisms,” Working paper.

Kirkebøen, L. J., E. Leuven, and M. Mogstad (2016): “Field of study, earnings, and self-selection,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1057–1111.

Kline, P. (2011): “Oaxaca-Blinder as a reweighting estimator,” American Economic Review: Papers &
  Proceedings, 101, 532–537.

Kline, P. and A. Santos (2012): “A score based approach to wild bootstrap inference,” Journal of
  Econometric Methods, 1, 23–41.

Kline, P. and C. R. Walters (2016): “Evaluating public programs with close substitutes: the case of
  Head Start,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1795–1848.

Koedel, C., K. Mihaly, and J. E. Rockoff (2015): “Value-added modeling: a review,” Economics of
  Education Review, 47, 180–195.

Kolesar, M. (2013): “Estimation in an instrumental variables model with treatment effect heterogeneity,”
  Cowles Foundation working paper.

Ladd, H. F. (2002): Market-based Reforms in Urban Education, Washington, DC: Economic Policy Insti-
  tute.


                                                    48
Langer, A. (2016): “(Dis)Incentives for demographic price discrimination in the new vehicle market,”
  Working paper.

Lee, L.-F. (1983): “Generalized econometric models with selectivity,” Econometrica, 51, 507–512.

Linge, M. K. and J. Tanzer (2016): “The top 40 public high schools in NYC,” New York Post,
  September 17.

MacLeod, W. B., E. Riehl, J. E. Saavedra, and M. Urquiola (2017): “The big sort: college
  reputation and labor market outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9, 223–261.

MacLeod, W. B. and M. Urquiola (2015): “Reputation and school competition,” American Economic
  Review, 105, 3471–3488.

Manski, C. F. (1993): “Identification of endogenous social effects: the reflection problem,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 60, 531–542.

Morris, C. N. (1983): “Parametric empirical Bayes inference: theory and applications,” Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 78, 47–55.

Mountjoy, J. (2017): “Community colleges and upward mobility,” Working paper.

Nathanson, L., S. Corcoran, and C. Baker-Smith (2013): “High school choice in New York City:
  a report on the school choices and placements of low-achieveing students,” Research Alliance for New
  York City Schools, April.

Neal, D. (1997): “The effects of Catholic secondary schooling on educational achievement,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 15, 98–123.

New York City Department of Education (2003): “Directory of the New York City Public High
  Schools, 2003-2004,” New York, New York.

——— (2004): “2003-2004 Annual School Reports,” New York, New York.

——— (2017): “2016-17 School Quality Reports,” Http://schools.nyc.gov/Accountability/tools/report/default.htm.
  Accessed December 11, 2017.

Oaxaca, R. (1973): “Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets,” International Economic
  Review, 14, 693–709.

Oster, E. (forthcoming): “Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: theory and evidence,” Journal
  of Business and Economic Statistics.

Pathak, P. A. and T. Sönmez (2013): “School admissions reform in Chicago and England: comparing
  mechanisms by their vulnerability to manipulation,” American Economic Review, 103, 80–106.


                                                   49
Peterson, P. E. and D. E. Campbell (2001): Charters, Vouchers and Public Education, Brookings
  Institution Press.

Robbins, H. (1956): “An empirical Bayes approach to statistics,” Proceedings of the Third Berkeley
  Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 1, 157–163.

Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin (1983): “The central role of the propensity score in observational
  studies for causal effects,” Biometrika, 70, 41–55.

Roth, A. E. (1982): “The economics of matching: stability and incentives,” Mathematics of Operations
  Research, 7, 617–628.

Rothstein, J. (2006): “Good principals or good peers? Parental valuation of school characteristics,
  Tiebout equilibrium, and the incentive effects of competition among jurisdictions,” American Economic
  Review, 96, 1333–1350.

——— (2010): “Teacher quality in educational production: tracking, decay, and student achievement,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 175–214.

——— (2017): “Measuring the impacts of teachers: comment,” American Economic Review, 107, 1656–
  1684.

Roy, A. (1951): “Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, 3, 135–146.

Staiger, D. and J. H. Stock (1997): “Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments,” Econo-
  metrica, 65, 557–586.

Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin (2003): “On the specification and estimation of the production function
  for cognitive achievement,” The Economic Journal, 113, F3–F33.

Walters, C. R. (2018): “The demand for effective charter schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 126.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2015): “Control function methods in applied econometrics,” Journal of Human
  Resources, 50, 420–445.




                                                        50
Appendix A: Data
The data used for this project were provided by the NYC Department of Education (DOE). This Appendix
describes the DOE data files and explains the process used to construct our working extract from these
files.


A.1 Application Data

Data on NYC high school applications are controlled by the Student Enrollment Office. We received all
applications for the 2003-2004 through 2006-2007 school years. Application records include students’ rank-
ordered lists of academic programs submitted in each round of the application process, along with school
priorities and student attributes such as special education status, race, gender, and address. The raw
application files contained all applications, including private school students and first-time ninth graders
who wished to change schools as well as new high school applicants. From these records we selected the
set of eighth graders who were enrolled as NYC public school students in the previous school year.


A.2 Enrollment Data

We received registration and enrollment files from the Office of School Performance and Accountability
(OSPA). These data include every student’s grade and building code, or school ID, as of October of
each school year. A separate OSPA file contains biographical information, including many of the same
demographic variables from the application data. We measure demographics from the application records
for variables that appeared in both files and use the OSPA file to gather additional background information
such as subsidized lunch status.
    OSPA also provided an attendance file with days attended and absent for each student at every school
he or she attended in a given year. We use these attendance records to assign students to ninth-grade
schools. If a student was enrolled in multiple schools, we use the school with the greatest number of days
attended in the year following their final application to high school. A final OSPA file included scores on
New York State Education Department eighth grade achievement tests. We use these test scores to assign
baseline math and English Language Arts (reading) scores. Baseline scores are normalized to have mean
zero and standard deviation one in our applicant sample.


A.3 Outcome Data

Our analysis studies five outcomes: Regents math scores, PSAT scores, high school graduation, college
attendance, and college quality. We next describe the construction of each of these outcomes.
    The Regents math test is one of five tests NYC students must pass to receive a Regents high school
diploma from the state of New York. We received records of scores on all Regents tests taken between



                                                    51
2004 and 2008. We measured Regents math scores based on the lowest level math test offered in each year,
which changed over the course of our sample. For the first three cohorts the lowest level math test offered
was the Math A (Elementary Algebra and Planar Geometry) test. In 2007, the Board of Regents began
administering the Math E (Integrated Algebra I) exam in addition to the Math A exam; the latter was
phased out completely by 2009. We assign the earliest high school score on either of these two exams as
the Regents math outcome for students in our sample. The majority of students took Math A in tenth
grade, while most students taking Math E did so in ninth grade.
   PSAT scores were provided to the NYC DOE by the College Board for 2003-2012. We retain PSAT
scores that include all three test sections: math, reading, and writing (some subtests are missing for some
observations, particularly in earlier years of our sample). If students took the PSAT multiple times, we
use the score from the first attempt.
   High school graduation is measured from graduation files reporting discharge status for all public school
students between 2005 and 2012. These files indicate the last school attended by each student and the
reason for discharge, including graduation, equivalent achievement (e.g. receiving a general equivalency
diploma), or dropout. Discharge status is reported in years 4, 5, and 6 from expected graduation based on
a student’s year of ninth grade enrollment; our data window ends in 2012, so we only observe 4-year and
5-year high school discharge outcomes for students enrolled in eighth grade for the 2006-2007 year. We
therefore focus on 5-year graduation for all four cohorts. Our graduation outcome equals one if a student
received either a local diploma, a Regents diploma, or an Advanced Regents diploma within 5 years of her
expected graduation date. Students not present in the graduation files are coded as not graduating.
   College outcomes are measured from National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) files. The NSC records
enrollment for the vast majority of post-secondary institutions, though a few important New York City-area
institutions, including Rutgers and Columbia University, were not included in the NSC during our sample
period.14 The NYC DOE submitted identifying information for all NYC students graduating between 2009
and 2012 for matching to the NSC. Since many students in the 2003-04 eighth grade cohort graduated in
2008, NSC data are missing for a large fraction of this cohort. Our college outcomes are therefore defined
only for the last three cohorts in the sample. For these years we code a student as attending college if she
enrolled in a post-secondary institution within five years of applying to high school. This captures students
who graduated from high school on time and enrolled in college the following fall, as well as students that
delayed high school graduation or college enrollment by one year.
   We measure college quality based on the mean 2014 incomes of students enrolled in each institution
among those born between 1980 and 1982. These average incomes are reported by Chetty et al. (2017b).
Fewer than 100 observations in the NSC sample failed to match to institutions in the Chetty et al. (2017b)
sample. For students who enrolled in multiple postsecondary institutions, we assign the quality of the first
institution attended. If a student enrolled in multiple schools simultaneously, we use the institution with
  14 In   addition, about 100 parents opted out of the NSC in 2011 and 2012.



                                                             52
the highest mean earnings.


A.4 Matching Data Files

To construct our final analysis sample, we begin with the set of high school applications submitted by
students enrolled in eighth grade between the 2003-2004 and 2006-2007 school years. We match these
applications to the student enrollment file using a unique student identifier known as the OSISID and
retain individuals that appear as eighth graders in both data sets. If a student submits multiple high
school applications as an eighth grader, we select the final application for which data is available. We then
use the OSISID to match applicant records to the OSPA attendance and test scores files (used to assign
ninth grade enrollment and baseline test scores), and the Regents, PSAT, graduation, and NSC outcome
files.
    This merged sample is used to construct the set of 316 high schools that enrolled at least 50 students
with observations for each of the five outcomes, excluding selective schools that do not participate in the
main DA round. The final choice sample includes the set of high school applicants reporting at least one
of these 316 schools on their preference lists. The five outcome samples are subsets of the choice sample
with observed data on the relevant outcome and enrolled in one of our sample high schools for ninth grade.
Table A1 displays the impact of each restriction on sample size for the four cohorts in our analysis sample.




                                                     53
Appendix B: Econometric Methods

B.1 Rank-Ordered Control Functions

This section provides formulas for the rank-ordered control functions in equation (8). The choice model is


                                   Uij = δc(Xi )j − τc(Xi ) Dij + ηij = Vij + ηij ,


where Vij ≡ δc(Xi )j − τc(Xi ) Dij represents the observed component of student i’s utility for school j and
ηij is the unobserved component. The control functions are given by λij = E[ηij − µη |Xi , Di , Ri ] =
E[ηij |Ri , Vi ] − µη , where Vi = (Vi1 , ..., ViJ )0 . To compute the conditional mean of ηij , it will be useful to
define the following functions for any set of mean utilities S and subset S 0 ⊆ S:
                                                      X
                                                            exp(v)
                                                            v∈S 0
                                             P (S 0 |S) = X                  ,
                                                                    exp(v)
                                                             v∈S
                                                                P               
                                        I(S) = µη + log             v∈S   exp(v) .

P (S 0 |S) gives the probability that an individual chooses an option in S 0 from the set S when the value
of each option is the sum of its mean utility and an extreme value type I error term, while I(S) gives
the expected maximum utility of choosing an option in S, also known as the inclusive value. We provide
expressions for the control functions for two cases: (1) when a student ranks all available alternatives, and
(2) when the student leaves some alternatives unranked.


B.1.1 All alternatives ranked

Control function for the highest-ranked alternative
Without loss of generality label alternatives in decreasing order of student i’s preferences, so that Rij = j
for j = 1...J. The control function associated with the highest ranked alternative is

                                     λi1 = −(Vi1 + µη ) + E [Ui1 |Ri , Vi ]
                                  R ∞ R u1 R u2     R uJ−1 h QJ                 i
                                   −∞ −∞ −∞
                                                .... −∞     u1 j=1 f (uj |Vij ) duJ ...du2 du1
                 = −(Vi1 + µη ) +                   QJ−1                                       ,
                                                      j=1 P (Vij |Vij ....ViJ )

where f (u|V ) = exp (V − u − exp(V − u)) is the density function of a Gumbel random variable with
location parameter V . This simplifies to
                                                 QJ
                                                    j=1   P (Vij |Vij ....ViJ ) × I(Vi1 ...ViJ )
                          λi1 = −(Vi1 + µη ) +             QJ−1                                  .
                                                             j=1 P (Vij |Vij ....ViJ )

                                          = −Vi1 + (I(Vi1 ...ViJ ) − µη )



                                                           54
                                                 = − log P (Vi1 |Vi1 ...ViJ ),

which coincides with the control function for the best alternative in the multinomial logit model of Dubin
and McFadden (1984). This shows that knowledge of the rankings of less-preferred alternatives does not
affect the expected utility associated with the best choice.
Control functions for lower-ranked alternatives
To work out λij for j > 1, define the following functions:

                                                          Gi0 (u) = 1,
                                             Z   ∞
                               Gik (u) =             f (x|Vik )Gi(k−1) (x)dx, k = 1...J.
                                              u

It can be shown that
                                              k
                                              X         j
                                 Gik (u) =             Bik [1 − F (u|I(Vj ...Vk ) − µη )],
                                                 j=1

                                                                                             j
where F (u|V ) = exp(− exp(V − u)) is the Gumbel CDF with location V , and the coefficients Bik are:

                                                             1
                                                            Bi1 = 1,

                             j      j
                            Bik = −Bi(k−1) × P (Vik |Vij ....Vik ) , k > 1, j 6= k,

                                                          k−1
                                                          X
                                              k                  j
                                             Bik =              Bi(k−1) , k > 1.
                                                          j=1

Then for j > 1, we have
                      R∞ R∞R∞                R ∞ R uj R uj+1             R uJ−1 h QJ                 i
                         −∞ uj    uj−1
                                       ...    u2       −∞ −∞
                                                                   ...    −∞
                                                                                 uj k=1 f (uk |Vik )   duJ ...duj+1 du1 ...duj
  λij = −(Vij + µη ) +                                           QJ−1
                                                                   k=1    P (Vik |Vik ....ViJ )
                                             R∞
                                             −∞
                                                       uj f (uj |I(Vij ...ViJ ) − µη )Gi(j−1) (uj )duj
                       = −(Vij + µη ) +                       Qj−1
                                                                  k=1 P (Vik |Vik ....ViJ )
                               Pj−1     m
                                 m=1   Bi(j−1) [I(Vij ...ViJ ) − P (Vij ...ViJ |Vim ...ViJ )I(Vim ...ViJ )]
            = −(Vij + µη ) +                          Qj−1                                                  .
                                                         k=1 P (Vik |Vik ....ViJ )


B.1.2 Unranked alternatives

To derive the control functions for a case in which some alternatives are unranked, assign arbitrary labels
`(i) + 1....J to unranked schools. The control functions for all ranked alternatives can be obtained by
defining a composite unranked alternative with observed utility Viu = I (Vik : k > `(i)) − µη and treating
this as the lowest-ranked option in the calculations in section B.1.1. The control function for an unranked
alternative j > `(i) is defined by the expression
                                                                                            
                  λij + (Vij + µη ) = E Uij |Ui1 > ... > Ui`(i) , Ui`(i) > Uik ∀k > `(i), Vi


                                                                 55
        R∞ R∞R∞ R∞                    R ∞ R u`(i) R u`(i) QJ
          −∞ uj        u`(i)   u`(i)−1
                                         ...
                                       u2 −∞
                                                  .. −∞ uj k=1 f (uk |Vik )du`(i)+1 duj−1 duj+1 ...duJ du1 ...du`(i) duj
    =                                                     Q`(i)
                                                             k=1 P (Vik |Vik ...ViJ )
                        R∞                   hR∞                                                              i
                                                                  −j
                         −∞
                            uj f (uj |V ij )   uj
                                                  f    u`(i) |I(S i  (`(i))) −  µ η   Gi(`(i)−1) (u`(i) )du`(i)   duj
                      =                                                                                               ,
                                          P (Vi`(i) |Si−j (`(i)))−1 × k=1 P (Vik |Vik ...ViJ )
                                                                        Q `(i)



where Si−j (m) = {Vik : k ≥ m}\{Vij } is the set of i’s mean utilities for alternatives m and higher excluding
alternative j. When `(i) = 1, we have Gi(`(i)−1) (u` ) = 1 and this expression collapses to
                                                         P (Vij |Vi1 ...ViJ )
                                               λij =                            log P (Vij |Vi1 ...ViJ ),
                                                       1 − P (Vij |Vi1 ...ViJ )
which is the expression derived by Dubin and McFadden (1984) for the expected errors of alternatives that
are not selected in the multinomial logit model. For `(i) > 1, we have

                                                                λij = −(Vij + µη )


    `(i)−1
    X
                        (1 − P (Si−j (`(i))|Si−j (m)))I(Vij ) − P (Vij |Vi`(i) ..ViJ )I(Vi`(i) ..ViJ ) + P (Si−j (`(i))|Si−j (m))P (Vij |Vim ..ViJ )I(Vim ..ViJ )
              m
                                                                                                                                                               
             Bi(`(i)−1)
    m=1
+                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                              `(i)
                                                                                              Y
                                                             P (Vi`(i) |Si−j (`(i)))−1 ×             P (Vik |Vik ...ViJ )
                                                                                              k=1




B.2 Two-Step Score Bootstrap

We use a two-step modification of the score bootstrap of Kline and Santos (2012) to conduct inference
for the control function models. Let ∆ = (δ11 ...δ1J , τ1 ...δC1 ...δCJ , τC )0 denote the vector of choice model
parameters for all covariate cells. Maximum likelihood estimates of these parameters are given by:
                                                                     X
                                                   ˆ = arg max
                                                   ∆                       log L(Ri |Xi , Di ; ∆),
                                                                 ∆
                                                                       i

where L(Ri |Xi , Di ; ∆) is the likelihood function defined in Section 4.1, now explicitly written as a function
of the choice model parameters.
      Let Γ = (α1 , β10 , ψ1 ...αJ , βJ0 , ψJ , γ 0 , ϕ)0 denote the vector of outcome equation parameters. Second-step
estimates of these parameters are
                                                       "                            #−1
                                                        X                                     X
                                                Γ̂ =             ˆ i (∆)
                                                             Wi (∆)W  ˆ         0
                                                                                          ×        ˆ i,
                                                                                               Wi (∆)Y
                                                         i                                     i

where Wi (∆) is the vector of regressors in equation (8). This vector depends on ∆ through the control
functions λj (Xi , Di , Ri ; ∆), which in turn depend on the choice model parameters as described in Appendix
B.1.
      The two-step score bootstrap adjusts inference for the extra uncertainty introduced by the first-step
                                                 ˆ or to analytically derive the influence of ∆
estimates while avoiding the need to recalculate ∆                                            ˆ on Γ̂. The


                                                                           56
first step directly applies the approach in Kline and Santos (2012) to the choice model estimates. This
                                                ˆ by taking repeated Newton-Raphson steps from the
approach generates a bootstrap distribution for ∆
full-sample estimates, randomly reweighting each observation’s score contribution. The bootstrap estimate
of ∆ in trial b ∈ {1...B} is:
                                  "
                                   X  ∂ 2 log L(Ri |Xi ,Di ;∆  #−1
                                                             ˆ)                                 ˆ
                                                                           X  ∂ log L(R |X ,D ;∆) 
                    ˆb = ∆
                    ∆    ˆ−                                            ×    ζib         i  i  i
                                                                                                     ,
                                                ∂∆∂∆0                                   ∂∆
                                          i                                 i
                                                                    
where the ζib are iid random weights satisfying E ζib = 0 and E (ζib )2 = 1. We draw these weights from
a standard normal distribution.
   Next, we use an additional set of Newton-Raphson steps to generate a bootstrap distribution for Γ̂.
The second-step bootstrap estimates are:
               "                  #−1
                X                       Xh                                                      i
       b
     Γ̂ = Γ̂ −         ˆ      ˆ
                   Wi (∆)Wi (∆) 0
                                      ×            ˆ
                                          −ζ b Wi (∆)(Y        ˆ 0          ˆb           ˆb 0
                                                       i − Wi (∆) Γ̂) − Wi (∆ )(Yi − Wi (∆ ) Γ̂) .
                                                        i
                     i                           i

The second term in the last sum accounts for the additional variability in the second-step score due to the
                    ˆ We construct standard errors and conduct hypothesis tests involving Γ using the
first-step estimate ∆.
distribution of Γ̂b across bootstrap trials.


B.3 Empirical Bayes Shrinkage

We next describe the empirical Bayes shrinkage procecure summarized in Section 4.2. Value-added or
                                                                                  n oJ
control function estimation produces a set of school-specific parameter estimates, θ̂j . Under the
                                                                                                         j=1
hierarchical model (10), the likelihood of the estimates for school j conditional on the latent parameters
θj and the sampling variance matrix Ωj is:
                                                                                          
                                         −T /2
                   L θ̂j |θj , Ωj = (2π)       |Ωj |−1/2 exp − 12 (θ̂j − θj )0 Ω−1
                                                                                j (θ̂j − θj ) ,

where T = dim(θj ). We estimate Ωj using conventional asymptotics for the value-added models and the
bootstrap procedure described in Section B.2 for the control function models. Our approach therefore
requires school-specific samples to be large enough for these asymptotic approximations to be accurate.
   An integrated likelihood function that conditions only on the hyperparameters is:
                                      Z
          LI (θ̂j |µθ , Σθ , Ωj ) = L(θ̂j |θj , Ωj )dF (θj |µθ , Σθ )
                                                                                                       
                                       −T /2                                                −1
                                = (2π)       |Ωj + Σθ |−1/2 exp − 12 (θ̂j − µθ )0 (Ωj + Σθ ) (θ̂j − µθ ) .


EB estimates of the hyperparameters are then
                                                X                         
                              µ̂θ , Σ̂θ = arg max   log LI θ̂j |µθ , Σθ , Ω̂j ,
                                                     µθ ,Σθ
                                                              j

where Ω̂j estimates Ωj .
   By standard arguments, the posterior distribution for θj given the estimate θ̂j is


                                                              57
                                           θj |θ̂j ∼ N θj∗ , Ω∗j ,
                                                                


where
                                                   −1                       
                                 θj∗ = Ω−1   −1
                                        j + Σθ             Ω−1
                                                            j  θ̂ j + Σ −1
                                                                        j  µθ   ,
                                                                −1
                                          Ω∗j = Ω−1   −1
                                                 j + Σθ               .

We form EB posteriors by plugging Ω̂j , µ̂θ and Σ̂θ into these formulas.




                                                     58
                                            Table A1. Sample restrictions
                                             All cohorts  2003-2004       2004-2005           2005-2006      2006-2007
                                                 (1)          (2)             (3)                 (4)            (5)
All NYC eighth graders                        368,603       89,671          93,399              94,015         91,518

In public school                               327,948          78,904          83,112          84,067         81,865

With baseline demographics                     276,797          68,507          67,555          68,279         72,456

With address data                              275,405          67,644          67,377          68,108         72,276

In preference sample                           270,157          66,125          66,004          67,163         70,865

In Regents math sample                         155,850          40,994          41,022          39,177         34,657

In PSAT sample                                 149,365          31,563          37,502          39,480         40,820

In high school graduation sample               230,087          56,833          56,979          57,803         58,472

In college sample                              173,254             0            56,979          57,803         58,472
Notes: This table displays the selection criteria for inclusion in the final analysis samples. Preference models are
estimated using the sample in the fourth row, and school effects are estimated using the samples in the remaining rows.
             Table A2. Correlations of peer quality and treatment effect parameters for Regents math scores, value-added model
                                Peer                                            Value-added parameters
                              quality         ATE          Female         Black       Hispanic    Sub. lunch Log tract inc. Math score
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)       (8)
ATE                            0.531
                              (0.042)
Female                            0.133          0.232
                                 (0.077)        (0.082)
Black                             -0.033         -0.007          -0.287
                                 (0.074)        (0.082)         (0.133)
Hispanic                          -0.002         -0.028          -0.414         0.939
                                 (0.077)        (0.086)         (0.135)        (0.022)
Subsidized lunch                  0.093          -0.133          0.098          -0.027          0.065
                                 (0.088)        (0.097)         (0.145)        (0.151)         (0.155)
Log census tract income           -0.288         -0.108          -0.210         -0.140          -0.048          -0.200
                                 (0.111)        (0.129)         (0.185)        (0.202)         (0.212)         (0.220)
Eighth grade math score           -0.108         0.033           -0.104         -0.005          0.054           0.012          -0.083
                                 (0.064)        (0.069)         (0.098)        (0.100)         (0.105)         (0.118)        (0.150)
Eighth grade reading score        -0.564         -0.425          -0.036         -0.065          -0.064          0.071          0.374            0.244
                                 (0.065)        (0.079)         (0.124)        (0.123)         (0.130)         (0.134)        (0.181)          (0.103)
Notes: This table reports estimated correlations between peer quality and school treatment effect parameters for Regents math scores. The ATE is a
school's average treatment effect, and other treatment effect parameters are school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come
from maximum likelihood models fit to school-specific regression coefficients from a value-added model controlling for observed characteristics.
                                         Table A3. Joint distribution of peer quality and treatment effect parameters for PSAT scores/10
                                    Peer                                                          Control function parameters
                                   quality       ATE           Female        Black        Hispanic     Sub. lunch Log tract inc. Math score Reading score                  Pref. coef.
                                     (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)       (9)                          (10)
Mean                                  0            0            -0.033       -0.284         -0.259        -0.006        -0.005       0.963      1.032                        -0.003
                                      -             -          (0.010)      (0.026)        (0.027)       (0.011)       (0.010)      (0.016)    (0.011)                      (0.001)

Standard deviation                  0.884         0.401         0.111          0.333          0.352          0.111           0.059           0.240           0.152            0.017
                                   (0.056)       (0.048)       (0.012)        (0.023)        (0.026)        (0.017)         (0.022)         (0.016)         (0.073)          (0.011)
Correlations:             ATE       0.979
                                   (0.086)
                       Female       -0.251        -0.315
                                   (0.094)       (0.068)
                         Black      -0.130        -0.253        0.020
                                   (0.124)       (0.090)       (0.160)
                     Hispanic       -0.168        -0.274        0.112          0.932
                                   (0.094)       (0.079)       (0.150)        (0.123)
            Subsidized lunch        -0.197        -0.211        0.252          -0.131         -0.120
                                   (0.144)       (0.101)       (0.117)        (0.135)        (0.124)
    Log census tract income         0.198         0.280         -0.228         -0.183         -0.122         -0.545
                                   (0.219)       (0.212)       (0.241)        (0.264)        (0.247)        (0.276)
    Eighth grade math score         0.709         0.701         -0.117         -0.005         -0.090         -0.099          0.022
                                   (0.123)       (0.102)       (0.093)        (0.125)        (0.108)        (0.135)         (0.220)
  Eighth grade reading score        0.164         0.249         -0.219         0.011          -0.084         0.108           0.446           0.246
                                   (0.230)       (0.121)       (0.074)        (0.067)        (0.065)        (0.072)         (0.198)         (0.287)

  Preference coefficient (𝜓j)       0.377         0.291         -0.159         -0.114         -0.062         -0.157          0.334           0.100           -0.109
                                   (0.280)       (0.145)       (0.039)        (0.038)        (0.055)        (0.066)         (0.117)         (0.074)         (0.105)
Notes: This table shows the estimated joint distribution of peer quality and school treatment effect parameters for PSAT scores divded by 10. The ATE is a school's average treatment
effect, and other treatment effect parameters are school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum likelihood models fit to school-specific
regression coefficients from a control function model controlling for observed characteristics, distance to school and unobserved tastes from the choice model.
                                    Table A4. Joint distribution of peer quality and treatment effect parameters for high school graduation
                                    Peer                                                         Control function parameters
                                   quality      ATE          Female         Black        Hispanic     Sub. lunch Log tract inc. Math score Reading score                      Pref. coef.
                                     (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)       (9)                              (10)
Mean                                  0           0           0.063         -0.006         -0.013        -0.013        0.002         0.132     0.062                            0.000
                                      -           -          (0.004)       (0.007)        (0.008)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.002)                          (0.000)

Standard deviation                  0.100          0.043         0.047          0.090          0.103           0.024           0.024           0.034           0.027            0.006
                                   (0.004)        (0.008)       (0.004)        (0.007)        (0.007)         (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.000)
Correlations:             ATE       0.590
                                   (0.106)
                       Female       -0.072         -0.549
                                   (0.070)        (0.170)
                         Black      -0.226         -0.296        -0.069
                                   (0.069)        (0.195)       (0.142)
                     Hispanic       -0.174         -0.237        -0.078         0.956
                                   (0.067)        (0.196)       (0.135)        (0.013)
            Subsidized lunch        0.169          -0.120        0.119          0.171          0.264
                                   (0.096)        (0.238)       (0.169)        (0.180)        (0.176)
     Log census tract income        0.039          0.032         -0.412         -0.113         -0.168          0.177
                                   (0.103)        (0.244)       (0.154)        (0.196)        (0.193)         (0.203)
     Eighth grade math score        -0.396         -0.619        0.075          -0.168         -0.114          0.051           0.036
                                   (0.060)        (0.166)       (0.098)        (0.109)        (0.107)         (0.128)         (0.134)
  Eighth grade reading score        -0.571         -0.570        -0.125         0.188          0.094           -0.194          0.140           0.475
                                   (0.059)        (0.180)       (0.112)        (0.136)        (0.134)         (0.153)         (0.157)         (0.103)

  Preference coefficient (𝜓j)       0.625          0.437         0.123          -0.110         -0.049          0.021           -0.117          -0.246          -0.470
                                   (0.044)        (0.180)       (0.084)        (0.089)        (0.086)         (0.120)         (0.123)         (0.078)         (0.078)
Notes: This table shows the estimated joint distribution of peer quality and school treatment effect parameters for high school graduation. The ATE is a school's average treatment effect,
and other treatment effect parameters are school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum likelihood models fit to school-specific regression
coefficients from a control function model controlling for observed characteristics, distance to school and unobserved tastes from the choice model.
                                        Table A5. Joint distribution of peer quality and treatment effect parameters for college attendance
                                    Peer                                                          Control function parameters
                                   quality        ATE          Female         Black       Hispanic     Sub. lunch Log tract inc. Math score Reading score                     Pref. coef.
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)     (9)                             (10)
Mean                                  0             0           0.075         -0.010        -0.011        -0.008         0.002          0.118   0.064                           -0.002
                                      -             -          (0.003)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.002) (0.002)                         (0.000)

Standard deviation                  0.099          0.053         0.035          0.122          0.120           0.031           0.019           0.030           0.024             0.005
                                   (0.118)        (0.022)       (0.004)        (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.005)         (0.007)         (0.013)         (0.009)           (0.002)
Correlations:             ATE       0.862
                                   (0.158)
                       Female       -0.074         -0.307
                                   (0.017)        (0.031)
                         Black      -0.035         -0.455        0.040
                                   (0.021)        (0.066)       (0.160)
                      Hispanic      -0.135         -0.471        -0.024         0.947
                                   (0.019)        (0.031)       (0.043)        (0.019)
            Subsidized lunch        0.110          0.235         -0.005         -0.390         -0.339
                                   (0.027)        (0.078)       (0.139)        (0.119)        (0.117)
     Log census tract income        -0.215         0.127         -0.182         -0.722         -0.674          0.316
                                   (0.065)        (0.238)       (0.287)        (0.246)        (0.241)         (0.242)
     Eighth grade math score        -0.204         -0.188        0.265          -0.067         -0.028          0.073           -0.437
                                   (0.073)        (0.179)       (0.074)        (0.073)        (0.056)         (0.110)         (0.129)
  Eighth grade reading score        -0.290         -0.121        -0.131         -0.346         -0.364          -0.198          0.217           0.304
                                   (0.112)        (0.197)       (0.078)        (0.083)        (0.082)         (0.105)         (0.219)         (0.171)

  Preference coefficient (𝜓j)       0.770          0.524         0.144          0.106          0.059           0.003           -0.210          -0.072          -0.314
                                   (0.119)        (0.130)       (0.068)        (0.056)        (0.057)         (0.129)         (0.233)         (0.238)         (0.183)
Notes: This table shows the estimated joint distribution of peer quality and school treatment effect parameters for college attendance. The ATE is a school's average treatment effect, and
other treatment effect parameters are school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum likelihood models fit to school-specific regression
coefficients from a control function model controlling for observed characteristics, distance to school and unobserved tastes from the choice model.
                                        Table A6. Joint distribution of peer quality and treatment effect parameters for log college quality
                                    Peer                                                          Control function parameters
                                   quality        ATE          Female         Black       Hispanic     Sub. lunch Log tract inc. Math score Reading score                      Pref. coef.
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)     (9)                              (10)
Mean                                  0             0           0.048         -0.037        -0.035        -0.006         -0.001         0.103   0.058                            -0.002
                                      -             -          (0.002)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002) (0.002)                          (0.000)

Standard deviation                  0.097          0.063          0.027         0.081           0.084          0.022           0.013            0.031           0.019            0.004
                                   (0.078)        (0.017)        (0.003)       (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.010)         (0.006)          (0.004)
Correlations:              ATE      0.931
                                   (0.051)
                       Female       0.114          0.084
                                   (0.018)        (0.021)
                         Black      -0.065         -0.258         -0.023
                                   (0.019)        (0.029)        (0.157)
                      Hispanic      -0.239         -0.354         -0.127        0.946
                                   (0.018)        (0.021)        (0.059)       (0.048)
            Subsidized lunch        -0.063         0.060          0.253         -0.334          -0.208
                                   (0.035)        (0.038)        (0.082)       (0.085)         (0.071)
     Log census tract income        0.030          -0.028         -0.333        -0.529          -0.553         0.036
                                   (0.060)        (0.068)        (0.121)       (0.132)         (0.135)        (0.109)
     Eighth grade math score        0.533          0.728          0.381         -0.143          -0.151         0.146           -0.550
                                   (0.078)        (0.063)        (0.054)       (0.072)         (0.040)        (0.066)         (0.151)
  Eighth grade reading score        0.296          0.479          -0.027        -0.266          -0.275         -0.355          0.089            0.466
                                   (0.064)        (0.033)        (0.018)       (0.019)         (0.020)        (0.046)         (0.088)          (0.070)

  Preference coefficient (𝜓j)       0.750          0.623          0.135         0.033           -0.061         -0.086          0.139            0.310           0.161
                                   (0.076)        (0.041)        (0.008)       (0.019)         (0.009)        (0.021)         (0.050)          (0.059)         (0.033)
Notes: This table shows the estimated joint distribution of peer quality and school treatment effect parameters for college quality. The ATE is a school's average treatment effect, and
other treatment effect parameters are school-specific interactions with student characteristics. Estimates come from maximum likelihood models fit to school-specific regression
coefficients from a control function model controlling for observed characteristics, distance to school and unobserved tastes from the choice model.
   Table A7. Tests for covariate balance in admission lotteries
                               Uncontrolled                Controlled
                                   (1)                        (2)
Black                             74.53                      0.873
                                 (0.000)                    (0.842)
Hispanic                          54.86                      0.897
                                 (0.000)                    (0.788)
Female                            15.71                      1.115
                                 (0.000)                    (0.181)
Log census tract median income    116.4                      1.134
                                 (0.000)                    (0.147)
Subsidized lunch                  30.46                      1.184
                                 (0.000)                    (0.080)
Eighth grade math score           27.96                      1.059
                                 (0.000)                    (0.311)
Eighth grade reading score        30.06                      1.034
                                 (0.000)                    (0.380)
Schools                                   124                 124
Students                                 53,327              32,131
Notes: This table reports F-statistics from school-specific tests for
balance, computed by regressing covariates on dummies indicating
offers at each school in the sample and testing that the coefficients on
all offer dummies are jointly zero. P-values reported in parentheses.
Column (2) controls for linear school-specific propensity score controls
and school-specific dummies for degenerate p-score values. The
sample is restricted to students who have non-degenerate risk for at
least one school and lotteries with 100 or more students at risk.
Students are considered to have risk at a given school if their
propensity score is strictly between zero and one and they are in a score
cell with variation in school offers.
                          Table A8. Yearly preferences for peer quality and Regents math effects
                             Value-added models                                      Control function models
                 2003-2004 2004-2005 2005-2006 2006-2007                 2003-2004 2004-2005 2005-2006                         2006-2007
                    (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)               (5)         (6)           (7)                         (8)
Peer Quality       0.384      0.455        0.538         0.465             0.412       0.478         0.570                       0.505
                  (0.072)    (0.077)      (0.076)       (0.074)           (0.065)     (0.067)       (0.066)                     (0.064)

ATE                 -0.044         -0.029         -0.031         -0.009              -0.061         -0.061         -0.071         -0.050
                   (0.056)        (0.055)        (0.054)        (0.050)             (0.053)        (0.052)        (0.050)        (0.047)

Match Effect        -0.090         -0.054         -0.057         -0.062              -0.175         -0.181         -0.165         -0.160
                   (0.053)        (0.056)        (0.051)        (0.048)             (0.058)        (0.062)        (0.056)        (0.053)
           N           17141          18493          18787          19286               17141          18493          18787          19286
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions of school popularity on peer quality and school effectiveness. School popularity is
measured as the estimated mean utility for each school and covariate cell in the choice model from Table 4. We estimate this model on
four subsamples: one from each school year. Covariate cells are defined by borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, an indicator
for students above the median of census tract median income, and tercile of the average of eighth grade math and reading scores. Peer
quality is constructed as the average predicted Regents math score for enrolled students across all years. Treatment effect estimates are
empirical Bayes posterior mean predictions of Regents math effects across all years. Mean utilities, peer quality, and treatment effects are
scaled in standard deviation units. Columns (1)-(4) report results from value-added models, while columns (5)-(8) report results from
control function models. All regressions include cell indicators and weight by the inverse of the squared standard error of the mean utility
estimates. Standard errors are double-clustered by school and covariate cell.
                                       Table A9. Preferences, peer quality, and math effects, alternative measures of popularity
                           Log first-choice share              Minus log sum of ranks                 Fewer than 12 choices                 Omitting unranked schools
                                            Control                             Control                               Control                                Control
                        Value-added         function       Value-added          function          Value-added         function             Value-added       function
                            (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)                  (5)              (6)                   (7)              (8)
Peer quality               0.487              0.542            0.036              0.038               0.445             0.485                 0.373            0.386
                          (0.071)            (0.062)          (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.077)           (0.068)               (0.026)          (0.029)

ATE                         -0.009            -0.034              -0.001             -0.002              -0.040            -0.073              -0.021             -0.027
                           (0.045)           (0.040)             (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.054)           (0.049)             (0.026)            (0.024)

Match effect                -0.091            -0.219              -0.004             -0.012              -0.092            -0.184              -0.049             -0.106
                           (0.043)           (0.047)             (0.003)            (0.004)             (0.050)           (0.055)             (0.023)            (0.027)

                  N                  15892                                 21684                                  20898                                 19842
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions of alternative measures of school popularity on peer quality and school effectiveness. The dependent variable in
columns (1) and (2) is the log of the share of students in a covariate cell ranking each school first, and the dependent variable in columns (3) and (4) is minus the log of
the sum of ranks for students in the cell. Unranked schools are assigned one rank below the least-preferred ranked school. Columns (5) and (6) restrict preference
estimation to students that ranked fewer than 12 choices. Columns (7) and (8) estimate preferences using only the schools on a student's choice list, omitting unranked
alternatives from the likelihood. Covariate cells are defined by borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, an indicator for students above the median of census tract
median income, and tercile of the average of eighth grade math and reading scores. Peer quality is constructed as the average predicted Regents math score for enrolled
students. Treatment effect estimates are empirical Bayes posterior mean predictions of Regents math effects. Columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) report results from value-
added models, while columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) report results from control function models. All regressions include cell indicators. Standard errors are double-
clustered by school and covariate cell.
                            Table A10. Preferences, peer quality, and math effects, alternative treatment effect models
                                         Matched first choice model                                    Distance instrument model
                                 (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)
Peer quality                   0.367                       0.400          0.406            0.397                         0.402           0.408
                              (0.053)                     (0.054)        (0.067)          (0.058)                       (0.060)         (0.060)

ATE                                          0.209          -0.058         -0.036                          0.236          -0.009         -0.027
                                            (0.045)        (0.043)        (0.045)                         (0.046)        (0.044)        (0.045)

Match effect                                                               -0.092                                                        -0.129
                                                                          (0.049)                                                       (0.041)

                        N                                                           21684
Notes: This table reports estimates from regressions of school popularity on peer quality and alternative measures of school effectiveness.
Estimates in columns (1)-(4) come from an OLS regression of Regents math scores on school indicators interacted with covariates, with controls
for distance and fixed effects for first choice schools. Estimates in columns (5)-(8) come from a regression of Regents math scores on school
indicators interacted with covariates and control functions measuring mean preferences for each school, excluding distance controls. School
popularity is measured as the estimated mean utility for each school and covariate cell in the choice model from Table 4. Covariate cells are
defined by borough, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, an indicator for students above the median of census tract median income, and tercile
of the average of eighth grade math and reading scores. Peer quality is constructed as the average predicted Regents math score for enrolled
students. Treatment effect estimates are empirical Bayes posterior mean predictions of Regents math effects. Mean utilities, peer quality, and
treatment effects are scaled in standard deviation units. All regressions include cell indicators and weight by the inverse of the squared standard
error of the mean utility estimates. Standard errors are double-clustered by school and covariate cell.
           Table A11. Potential achievement gains from ranking schools by effectiveness, by baseline test score quartile
                                  Observed rankings                       Rankings based on effectiveness             Increase in
                     Peer quality       ATE           Match           Peer quality        ATE            Match       effectiveness
  Baseline quartile       (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)            (7)
Lowest                  -0.084          0.015          0.015             0.312            0.452           0.356          0.779

Second                     0.011           0.042           0.005               0.395            0.469          0.122           0.545

Third                      0.127           0.074           -0.011              0.329            0.464          0.018           0.419

Highest                    0.399           0.155           -0.157              0.106            0.324          0.149           0.475
Notes: This table summarizes Regents math score gains that parents could achieve by ranking schools based on effectiveness.,
separately by baseline math score quartile. Columns (1)-(3) report average peer quality, average treatment effects, and average match
effects for schools ranked first by students in each quartile. Columns (4)-(6) display corresponding statistics for hypothetical rankings
that list schools in order of their treatment effects. Column (7) reports the difference in treatment effects (ATE+match) between the
top-ranked school when rankings are based on effectiveness and the observed top-ranked school. Treatment effect estimates come
from control function models. All calculations are restricted to ranked schools within the home borough.
