                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       IN SEARCH OF A SPATIAL EQUILIBRIUM IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD

                                       Douglas Gollin
                                      Martina Kirchberger
                                       David Lagakos

                                      Working Paper 23916
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23916


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017

For helpful comments we thank Deborah Balk, Joe Cummins, Banu Demir-Pakel, Stefan Dercon,
Dave Donaldson, Ben Faber, Marcel Fafchamps, Darby Jack, Kelsey Jack, Matt Kahn, Pat
Kinney, Pramila Krishnan, Horacio Larreguy, Ethan Ligon, Matthew Neidell, Natalia Ramondo,
Chris Small, Daniel Sturm, Luke Valin, David Weil, and seminar participants at Barcelona,
Bristol, Columbia, Copenhagen, Edinburgh, the Ethiopian Development Research Institute, IMF
Research Department Development Macroeconomics division, LSE, Notre Dame, Nottingham,
Sussex, Trinity College Dublin, UC Riverside, as well as conference participants at the
Edinburgh Structural Change Conference, the NEUDC, CEPR and CSAE conferences. For
excellent research assistance, we thank Jessie Wang, Eoin Dignam and Abed Mutemi, as well as
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for supporting Mutemi's work on this project. We would
like to thank Jeff Geddes and Aaron van Donkelaar for sharing the pollution data and their
advice. Kirchberger is grateful for many helpful conversations and suggestions while hosted by
the Center for International Earth Science Information Network at Columbia University. This
paper was partly supported through the Global Research Program on Spatial Development of
Cities, funded by the Multi Donor Trust Fund on Sustainable Urbanization of the World Bank
and supported by the UK Department for International Development. All potential errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Douglas Gollin, Martina Kirchberger, and David Lagakos. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
In Search of a Spatial Equilibrium in the Developing World
Douglas Gollin, Martina Kirchberger, and David Lagakos
NBER Working Paper No. 23916
October 2017
JEL No. E0,O11,O18

                                         ABSTRACT

In most developing countries, there is a large gap in average consumption per capita between
urban and rural areas. One appealing interpretation of this gap is that it reflects a spatial
equilibrium, in which the higher consumption levels of urban areas are offset by lower non-
monetary amenities. In this paper, we draw on new high-resolution evidence to document how
non-monetary amenities vary across space within 20 developing countries. We focus on measures
of health, public goods, crime and pollution. These vary substantially across locations within
countries and can be carefully measured with highly comparable data. We find that in almost all
countries, and for almost all measures, the quality of these amenities is non-decreasing in
population density. In addition, net internal migration flows are directed toward denser areas in
every country. These findings are hard to reconcile with a spatial equilibrium. Instead, they
suggest that developing countries are undergoing a reallocation of workers to densely populated
areas, consistent with many models of structural change but inconsistent with models that assume
a simple static spatial equilibrium.

Douglas Gollin                                  David Lagakos
University of Oxford                            Department of Economics, 0508
Department of International Development         University of California, San Diego
Queen Elizabeth House                           9500 Gilman Drive
3 Mansfield Road                                La Jolla, CA 92093
Oxford OX1 3TB                                  and NBER
United Kingdom                                  lagakos@ucsd.edu
Douglas.Gollin@qeh.ox.ac.uk

Martina Kirchberger
Department of Economics
Room 3012, Arts Building
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin 2 Ireland
kirchbem@tcd.ie
1. Introduction
Economists have long recognized that there are large income differences across space within
countries. A body of recent evidence documents that real urban-rural consumption gaps are
particularly large in developing countries (Ferré, Ferreira, and Lanjouw, 2012; Young, 2014),
as, similarly, are gaps in average labor productivity between non-agricultural and agricultural
workers (Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh, 2014). In an accounting sense, these gaps are important
for understanding why developing countries have such low aggregate income, since a large
fraction of workers in developing countries live in rural areas and work in agriculture (Caselli,
2005; Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu, 2008; Vollrath, 2009; McMillan and Rodrik, 2011).

One interpretation of these gaps is that they reflect a spatial equilibrium, in which the higher
real consumption levels of urban areas are offset by lower non-monetary amenities. A spatial
equilibrium – in which utility levels are equalized across locations – is one of the simplest and
most appealing concepts that economists have used to analyze how economic agents locate
through space (Rosen, 1979; Roback, 1982). The rationale is simple: if any region offered a
better bundle of consumption and amenities than the rest, then agents would move into the
better region until any arbitrage opportunities were gone. The concept of a spatial equilibrium
has proven useful in learning about a wide set of economic phenomena, including the wage
and size distribution of U.S. cities (Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2012; Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg,
2013), the dynamics of U.S. manufacturing and service activity (Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg,
2014), and the welfare effects of infrastructure investments (Allen and Arkolakis, 2014; Don-
aldson and Hornbeck, 2016) and regional development policy (e.g., Kline and Moretti, 2014a).
It is no wonder then that Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009, p.3) call a spatial equilibrium the “central
theoretical tool” of urban economics.1

Almost all papers that assume a spatial equilibrium rely on models to infer the amenity values of
different locations, rather than measuring the amenities directly (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2009).
This reflects the intrinsic difficulty of measuring amenities. But in the context of developing
countries, this approach is particularly unsatisfying. Given that most developing countries have
much higher real average consumption in urban areas, a spatial equilibrium implies that there
are some offsetting amenities that are far superior in rural areas. If this is true, researchers and
policy makers should know which amenities of urban areas are of so much worse quality. If
urban amenities are not worse, then a spatial equilibrium may not be the right interpretation
of the significantly higher urban consumption levels in developing countries – with important
   1
    Numerous other papers assume a spatial equilibrium as part of their analysis. See Kline and Moretti (2014b)
and Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (Forthcoming) for highly readable surveys of the recent quantitative literature
in urban economics and studies of place-based policies more generally.



                                                      1
implications for policy. For instance, a model with large disamenities of urban life would call for
different policy responses than a model in which there are significant frictions associated with
rural-urban migration. Distinguishing between these two alternatives requires direct measures
of amenities across space.

In this paper, we report on spatial patterns of living standards that we find from constructing
a new database of consistently measured amenities covering 20 developing countries in sub-
Saharan Africa. We take a broad definition of amenities and include aspects of living standards
that are not solely private consumption and that are linked to location. We focus on real mea-
sures based on health outcomes, public goods access, crime exposure and pollution exposure.2
These measures are commonly cited as amenities in the literature on urban and regional eco-
nomics, they are unlikely to be well captured in existing consumption metrics, and they can
be measured consistently within and across countries. To construct our database, we combine
nationally representative household survey data, satellite-derived measures of pollution, and
population-density data coming from the Gridded Population of the World Version 4 (GPW).
The main surveys we employ are the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and Afrobarome-
ter Surveys. The surveys also report the GPS coordinates or location names of each geographic
region sampled, which we link to data on population density from the GPW. We draw on global
estimates of the spatial distribution of air pollution concentrations for fine particulate matter
(PM2.5) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). An advantage of our approach is that we do not have
to rely on reported categories of what is “urban” and “rural.” These binary categories often
reflect administrative boundaries and cut-offs that are not consistent across space and time.
Our linked data allow us to examine in much greater detail how these amenity measures vary
across population density within each country, using internationally comparable measures of
density.

We find that in almost all countries, and for almost all measures, amenities are non-decreasing
in population density. Measures of children’s health, which reflect private consumption as
well as public health investments and pollution exposure, are increasing in density almost
everywhere. Every public good we consider is at least as prevalent in denser areas if not more
prevalent. Property crime and violent crime are, unfortunately, high throughout density space
in most countries, and marginally higher in urban areas, on average, though with statistically
and insignificant differences in most countries. The same is true for the percent of adults
reporting fear of crime in their homes and feeling unsafe in their neighborhoods. In terms of
magnitudes, we draw on previous studies of willingness to pay to avoid crime to estimate the
  2
    By "real," we mean that we measure quantities rather than values. In the following section, we discuss
how higher housing prices in urban areas are consistent with a spatial equilibrium only if housing quality or
consumption levels (or both) are lower in urban areas – hence our analysis of housing quality.


                                                     2
monetary value of the higher crime rates in denser areas. We conclude that in monetary terms,
the value of the crime-rate differences between rural and urban areas is dwarfed by the much
larger differences in average income.

Perhaps surprisingly, we find that outdoor air pollution is largely unrelated to density in sub-
Saharan Africa. Fine particulate matter is most prevalent in areas near the Sahara, due to
dust and sand in the air. Even excluding dust and sea salt, PM2.5 concentrations are quite
similar in urban areas and rural areas, on average, as are NO2 concentrations, to focus on two
widely used measures of air quality. Overall magnitudes are also quite low, particularly relative
to other developing countries such as India and China, which we view as a sad commentary
on the lack of manufacturing activity in Africa. Arguably more relevant for many Africans is
indoor air pollution, which comes about from cooking indoors with solid fuels such as coal or
wood. In each of our countries, we find that the fraction of households using solid fuels to cook
indoors falls sharply with population density. Thus, people in the rural areas of our countries
face worse air quality, on average, than their urban counterparts face. Although we have no
comparable measures on water pollution, child health indicators – which can be quite sensitive
to water-quality issues – are systematically better in densely populated areas.

Our findings provide little support for the existence of a spatial equilibrium in Africa, at least
in a simple static sense. With few exceptions, measures of health, public goods, crime and
pollution are either similar across density space or strictly better, on average, in denser ar-
eas. Previous studies show that real consumption is higher in denser areas; in particular, our
data confirm that consumer durables ownership and housing quality are higher, on average, in
denser areas. Of course, our results do not imply that a spatial equilibrium does not exist. We
did not – and could not – consider all possible amenities.3 One should view our findings so far
as the most careful look to date at the “prime suspects” of amenities mentioned in the litera-
ture, rather than as proof of non-existence of a spatial equilibrium, which, even in principle,
we could not produce.

To complement our findings for these amenities, we take two further steps. First, we look at
data on internal migration rates within our countries. In a spatial equilibrium, net migration
should not flow systematically toward denser areas or toward rural areas. What we find is
that migration flows are, in fact, strongly oriented toward denser areas in all but one of the
20 countries we consider – consistent with a long-standing literature on rural-urban migration
   3
     In fact, by definition, there is an “amenity” which is “worse” in denser areas: population density. It is possible
that people could simply dislike living in denser areas. Ciccone and Hall (1996), for example, argue that this is
a simple and “realistic” description of the data. Still, there are reasons to believe people prefer to be in denser
areas. In the developing world, Fafchamps and Shilpi (2009), for example, provide evidence that rural workers
dislike the isolation that comes with rural life.



                                                          3
(see, e.g., Young, 2014; Glaeser and Henderson, 2017, and the references therein). Second,
we look at some additional “secondary” measures of amenities, moving down the list of sus-
pects; for these, we have fewer countries (and less data). Here, we find one amenity that does
seem to decrease with population density: trust in neighbors, though the magnitudes are not
overwhelmingly higher in denser areas. For the other secondary metrics that we consider –
anxiety, reported lack of food, and reported lack of medicine – we again find worse outcomes
in rural areas.

We conclude that the simplest explanation for our findings is that living standards in developing
countries are higher, on average in denser areas, and that individuals respond by voting with
their feet and migrating to denser areas. In other words, our facts are consistent with a more
dynamic notion of spatial equilibrium, in which individuals are not indifferent across space
at any point in time but migrate to better locations to close spatial gaps in living standards
(Topel, 1986).4 The fact that we find few permanent amenities of cities that are systemically
worse than those in rural areas does not imply that moving costs are small. In fact, many related
studies point to large moving costs, such as from loss of social networks (Morten, 2013; Munshi
and Rosenzweig, 2016), lack of skill transferability (Bazzi, Gaduh, Rothenberg, and Wong,
2016), poor road infrastructure (Morten and Oliveira, 2017), risk of bad migration outcomes
(Harris and Todaro, 1970; Bryan, Chowdhury, and Mobarak, 2014), or policies that restrict
migrants’ access to public goods (see, e.g., Feler and Henderson, 2011; Brueckner and Lall,
2015). Relatedly, historical evidence points to very persistent transitional dynamics associated
with large shocks, such as after the division of Germany post-WWII, when workers reallocated
away from border regions for decades (Redding and Sturm, 2008; Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm,
and Wolf, 2015).

One refinement of the spatial equilibrium theory relies on compositional effects linked to
the sorting of heterogeneous agents (Lagakos and Waugh, 2013; Herrendorf and Schoellman,
2014; Young, 2014; Hamory Hicks, Kleemans, Li, and Miguel, 2017). In particular, there could
be a spatial equilibrium within narrowly defined education groups, where utility is constant
within each education group, and higher for more educated groups. To evaluate this possi-
bility, we look at a subset of our amenity measures, as our data allow, for households within
narrowly defined educational groups, including those with no education. We find that ameni-
ties are again similar or increasing with density within each education category. This challenges
the notion that a spatial equilibrium holds within education groups.

In terms of measurement, our work is close to that of Young (2014), and builds on his inno-
vative use of the DHS surveys. Unlike in his paper, our work covers measures of property and
  4
      See Eckert and Peters (2017) for an elegant recent formulation of such a model.


                                                        4
violent crime, fear of crime, trust in neighbors, indoor and outdoor air pollution, and public
goods like roads, police stations, health clinics and schools. Our paper is also close to that of
Chauvin, Glaeser, Ma, and Tobio (2016), who test the spatial equilibrium hypothesis in various
forms in Brazil, China and India. They conclude that a spatial equilibrium assumption can be
used, “if it is used warily,” in Brazil and China, but they reject a spatial equilibrium outright in
India. Our data, which all come from countries less developed than India, are consistent with
their conclusions for India, suggesting that a spatial equilibrium is not the right description of
the world’s least developed countries. Finally, our paper builds on recent work measuring com-
ponents of living standards at a fine level of geographic detail, such as Henderson, Storeygard,
and Weil (2012) and Henderson, Storeygard, and Deichman (2017), which use satellite data
on night lights to construct proxies for income at a fine level of geographic detail. One way
that our work differs is that it tries to isolate the effect of non-monetary amenities, which have
not been studied systematically in the developing world. In emphasizing the measurement
of amenities, our work parallels that of Albouy (2012), and echoes his conclusion that, once
one considers richer spatial data with better measurement, denser areas do not appear to be
undesirable places to live.

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a simple model with a spatial equilibrium
and discusses the role of housing prices. Section 3 outlines our data and how we link our
outcome measures with population density. Section 4 presents our main findings for amenities
by population density. Section 5 looks at amenity measures for households by education group
and for rural-urban migrants. Section 6 explores migration flows and our secondary amenities
metrics. Section 7 concludes.


2. Simple Spatial Equilibrium Model
In this section, we present a simple spatial model so as to motivate our empirical work. We also
use the model to clarify, in particular, how housing prices fit into our analysis, and to explore
how including worker heterogeneity may alter our analysis.

Environment: The economy is populated by identical households that each have a utility func-
tion U(c,h, a), where c is non-housing consumption, h is housing consumption (or “housing
                                                                ∂U          ∂U             ∂U
quality”), and a is amenities. The utility function satisfies   ∂c   ≥ 0,   ∂h   ≥ 0 and   ∂a   ≥ 0 for all
levels of c, h and a; i.e., utility is everywhere non-decreasing in each input.

The economy is partitioned into J regions. Households are freely mobile and must locate in
exactly one region. Regions have three exogenous characteristics: wages, w j ; housing prices,
p j ; and amenities a j . Any household locating in region j earns wage w j , may consume as


                                                 5
much housing services as it wants at price p j per unit, and enjoys amenities a j . Households
anywhere may consume non-housing consumption at a normalized price of one. The budget
constraint of a household locating in region j is w j = c + p j h. We make no attempt to clear
markets but, rather, focus on the households’ choice of where to locate.

Spatial Equilibrium: A spatial equilibrium implies that utility levels are equated across re-
gions. Let this common utility level be denoted ū. The standard approach in the literature is
to use the households’ (and/or firms’) optimality conditions, plus the common utility value ū,
to impute amenities, a j , given data on prices w j and p j . In contrast, our approach is to focus
on quantities, and to assess whether the model’s predictions for amenities are borne out in the
data. To this end, we denote the common quantities of non-housing consumption and housing
in j by c j and h j . Then, note the following basic, almost definitional, properties of the static
spatial equilibrium:

  1. Consider two regions u and r. If cu > c r , than hu < h r or au < a r or both.

  2. Consider two regions u and r. Households do not prefer to migrate from u to r, or vice
      versa.

Property 1 says simply that if non-housing consumption is higher in one region than in a second
region, then either housing consumption or amenities must be higher in the second. No region
can have higher quantities of every input into the utility function, or that would violate the
assumption that utility is equated across regions. Property 2 says that when offered the choice,
households do not systematically prefer another region to the one they are in. This is the heart
of the logic of a spatial equilibrium: if households were systematically better off in another
region than in their current region, they would migrate to improve their well being. In what
follows, we draw on new data on quantities of consumption, amenities and net migration flows
to test these two basic predictions of a static spatial equilibrium.

The Role of Housing Prices: How do housing prices fit into this? Suppose that the urban re-
gion had higher wages but also higher housing prices. That is, wu > w r , but pu > p r . Couldn’t
this mean there is a spatial equilibrium, even if amenities are the same, – i.e., au = a r ? If there
were a spatial equilibrium, then one of two basic patterns could be found in the quantity data.
First, households could use the higher wages in the urban area to obtain higher consumption,
but with lower housing consumption. Second, households could have lower consumption but
more housing. If both were higher in the urban area then there would not be a spatial equi-
librium. The point is that the ubiquity of higher housing prices in high-wage regions is not
sufficient to conclude there is a spatial equilibrium. A spatial equilibrium implies that the
high-wage, high-price region must have either lower consumption or lower housing, where

                                                 6
these are measured in real terms rather than in value terms. If, instead, as we later find, both
housing quality and consumption are higher in the high-wage, high-price denser areas, it must
be true that some other amenity is worse in the denser area, or there would not be a spatial
equilibrium.

Extension to Heterogeneous Households: The assumption that all households are identical,
while quite common, is rather stark. Indeed, many more recent spatial equilibrium models
assume that households are heterogeneous in productivity or tastes and sort accordingly. Re-
cent examples include Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015), Caliendo, Dvorkin, and
Parro (2015) and Faber and Gaubert (2016). Relative to homogeneous-agent spatial equilib-
rium models, households are not indifferent, and, in general, each household strictly prefers
one region. The key is that population shares depend on relative wages, housing prices and
amenities, with higher population shares in regions with higher amenities, all else equal.5

How would the assumption of heterogeneous households affect our conclusions above? To
answer this question, consider the following simple extension of our model based (heavily)
on the elegant formulation of Kline and Moretti (2014b). Suppose, for simplicity, that there
are two regions: u and r. Households are indexed by i, and the utility of household i is
U(c j ,h j , a j ) + ei, j for region j, where c j , h j and a j are the common consumption, housing and
amenities of region j, and ei, j is an idiosyncratic taste term. The ei, j draws are independent
and identically distributed across households with mean zero in each region. For tractability,
assume further that ei, j are drawn from a Gumbel (extreme value type I) distribution with
shape parameter σ.

In this model, the workers that prefer a region u to a second region r are those that have
U(cu ,hu , au ) − U(c r ,h r , a r ) > ei,r − ei,u , and vice versa. As Kline and Moretti (2014b) show, the
Gumbel assumption implies that the fraction of households locating in region u is given by

                                        U(cu ,hu , au ) − U(c r ,h r , a r )
                                                                            
                                 Nu = Λ                                        ,                            (1)
                                                        σ

                 exp(.)
where Λ(·) ≡ 1+exp(.) is a logistic(0,1) distribution.

In most developing countries, and in each of the African countries studied in the current paper,
the majority of the population lives in rural areas. Is there a way to square this observation,
plus the higher consumption levels of urban areas, with a spatial equilibrium? In this model,
the only way this is possible is if either housing quality or amenities are higher in the rural
area. To see this, suppose Nu < 1/2 as we see empirically. Then it follows from (1) that
   5
     Of course, in general equilibrium, housing prices may depend on amenities, though since this is not crucial
for our argument, we abstract from it here.


                                                       7
U(cu ,hu , au ) < U(c r ,h r , a r ) for any value of the parameter σ. If cu > c r , it must then be the case
that either hu < h r or au < a r (or both).

We conclude that adding heterogeneity in household preferences to our model doesn’t change
our basic conclusion. For there to be a spatial equilibrium with most households located in the
rural area, as is empirically the case in most developing countries, amenities still have to be
higher in rural areas. We now turn to measuring whether this is the case.


3. Measuring Amenities Across Space

This section describes our data and our method for matching the data on amenities and other
real outcome measures with population density.

3.1. Overview of Data Sources

Until recently, measuring amenities and other living standards metrics across space in the de-
veloping world was not feasible. Exploiting progress in surveying and mapping technology, we
construct a new dataset that spatially links household surveys on health, public goods, crime,
mistrust and other reported living standards, and satellite-derived measures of pollution with
gridded population density. To do so, we use data from the Demographic and Health Sur-
veys (DHS), the Living Standards Measurement Surveys (LSMS), Afrobarometer and remotely
sensed pollution data. The micro surveys are high-quality nationally representative surveys
that cover large numbers of households (typically more than 5,000 for DHS and LSMS and
1,200–2,400 for Afrobarometer) in developing countries. The surveys are designed to use
consistent methodologies and definitions across countries. The DHS and LSMS data focus on
variables related to population, health, and nutrition, while Afrobarometer focuses on attitudes
towards democracy and governance, including the availability of public goods and experiences
of crimes. Our data on outdoor air pollution come from satellite-derived estimates of fine par-
ticulate matter — in particular PM2.5 concentrations from van Donkelaar, Martin, Brauer, and
Boys (2015) and NO2 concentrations from Geddes, Martin, Boys, and van Donkelaar (2016).
We outline the main choices related to using these data here and in the following section,
when we present our results, while referring the reader to the detailed data appendices A - C
for further details.

We select countries that satisfy four criteria: (i) the survey was conducted no earlier than
2005; (ii) spatial identifiers of the respondents or clusters were collected and are available;
(iii) the country was larger than 50,000 square kilometers; and (iv) the country was classified
as a low-income country by the World Bank in 2012 (meaning GNI per capita (Atlas method,


                                                     8
current US$) below $4,126 in 2012.) For the DHS data, we are left with a sample of 276,051
households across 20 African countries, as listed in Tables A.1 and A.5, covering countries with
a combined population of about 770 million people. From these data, we get our main metrics
of child health (stunting, wasting, anemia, and minimum acceptable diet), indoor air pollution
(cook indoors, use of solid fuel for cooking) and measures of durables ownership and housing
quality that we use to supplement our main analysis.

3.2. Population Density Measures

To measure population density, we use data from the Gridded Population of the World Version
4 (GPWv4), which provides population density estimates at a resolution of 30 arc-seconds,
corresponding to about 1km at the equator (Center for International Earth Science Informa-
tion Network, 2015). The gridded population data employ a minimal amount of modeling
by equally distributing non-spatial population data from censuses among spatial datasets of
administrative units (Doxsey-Whitfield, MacManus, Adamo, Pistolesi, Squires, Borkovska, and
Baptista, 2015).

One attractive feature of GPWv4 for the purpose of this analysis is that the distribution of pop-
ulation data is transparent and performed without using further auxiliary data. This comes at
a cost of a lower resolution than that available in some alternative data sources. For example,
one higher resolution dataset is WorldPop, which uses a range of input data and has a resolu-
tion of 100m (Linard, Gilbert, Snow, Noor, and Tatem, 2012). For our analysis, one important
consideration is that these other input data might introduce circularity in measurement. For
example, if nighttime lights data from satellites are used to assign populations to locations,
in an effort to allocate population at a finer geographical resolution, then it would hamper
our efforts to estimate the relationship between population density and electrification: by con-
struction, higher densities would be associated with higher rates of electrification. We rule out
this circularity by using population density data that are not modeled using further input data.
The maximum dispersion assumption of GPWv4 within spatial administrative units therefore
biases us towards finding no relationship between population density and outcome variables.

The resolution of the census data underlying the GPWv4 varies across countries due to avail-
ability of data. Some countries provide their data at the level of the enumeration area, while
others share data only at the second administrative level. We restrict our analysis to countries
for which the underlying census data have sufficiently high spatial detail, which corresponds
approximately to those for which we have data on more than 40 regions per country.




                                               9
3.3. Spatially Linking Amenity Measures and Density

We next combine the different sources of data step by step. To link the individual data from the
DHS and Afrobarometer with population density, we would ideally have the GPS location of
each household. The DHS readily collects GPS coordinates for survey clusters, but in order to
preserve the anonymity of survey respondents, these have been displaced — i.e., reassigned a
GPS location that falls within a specified distance of the actual location. Urban DHS clusters are
randomly displaced by 0-2km, and rural clusters are randomly displaced by 0-5km, with one
percent of clusters randomly selected to be displaced by up to 10km (Perez-Heydrich, Warren,
Burgert, and Emch, 2013). We take into account the random offset of DHS cluster locations
when linking DHS GPS data with continuous raster data by taking 5 km buffers around both
urban and rural DHS clusters, as suggested by Perez-Heydrich, Warren, Burgert, and Emch
(2013). Appendix A provides more detail on this procedure. An important consideration is
how representative our samples are across different levels of population density. We discuss
the sampling protocol of the surveys in the Appendix and show in Figure A.6 that when we
have geo-coded census data, the survey data cover a wide range of densities. All of our results
are robust to using the survey weights provided.

Unfortunately, the Afrobarometer did not collect the GPS location for respondents, but the
location name was recorded. We develop an algorithm that performs a series of exact and
fuzzy matches of location names relying on data from a global gazetteer that contains the
latitude and longitude of a location. Depending on the survey round, this involves between
13 and 21 steps in which the village name, district name and region name are sequentially
matched against the ascii names of locations, as well as up to four alternative names listed in
the gazetteer. To catch misspellings, we perform fuzzy matches based on similar text patterns,
using a similarity score of 0.7 and a vectorial decomposition algorithm (3-gram) (Raffo, 2015).
Appendix B provides further detail on the matching procedure. Using this algorithm, we are
able to geo-locate 92–95 percent of village names in each round.6 For each location we can
then extract the population density value.

Both the pollution data and the population density data are gridded data, making it straightfor-
ward to link them. The estimated PM2.5 and NO2 concentrations are available at a resolution
of 0.1 decimal degrees (about 10km at the equator), compared to the 30 arc-second resolution
of the population data. We construct a fishnet grid of the same resolution of the pollution data
(the coarser spatial resolution) and, for each pixel, compute the average pollution measure and
the average population density from the GPWv4. PM2.5 is measured in µg/m3 , while NO2 is
  6
    Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) manually geo-locate the respondents of the 2005 Afrobarometer round. When
we compare their locations with ours, we find that the median distance is 12.5km.


                                                  10
measured in ppb (parts per billion). Appendix C contains further details on how we link the
pollution data with the population density data. Section 4.5 discusses the joint distributions
of these variables in detail for the Nigerian case, as an illustrative case.

With these different pieces of information in hand, we can test whether the data are consistent
with a simple static spatial equilibrium model when considering this key set of real outcome
measures.


4. Empirical Findings

In this section, we present our empirical findings. We begin with measures of consumption
of durable goods and housing quality across geographic space, to motivate our methodology
and as a frame of reference. As in previous studies, our data confirm that durable ownership
and housing quality increase substantially with population density. We then turn to our main
outcome measures, in particular the amenity metrics covering health, public goods, crime and
pollution. We find that health outcomes, which may reflect public health investments or pollu-
tion exposure, are generally better in urban areas. Public goods access is either similar across
density or better in denser areas. Crime is similar in most countries and, at best, marginally
worse in denser areas in some countries. Some pollution metrics are unrelated to density
(fine particulate matter levels), while others are worse in rural areas (use of solid fuels burned
indoors).

4.1. Consumption of Durables and Housing

To illustrate our methodology, we consider how telephone ownership varies through space.
Telephones are a prime example of a consumer durable good in Africa that is important in the
aggregate and clearly associated with higher incomes. Figure 1 shows a kernel-weighted local
polynomial regression of whether a household has a telephone at different levels of the log of
population density for Ethiopia, Nigeria, Senegal and Tanzania. Each regression line shows a
95-percent confidence interval, and the graphs exclude the top and bottom five percentiles of
the distribution. Several facts are worth noting. First, there is a large dispersion in telephone
ownership from the least populated to the most populated areas, with a support from zero to
one. Second, across the whole range of densities, ownership is increasing almost monotonically
and continuously. The pattern is not driven by our choice of countries: we find similar pictures
for the remaining 16 countries in our data.

To present data in a compact fashion for our whole set of countries, we divide locations within
each country into quartiles of population density, and we compute average durable ownership


                                                11
                               Figure 1: Telephone Ownership Gradients

                       Phone ownership in Ethiopia, Nigeria, Senegal and Tanzania
             1
             .8
           Phone
              .6
             .4
             .2




                   2                    4                6                      8                   10
                                              Log of population density

                             Ethiopia             Nigeria             Senegal              Tanzania




rates by quartile. An advantage of looking at density quartiles is that we avoid the problems of
defining “urban” and “rural” locations, which may reflect arbitrary administrative categories
and are not standardized across countries.7

Table 1 presents the average durable ownership rates by density quartile. The number of
countries with statistically significant differences from Q1 are given below each average (both
negative and positive differences, so that 0-20 means zero negative differences and 20 posi-
tive differences across our 20 countries). Telephone ownership rates are strongly increasing
with density, with the least dense quartile having a 41 percent ownership rate, compared to
83 percent in the densest quartile. These differences are statistically significant in all of our
20 countries. Television ownership is similarly higher in denser areas, with just 11 percent
having televisions in the least dense quartile and 59 percent in the densest, and, again, all 20
having significant differences. Automobile ownership rates are low everywhere, but still higher
in the densest quartile on average and significant in all but one country. Motorcycle owner-
ship rates are similar across quartiles, with five countries having significantly lower ownership
rates in denser areas, six having higher rates, and the rest insignificant. Households are likely
   7
    We use sample weights when computing quartiles and averages across quartiles; when looking at averages
across quartiles within countries, we define these within countries; when we aggregate across countries, we define
quartiles over the whole sample of countries.


                                                       12
                        Table 1: Durables Ownership by Density Quartiles

                                               Population Density Quartile
                                                Q1         Q2       Q3        Q4
                             Telephone          .41        .49      .60       .83
                                                           0-9     0-15      0-20
                             Television         .11        .15      .29       .59
                                                           1-4     0-16      0-20
                             Automobile         .01        .02      .03       .10
                                                           0-4      0-8      0-19
                             Motorcycle         .13        .13      .13       .14
                                                           2-4      4-4       5-6

       Note: This table reports the average fraction of respondents who own durables across quartiles
       across our set of 20 countries. The two numbers below the averages x- y represent the number of
       countries with a difference between the least dense quartile (Q1) that is statistically significant
       at the one-percent level and either negative (x) or positive ( y).


substituting motorcycles for automobiles to some extent in denser areas, though, overall, they
have higher ownership rates of motorized transportation goods. Overall, these results confirm
that our metrics are consistent with the existing finding in the literature that real consumption
levels are relatively highest in urban areas.

We turn next to measures of housing consumption. We focus on eight measures of housing
quality: the percentages of households having: (1) electricity, (2) tap water, (3) a constructed
floor, (4) a flush toilet, (5) a finished roof, and (6) finished walls; plus (7) the average number
of minutes each day spent collecting water, and (8) the number of sleeping rooms per per-
son over the age of 5. The latter could be seen as a measure of housing quantity. Together,
these measures provide a fairly comprehensive view of housing quality for households in the
developing world.

Table 2 reports the average housing quality metrics by density quartiles. The table shows that,
for each metric, housing quality rises with density on average (see Appendix Figure A.2 for the
corresponding plots). Differences between the second and first quartiles are statistically signif-
icant for the majority of countries. Differences between the first and fourth (densest) quartiles
are quite large in magnitude and statistically significant for all but a few countries. In the least
dense quartile, people spend, on average, 29.4 minutes per day collecting water, while those
in the densest quartiles spend, on average, 12.2 minutes. In 17 countries, the difference is


                                                      13
                             Table 2: Housing Quality by Density Quartile

                                                                 Population Density Quartile
                                                               Q1          Q2         Q3         Q4
           Electricity                                         .12        .16         .32        .64
                                                                          0-4        0-14       0-20
           Tap water                                           .15        .19         .39        .67
                                                                          0-2        0-11       0-20
           Constructed floor                                   .33        .38         .52        .82
                                                                          1-5        0-12       0-19
           Flush toilet                                        .02        .05         .12        .31
                                                                          0-3        0-10       0-19
           Water collection (min)                             29.4        24.3       20.7       12.2
                                                                          4-0         6-0       17-0
           Finished roof                                       .41         .5         .67        .88
                                                                          2-8        1-14       0-19
           Finished walls                                      .35        .42         .53        .82
                                                                          0-6        1-14       0-20
           Sleeping rooms per person (aged> 5)                 .61        .62         .61        .61
                                                                          0-2         1-5        4-6

        Note: This table reports housing quality across quartiles across our set of 20 countries. The two
        numbers below the averages x- y represent the number of countries with a difference between
        the least dense quartile (Q1) that is statistically significant at the one-percent level and either
        negative (x) or positive ( y).


statistically significant from zero. Households in the densest quartiles are substantially more
likely to have finished walls, a finished roof or a constructed floor. We conclude that by these
six measures, housing quality is unambiguously higher in denser areas in these developing
countries.8 Our one measure of housing quantity – the number of sleeping rooms per person –
does not suggest any strong differences across density quartiles: households in densely popu-
lated locations do not have substantially less housing space, by this measure, than those living
in rural areas.

   8
     Some measures of housing quality may already be incorporated into measured rural-urban income differ-
ences. For example, surveys reporting average consumption expenditures at the household level may deflate
housing expenditure by regional quality-adjusted price indices. In practice, it is an open question how well qual-
ity adjustments are done in these surveys.


                                                       14
4.2. Child Health

We next look at measures of child health. Child health is informative about both the con-
sumption of the household and amenities such as access to health facilities or medicine. One
potential pitfall of using child health measures is that household members living in urban ar-
eas might be more informed about children’s health problems, thus affecting their propensity
to report a health problem. Mindful of this, we selected only outcomes that are objectively
measured; in other words, they are not dependent on reporting by caretakers and, thus, do
not reflect inaccurate information by respondents.

We look at four main objective measures of child health: stunting, wasting, anemia and con-
suming an acceptable minimum diet. Stunting is defined as having low height for age, and
is perhaps the most commonly used indicator of poor child health calculated using the DHS
(see, e.g., Cummins, 2013). Wasting is defined as having low weight for height. The minimum
acceptable diet is is defined by minimum meal frequency and dietary diversity (World Health
Organization, 2015). For all metrics we calculate the fraction of children that have the condi-
tion in question and then aggregate by population density; see Appendix A for more detail on
how these variables are defined.

Figure 2 shows the fraction of children with stunting, wasting, anemia and consumption below
the acceptable minimum diet. For each metric, there is one point per country, capturing the
average value in the lowest-density ( y-axis) and the highest-density (x-axis) quartiles. The
upper panel covers the percent stunted (darker circles) and the percent wasted (lighter dia-
monds). The lower panel covers the percent anemic (darker circles) and the percent below an
acceptable minimum diet (lighter diamonds).

Two main features stand out in Figure 2. First, for all four metrics, most countries lie near the
45 degree line. This implies that rates of child malnourishment are largely similar in the least
dense and densest areas in most countries. Second, in all but a handful of countries, rural
areas have higher rates of child malnourishment. Rates of stunting and wasting are similar
or higher in rural areas in all countries but Madagascar. Anemia and dietary inadequacy are
worse in rural areas for all countries except Zimbabwe and Tanzania, which have marginally
worse values in the most densely populated areas. We find that differences in stunting rates are
significantly lower in urban areas in 11 out of 20 countries, while around half of the countries
have significant differences in the other metrics (see Appendix Table A.2). It is hard for us to
conclude whether these findings are largely about better food consumption by urban children
or better access to health care in urban areas. In either case, it is safe to conclude that, in most




                                                15
                                                               Figure 2: Child Health


              .6
                                                                                                 BEN
                                                                                                         MWI

                                                                        MLI                TZA    ZMB    ETH
                                                                                 COD                                      MDG
 Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                         BFA     SLE
                                                                       NGA         KEN
                  .4




                                                         CMR CIV         UGA
                                                                          LBR
                                                         GHA     SEN       ZWE




                                                  BEN                  MDG
    .2




                                                                NGA
                                                          BFA

                                   KEN ETH SEN
                                     CODGHA     MLI
                                            SLE
                                            CIV
                                   MOZ LBR
                                CMRZMBTZA
                                  MWI UGA
                                 ZWE
              0




                           0                                     .2                        .4                                         .6
                                                                   Highest Density Quartile

                                                                       Wasted            Stunted


                                                                                                                                MDG
            1




                                                                                                                          ETH   BFA
                                                                                                             ZWE    SLE  CIV
                                                                                                                     MLILBR
                                                                                                                   UGA   CMR
                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                   NGA
                                                                                                                   COD
                                                                                                       BFA      SEN MOZ
                                                                                                             BEN
                                                                         GHA MLI SLE
                                                                                  MWI
                                                                            ZMB  KEN
Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                               CIV GHA
                                                                                     SEN
                 .8




                                                   MWI
                                                        CMR     MOZ
                                                  COD

                                                                TZA
   .6




                                                   BEN          ZWE
                                    MDG



                                   ETH      UGA
            .4




                           .4                                   .6                        .8                                          1
                                                                  Highest Density Quartile

                                                  Anemic               Below minimum acceptable diet




                                                                              16
countries, child health is substantially better in more densely populated areas.9

There is an important comparison to be made with the historical evidence from currently rich
countries such as the United States and those in Western Europe. Interestingly, these rich
countries generally have better average health outcomes in cities than in rural areas, though
this wasn’t previously the case (Costa and Kahn, 2006). In the early 20th century, U.S. cities
had higher death rates than rural areas. Since then, these patterns have reversed, with higher
life expectancies among urban residents, and public health investments playing a central role
in raising the quality of city life (Cutler and Miller, 2005; Costa and Kahn, 2006; Kesztenbaum
and Rosenthal, 2016). Thus, while the developing countries in the present study are poorer
than the United States was in 1900, they do not share the same pattern of cities being associated
with worse health environments that once characterized the United States.10

4.3. Public Goods

This section documents the prevalence of public goods across space, such as the presence of a
sewerage system, cell phone service, schools and health facilities. So far, we have not distin-
guished between “consumption” that is privately provided and publicly provided. Many of the
goods that we consider as “consumption” or “amenities” incorporate some element of private
provision and some element of public provision. For instance, our child health indicators are
influenced both by private expenditure (e.g., on food) and public investments (e.g., in health
service provision). The same is true, to some degree, even of durable goods ownership, where
the private expenditure requires accompanying public investments or public institutional ar-
rangements — e.g., for mobile phones or motorcycles, which require mobile phone coverage
and road construction, respectively.

Some public goods (e.g., legal systems) are difficult to assign to geographic locations. How-
ever, certain other categories of public goods can be assigned to locations in density space, and
we now briefly consider these. If these goods were more abundantly provided in sparsely popu-
lated rural areas than in densely populated areas, they might offset the urban-rural differences
in consumption goods.

Table 3 shows a number of public goods across density quartiles. Overall, none of these mea-
   9
     We also looked for geo-referenced data on infectious diseases as well, but found that they were largely un-
available for our set of countries. One exception are malaria test samples taken as part of the Demographic and
Health Surveys, Malaria Indicator Surveys and AIDS Indicator Surveys. Using all data available for our countries
from these surveys, we find that malaria incidence is decreasing with population density consistently in most of
the countries. This is in line with Tatem, Gething, Smith, and Hay (2013), who document a negative relationship
between malaria and urbanization on a global scale.
  10
     Jedwab and Vollrath (2017) argue that much of the recent growth of cities in the developing world is due to
their relatively low mortality rates, unlike cities in Western Europe in the past.


                                                      17
sures is worse in denser areas, on average. Denser areas are more likely to have electricity
grids, piped water systems, sewerage systems and cell phone coverage. A number of services
are also more likely to be present in denser areas: post offices, health facilities, police stations
and market stalls. Finally, transportation infrastructure is better – at least when measured by
whether a road is paved. These findings are consistent with the theory that, although there
may be some congestion issues in urban areas that offset the benefits to individuals, the per
capita cost of providing many public goods in remote and sparsely populated locations has led
governments (rationally) to supply lower quantities of public goods in these areas.

It is also worth pointing out that the patterns across density are very similar to those emerging
from the household-level DHS data, both in terms of the monotonically increasing relationship
as well as the differences across, for example, the bottom and top quartiles. An important
limitation of the data is that we can observe only the presence of a public good, but not its
attributes, such as the availability of doctors and nurses or teachers, their qualifications, or
how crowded a health facility or school is; we also do not observe whether a sewer is open or
closed, or how reliable the electricity off the grid is. We still think that these measures contain
valuable information on the distribution of amenities across space.

4.4. Crime

We next turn to measures of crime, which is arguably one of the most important non-monetary
amenities that varies across space. The challenge we face is that data on crime at small levels
of geographic detail are difficult to obtain for African countries. Official administrative records
are either not stored centrally or not available to researchers.

The best and most comparable data on crime come from the Afrobarometer surveys, which
were collected in 2005, 2009 and 2011 for a large subset of our countries (see Table A.6 in
the Appendix for more on the surveys we employ). The surveys are designed to use consis-
tent methodologies and definitions across countries. The questionnaire focuses on attitudes
towards democracy and governance and includes questions on crime, safety and trust. An
advantage of survey data over administrative data on crime is that the latter are likely to be
biased towards areas with police presence or better record-keeping capacity. In contrast, our
surveys are administrered in the same way within and across countries, as well as across the
three years of our survey. Hence, our data are unlikely to be biased toward any particular
geographic area.

We consider four main metrics: property crime, violent crime, feeling safe in one’s neighbor-
hood, and fear of crime in one’s home. To measure property and violent crime, we use the
survey questions: “Over the past year, how often (if ever) have you or anyone in your family had

                                                18
                               Table 3: Public Goods by Density Quartile

                                                                           Population Density Quartile
                                                                           Q1        Q2        Q3        Q4
      Electricity grid that most houses could access                      0.39      0.42      0.48      0.72
                                                                                     1-0       0-4      0-10
      Piped water system that most houses could access                    0.36      0.35      0.42      0.67
                                                                                     0-0       0-2      0-11
      Sewage system that most houses could access                         0.14      0.13      0.18      0.37
                                                                                     0-0       0-0       0-7
      School in EA or within easy walking distance                        0.91      0.90      0.90      0.90
                                                                                     0-0       0-0       0-0
      Health Clinic in EA or within easy walking distance                 0.59      0.58      0.62      0.73
                                                                                     1-0       0-0       2-4
      Police Station in EA or within easy walking distance                0.29      0.30      0.33      0.47
                                                                                     0-0       0-0       1-4
      Market Stalls in EA or within easy walking distance                 0.62      0.64      0.64      0.76
                                                                                     0-1       0-0       0-4
      Road on way to interview was at the start paved                     0.27      0.30      0.35      0.54
                                                                                     1-0       1-2       0-6
Note: This table reports the average fraction of enumeration areas having access to a public good. Electricity
grid, piped water system and sewerage system are equal to one if they can be accessed by most houses in an
enumeration area. Post-office, school, health clinic, police station and market stalls are equal to one if they are
present in the enumeration area or within easy walking distance. Road to interview is equal to one if the road taken
on the way to the interview was at the start paved/tarred/concrete. Numbers below the averages in each row
are the number of countries with a difference from the least dense quartile (Q1) that is statistically significant at
the one-percent level. In this table we use within-country quartiles rather than across-country quartiles to ensure
that all countries have enumeration areas across quartiles.


something stolen from your house?” and “Over the past year, how often (if ever) have you or
anyone in your family been physically attacked?” For each region, we compute the fraction of
respondents reporting at least one theft (property crime) or attack (violent crime).

To measure feeling safe and fear of crime, the questions are: “Over the past year, how often, if
ever, have you or anyone in your family felt unsafe walking in your neighborhood?” and “Over
the past year, how often have you or anyone in your family feared crime in your own home?” The
possible answers to these questions on experienced crime and perceived safety are: “never,”


                                                        19
                                                                         Figure 3: Crime




                       .8       .6
           Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                                              CMR                      LBR
                    .4




                                                                                              UGA
                                                                                ZMB
                                                                               KENMOZSEN
                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                       MWI         SLE
                                                                         NGA
                                                                           TZA
                                                                             TGO
                                                                           GHA
                                                                   MLI   BFA
          .2




                                                         NGAUGA    BEN
                                                         KEN             CIV
                                                   MDG     NER
                                                 ZWE  ZMB
                                                    SLE            CMR
                                                                         LBR
                                           MWI  SEN
                                         MDG TZABFAMOZ
                                          BEN
                                          MLI TGO GHA
                                                   CIV
                                     NER
                       0




                                     0                       .2                     .4                            .6           .8
                                                                          Highest Density Quartile

                                                                  Property crime              Violent crime
                      .8       .6
          Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                                                MDG
                                                                                                      KEN
                                                                                               KEN
                                                                                                      SEN                CMR
                                                                                     MWI BFA
                                                                                    TZA         ZMB
                                                                                          ZWE MOZ
                                                                                MWI     TZA UGA             MLI
                   .4




                                                                           MDG            ZMB
                                                                                          MOZ
                                                                                BFA NGA                 CIV
                                                                            NGA ZWE UGA       CMR        LBR
                                                                                      TGO CIV               LBR
                                                                  SEN
                                                                     MLI   TGO          SLE
                                                                        GHA BEN
                                                               GHA BEN                        SLE
         .2




                                                             NER

                                                   NER
                      0




                                     0                      .2                     .4                             .6           .8
                                                                         Highest Density Quartile

                                                         Feel safe in neighborhood                    Fear of crime




“just once or twice,” “several times,” “many times,” and “always.” We define a dummy variable


                                                                                   20
as equal to one if a respondent’s reply is anything more than “never.”

Overall, we find that crime is quite common in Africa. About one third of respondents report a
theft from their house in the previous year. The highest rates of theft are in Liberia (49 percent),
Uganda (42 percent) and Senegal (39 percent), and the lowest rates are in Madagascar (13
percent), Niger (18 percent) and Mali (21 percent). The heterogeneity in physical attacks
follows a similar pattern for most countries, and the pairwise correlation coefficient at the
country level between theft and attack is 0.7 and highly significant. Exceptions include Senegal,
where theft is high but attacks are reported infrequently. Across the whole sample, more than
one third of respondents report that they felt unsafe in their neighborhood at least once in the
past year, and that they feared crime in their own home.

Figure 3 shows differences in experienced crime and fear of crime across space. We show both
of these categories of variables, as fear of crime might matter at least as much as experiences
of crime for location choices. Both figures illustrate that most countries are located close to the
45-degree line. Property crime appears to be slightly higher in denser areas, but the differences
for most countries are fairly small when comparing them with observed differences in living
standards, for example. One limitation of the theft variable is that it does not consider livestock
theft, a type of crime common in rural areas. It is, therefore, likely that the difference is even
smaller when taking into account livestock theft. The results are similar for fear of crime and
perceived feeling of safety in the neighborhood, where most countries cluster around the 45-
degree line.

Table 4 presents the average crime rates by density quartile across all the countries. Around
29 percent of households in the least dense quartile experience property crimes, compared to
33 percent in the densest quartile. Violent crime affects ten percent of households in the least
dense quartile compared to 12 percent in the densest quartile. Fear of crime and feeling unsafe
are similarly increasing in population density on average, with similarly modest differences by
density. Only a handful of countries have statistically significant differences in crime rates
through density, with the majority insignificant.11

Still, our evidence so far suggests that crime is the leading contender for the amenity that
  11
    Studies by Fafchamps and Moser (2003) and Demombynes and Ozler (2002) from Madagascar and South
Africa point to somewhat higher crime rates in less dense areas. Crime information is also available in some
LSMS surveys, though with questions that are hard to compare across countries. Appendix Figure A.9 shows
the fractions of LSMS households having experienced a crime in the last twelve months, in five countries for
which geo-references are available: Ethiopia (2013), Malawi (2010), Tanzania (2009-2010), Nigeria (2012) and
Uganda (2010-2011). While patterns of crime across space are different in each of these five countries, one
common theme is a lack of evidence that rates of crime are systematically increasing in density, or a lack of
evidence that the densest areas have the highest rates of theft; visually, a constant rate of crime seems as though
it would just about fit within the confidence intervals.



                                                       21
                      Table 4: Crime and Fear of Crime by Density Quartile

                                                 Population Density Quartile
                                                 Q1         Q2       Q3        Q4
                          Property crime         .29        .31      .31      .33
                                                            0-3      0-1      0-4
                          Violent crime           .1        .09          .1   .12
                                                            0-1      0-0      0-4
                          Fear of crime          .32        .33      .34      .36
                                                            0-1      0-2      0-4
                          Feel unsafe            .37        .39      .38      .45
                                                            0-2      0-1      0-3

           Note: This table reports the average fraction of respondents reporting property crime,
           violent crime, fear of crime in one’s home, and feeling unsafe in one’s neighborhood.
           The two numbers below the averages x- y represent the number of countries with a
           difference between the least dense quartile (Q1) that is statistically significant at the
           one-percent level and either negative (x) or positive ( y).


gets worse with density. Could it be that crime rates are enough to offset the higher income
and consumption levels of more-urban areas? Several previous studies in the literature have
estimated the value of living in an areas with less crime, proxied by willingness to pay. What is
the value of having 33-percent chance of theft in the densest areas relative to just 29 percent
in the least dense, as we find on average? Or having a 12 percent chance of violent crime in
the densest areas compared to just ten percent in the least dense areas?

Relative to the large differences in average income across space, the estimated valuations of
crime implied by estimates in the literature are quite modest. For example, using crime and
property-value data, Bishop and Murphy (2011) estimate a dynamic model and infer that San
Francisco residents are willing to pay $472 per year to avoid a ten-percent increase in violent
crime. On an average income per head of $57,276, this amounts to 0.8 percent of average
yearly income. Using direct survey questions, Cohen, Rust, Steen, and Tidd (2001) estimate
that, in 2000, U.S. residents were willing to pay $120 to reduce the chance of armed robbery
by ten percent. This amounts to 0.4 percent percent of average income ($120 / $34,432).
Similarly, Ludwig and Cook (2001) estimate that U.S. households in 1998 were willing to pay
$240 per year to reduce the chance of gunshot injury by 30 percent, which amounts to 0.5


                                                       22
percent of average household income ($240 / $51,939). Taken together, these studies suggest
that the modest differences in crime rates with density may not be large enough to offset the
much higher average incomes in urban areas.

4.5. Outdoor Air Pollution

Pollution is a widely studied amenity that varies through space. Sources of outdoor pollution
include vehicles, electricity generation, industry, waste and biomass burning, and re-suspended
road dust from unpaved roads. Banzhaf and Walsh (2008) find pollution to be an important
determinant of locational choice in the United States, and exposure to pollutants significantly
affects health, human capital and productivity (Adhvaryu, Kala, and Nyshadham, 2014; Currie
and Walker, 2011; Currie, Hanushek, Kahn, Neidell, and Rivkin, 2009; Graff Zivin and Neidell,
2012).12

In this section, we use satellite-derived estimates of two measures of outdoor air pollution —
fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) — and document how they vary
with population density in our set of countries and several reference countries. We measure
both pollution measures in micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3 ). For frame of reference,
the World Health Organization recommends mean annual exposures of 10 µg/m3 or less for
PM2.5 and 40 µg/m3 or less for NO2, at the same time highlighting that there are no levels of
pollution exposure that have been proven not to negatively affect health (Geddes, Martin, Boys,
and van Donkelaar, 2016; WHO, 2006). Indeed, Pope and Dockery (2006) conclude from a
meta analysis of dozens of studies that the relationship between particulate-matter exposure
and life expectancy is approximately linear.

Figure 4 illustrates this procedure and shows the distributions of pollutants and population
density across space in Nigeria. The top left graph shows the distribution of population density;
the top right graph shows the NO2 distribution; and the two bottom graphs show PM2.5, where
the graph on the right removing sea salt and dust. Warmer colors denote higher values, and
the bins are formed by dividing the data into deciles. Population density in the North is highest
around Kano; in the center around Abuja; in the South West close to Lagos and Ibadan; and in
the South East between Benin City, Port Hartcourt and Enugu.

Moving to the pollution measures, several observations are worth highlighting: first, at least
visually, population density does not appear to be strongly correlated with either of the pol-
lution measures. Nitrogen dioxide levels are very low, with a maximum of 0.7 ppb (1.316
µg/m3 ), far below the WHO recommended thresholds of 40 µg/m3 . Values are higher over
  12
   For a comprehensive survey of the literature on pollution and individual welfare see Graff Zivin and Neidell
(2013); on environmental amenities and city growth see Kahn and Walsh (2015).


                                                     23
                         Figure 4: Outdoor Air Pollution (PM2.5) in Nigeria

                         Population Density                                       NO2




                                                                                                  NO2
                                                     12 - 32                                            0.05 - 0.17
                                                     33 - 47                                            0.18 - 0.19
                                                     48 - 60                                            0.20 - 0.21
                                                     61 - 73                                            0.22 - 0.23
                                                     74 - 91                                            0.24 - 0.25
                                                     92 - 121                                           0.26 - 0.28
                                                     122 - 151                                          0.29 - 0.31
                                                     152 - 216                                          0.32 - 0.34
                                                     217 - 349                                          0.35 - 0.38
                                                     350 - 19841                                        0.39 - 0.70



                               PM2.5                                PM2.5 (Dust and Sea Salt removed)




                                                 PM2.5                                            PM2.5
                                                    5 - 16                                           0.5 - 5.3
                                                    17 - 20                                          5.4 - 6.0
                                                    21 - 26                                          6.1 - 6.6
                                                    27 - 32                                          6.7 - 7.2
                                                    33 - 35                                          7.3 - 7.9
                                                    36 - 38                                          8.0 - 8.5
                                                    39 - 41                                          8.6 - 9.3
                                                    42 - 45                                          9.4 - 10.1
                                                    46 - 54                                          10.2 - 11.2
                                                    55 - 110                                         11.3 - 20.5



       Notes: The top left graph shows the distribution of population density, the top right graph shows the
       NO2 distribution, and the two bottom graphs show PM2.5, where the graph on the right removes
       sea salt and dust. Warmer (darker) colors denote higher values, and the bins are formed by dividing
       the data into deciles.


Lagos, Ibadan, Abuja, Kanduna and Kano, but not over cities in the South East in the Delta,
and there are high levels in the center towards the West of the country, where few people live.
PM2.5 levels appear to be driven mainly by dust from the Sahara when inspecting the bottom
left graph. Removing sea salt and dust produces quite a different distribution, with higher
levels in the center and over some cities.

The Nigerian example illustrates further that looking separately at these two indicators for
pollution is instructive.13 The pairwise correlation between PM2.5 and NO2 is -0.0085 with
a p-value of 0.4633. Across our whole set of African countries, the correlation of these two
measures ranges from 0.65 (Cameroon) to -0.47 (Senegal).

Figure 5 plots (as black circles) the average PM2.5 concentrations for the highest and lowest
population density quartiles across all our countries. Those with the highest overall concentra-
tions of PM2.5 tend to have high concentrations both in the least and most dense areas. These
countries are essentially the ones that border or contain parts of the Sahara desert, such as
  13
    This is in line with what Geddes, Martin, Boys, and van Donkelaar (2016) find when they inspect population
weighted average PM2.5 and NO2 levels and trends.



                                                               24
                                                         Figure 5: Outdoor Air Pollution

                 50

                                                                                                                    NER
                           40




                                                                                                MLI
   Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                                       NGABFA
                                                                                 BEN
                                                                                                              SEN
                                                                      GHA
                 30




                                                              CIV
                                                                           TGO



                                                                     SLE
        20




                                                                    LBR

                                                                    CMR

                                                 GHA
                 10




                                                TGONGA
                                                 ZMB
                                                ZMB
                                           CIV CMR UGA
                                                  BEN
                                          MWI
                                          MWI   UGA
                                          BFA
                                         ZWETZA
                                           KEN
                                         ZWE
                                          TZA
                                         SEN
                                         SLE
                                       MOZ  LBR
                                      MOZ
                                        KEN
                                        MLINER
                                     MDG
                                    MDG
                 0




                                0                   10            20            30                       40               50
                                                               Highest Density Quartile

                                                   PM2.5 Dust and sea salt removed                    PM2.5



Niger, Senegal, Mali and Nigeria. Therefore, we look plot PM2.5 concentrations with dust and
sea salt removed (as black triangles).14 There is no evidence suggesting that anthropogenic
sources of PM2.5 are more or less harmful for health than are natural sources, but it is possi-
ble that individuals perceive anthropogenic sources as more hazardous to their health. These
lead to far lower levels of PM2.5, again with very modest apparent differences by population
density. Figure A.3 plots NO2 by population density. While there is some variation across coun-
tries, there is, again, little apparent difference by density. When we look at average pollution
levels by density quartile, we find that NO2 concentrations have largely statistically insignifi-
cant differences (see Appendix Table A.3). PM2.5 on average is lower in denser areas, though
the differences are statistically significant only in around half the countries, and the average
differences are again modest. We conclude that outdoor air pollution concentrations in Africa
are at best loosely linked to population density.
  14
     About half of the population-weighted ten-year mean of PM2.5 concentration in Eastern Sub-Saharan Africa
is estimated to be due to dust and sea salt; in Western Sub-Saharan Africa the proportion amounts to about three
quarters (van Donkelaar, Martin, Brauer, and Boys, 2015).


                                                                            25
What do these gradients look like in other parts of the world, known to suffer from high levels
of urban pollution, such as China? The global coverage of the PM2.5 map and the population
density map allows us to look at additional countries. Figure A.4 shows the relationship be-
tween pollution and population density in China, India, and the United States. The left-hand
side axis denotes levels for India and China, while the right-hand axis indicates the level in
the United States. All three countries show clearly positive density gradients. In China, PM2.5
levels for the top population density decile amount to 66 µg/m3 , more than six times the WHO
recommended threshold; the lowest population density decile has a level of 13 µg/m3 . In In-
dia, the top decile has a level of 41 µg/m3 , still four times the WHO recommended threshold,
compared to 6 µg/m3 in the lowest decile. The bottom figure shows NO2 distribution for these
other countries. The levels are much lower, but there are gradients again for China, India and
the United States. These positive gradients are very much what we might expect of a world in
which cities have high concentrations of industrial activity and automobile traffic. Although
urban areas in Africa are growing rapidly, there is little industrial activity (Gollin, Jedwab, and
Vollrath, 2016), and, consequently, industrial air pollution is relatively low.

To be clear, we are not making a claim that outdoor pollution does not matter in African cities.
Our satellite-derived pollution estimates do not capture pollution exposure in some dimen-
sions: they are annual series and, therefore, average over temporarily high values. At a 10km
resolution, they are spatially rather coarse, ignoring local effects such as proximity to roads that
have been demonstrated to matter significantly. For example, Kinney, Gichuru, Volavka-Close,
Ngo, Ndiba, Law, Gachanja, Gaita, Chillrud, and Sclar (2011) find average PM2.5 concentra-
tions at four traffic sites between 7.30am and 6.30pm in Nairobi to amount to between 58.1
and 98.1 µg/m3 ; the maximum multi-annual average PM2.5 concentration for Kenya in our
sample is 13.9 µg/m3 , and this pixel is at Lake Turkana, the world’s largest desert lake (Av-
ery, 2012). Finally, satellite-derived measures reflect the column of pollution as observed from
space, rather than the concentration experienced on the ground. Nevertheless, as the graphs
from India, China, and the United States illustrate, the two datasets still capture meaningful
variation in concentration levels across space. What emerges, rather, is that in Africa, cities
are not large enough and concentration of industries is not significant enough to create large
clouds of pollution around cities; however, background non-anthropogenic pollution is high.
This combination produces different pollution gradients from those observed in more industri-
alized parts of the world.




                                                26
                                                   Figure 6: Indoor Air Pollution

                1                                              CIV      KEN ZMB              BFA MOZ
                                                                                           BEN   TZA  MWI
                                                                                                    COD
                                                                                                     UGA
                                                                                                   ETH    SLE
                                                                                                         MLBR
                                                                                                       MDG LI
                                     SEN                                      GHA
                                      ZWE           NGA
                                                                  KEN
                                                                                MLI          ETH
                                                            CMR
                               ZWE                                                   MDG
                          .8



                                     SEN
                                                                       MWI
  Lowest Density Quartile




                                                              COD      UGA
                                            NGA
                                               GHA
                                             CMR
                .6




                                                          LBR MOZ
                                      CIV          ZMB
                                                             SLE
       .4




                                                                       BEN
                                             BFA
                .2
                0




                               0            .2               .4            .6                .8            1
                                                          Highest Density Quartile

                                     Solid cooking fuel         Solid cooking fuel x cook indoors



4.6. Indoor Air Pollution

Arguably a more serious health risk in developing countries is indoor air pollution, largely re-
lated to the use of unvented fires for cooking. As a proxy for indoor air quality, we examine the
main material used for cooking as reported in the DHS. The World Health Organization esti-
mates that over four million people suffer from premature deaths due to illnesses attributable
to cooking with solid fuels, such as wood and charcoal (WHO, 2014). Indoor air pollution is
also estimated to contribute significantly to outdoor air-pollution-related deaths.

Figure 6 shows the proportion of households using solid fuels for cooking across population
density (as black squares). Across all of our countries, virtually everyone in the least dense
areas uses a solid cooking fuel. In the urban areas there is more variation, with the densest
areas ranging from 20 percent solid fuel in Zimbabwe up to around half in countries such as
Nigeria, Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana, and the majority over 80 percent. Overall, the pattern is
clearly one of much higher use of solid fuels in rural areas than in urban areas.



                                                                  27
One potential advantage of rural areas is that there might be more space to accommodate out-
door cooking, thereby somewhat mitigating the negative effect of using solid fuels. Therefore
we also show the interaction effect: among the households using solid fuels, we look at the
proportion cooking indoors (as black diamonds). The fraction of people cooking primarily in-
doors with solids drops everywhere, and it is still higher in rural areas in almost every country
(Benin being the sole exception). The last row of Table A.3 shows that the fraction cooking
inside with solid fuels is six percentage points lower in the third quartile than in the least dense
quartile, and 25 percentage points lower in the densest quartile. All but one country have a
significant difference. In summary, indoor air pollution is worse almost everywhere in rural
areas than in African cities.

We note in passing that our pollution measures do not include adequate data on trash and
refuse, which might be more abundant and more visible in urban areas than rural areas. We
also do not capture measures of water quality directly – although a number of our health mea-
sures (especially child health outcomes) are quite sensitive to certain types of water pollution
and sanitation problems. We cannot eliminate the possibility that there are some disamenities
related to pollution and waste in urban areas. But we also note that rural areas have their own
issues of water and air pollution, and the data for our African countries are not consistent with
the idea that pollution is systematically worse in urban areas or locations of high population
density.


5. Heterogeneity by Education Level and Migration Status

In this section we consider how our results vary by education level, and how rural-urban mi-
grant households differ from other urban households.

5.1. Heterogeneity by Education Level

One explanation for the patterns that we observe is that workers select into different regions
and occupations according to comparative advantage. This type of sorting has been empha-
sized recently in the macroeconomics literature by, e.g., Lagakos and Waugh (2013), Young
(2014), Bryan and Morten (2015) and others, and by many in the urban economics litera-
ture, including Glaeser and Mare (2001) and Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2008), as a
way of explaining regional average income differences. One variant of the spatial equilibrium
hypothesis building on the sorting literature is that there is a spatial equilibrium within each
permanent-income (education) category, but not across categories. This theory could poten-
tially reconcile the higher average consumption and amenity levels of urban areas by simply
having more of the educated households living in urban areas. To address this issue further,

                                                28
we compare how measured living standards vary by density within specific educational groups.
Educational attainment is perhaps the simplest measure of permanent income that is available
at the individual level in the data, though of course there are components of ability not well
captured by educational attainment.

For simplicity, we divide households into two education groups: those whose head finished
primary school, and those whose head did not finish primary school. Figure A.5 plots one met-
ric by educational group: electricity access. The top graph shows the proportion of households
that have electricity by the highest education of the household head. The histograms show that
the different educational groups are represented at various population density levels. House-
holds with more-educated household heads experience better access to electricity at almost all
levels of population density. Still, the urban-rural gradients documented earlier persist even
within these education categories.

To study these slopes by education group, we estimate the following linear projection for house-
holds i in country c:

                           x ic =θ0 + θ1 Pic + θ2 Eic + θ3 (Pic ∗ Eic ) + εic

where x ic is a measure of consumption or amenities, Pic is the log of population density and
Eic is a dummy variable that is equal to one if the household head has completed primary
education or more.

Figure 7, Panel (a), shows the linear gradients for households with heads who have less than
complete primary education, and panel (b) shows gradients for households with heads who
have complete primary education or more. Each dot represents a slope estimate for one coun-
try. The y-axis indicates the size of the coefficient. The figures show that in virtually all coun-
tries and for virtually all of our living-standards measures, these urban-rural gradients persist
within populations at similar educational levels. That is, almost without exception, the re-
lationship between population density and housing consumption is positive for the two main
education groups. These findings provide evidence against the variant theory in which a spatial
equilibrium holds within educational categories.

5.2. Rural-Urban Migrant Households

Migration decisions are likely to be shaped by the conditions in arrival destinations rather than
by averages of a population. It might be the case that conditions in the location to which indi-
viduals would consider migrating are much worse than the averages we have documented so
far. Our data do not contain any information about whether a cluster is a migration destina-


                                                  29
                                    Figure 7: Density Gradients by Education of Household Head

                                                                   (a) No or incomplete primary schooling

                      0.20   0.10
          Slope coefficients
                0.00  −0.10
                      −0.20




                                    (1) electricity   (2) water   (3) indoor poll   (4) theft    (5) attack   (6) unsafe   (7) fear
                                                                                         group




                                                                        (b) At least primary schooling
                      0.20 0.10
          Slope coefficients
              0.00    −0.10
                      −0.20




                                    (1) electricity   (2) water   (3) indoor poll   (4) theft    (5) attack   (6) unsafe   (7) fear
                                                                                         group




 Note: Each dot in the Figure represents the coefficient estimate of a linear projection for household i in country
 c: x ic = θ0 + θ1 Pic + θ2 Eic + θ3 (Pic ∗ Eic ) + εic where x ic is a measure of consumption, Pic is the log of popu-
 lation density, and Eic is a dummy variable that is equal to one if the household head has completed primary
 education or more. Panel (a) shows the linear gradients for households with household heads/respondents
 who have less than complete primary education; and panel (b) shows gradients for households with house-
 hold heads/respondents who have complete primary education or more. The y-axis indicates the size of the
 coefficient.


tion, and the random displacement of clusters makes it infeasible to spatially merge the DHS
data with secondary data (i.e., “slum” settlements). Still, we can use the individual-level mi-
gration data to characterize rural-urban migrant households and compare them to other urban
households and to rural households.

Table 5 reports measures of durables ownership, housing quality, public goods and indoor air
quality for rural-urban migrant households in the densest quartile. The first two data columns


                                                                                    30
                                      Table 5: Rural-Urban Migrants

                                                          Population Density Quartile
                                          Q1            Q4            Q4               Q4              Q4
                                                                                                   >=50%
                                                                                                    rural-
                                                                  >=2 adult        >=50%
                                                                                                    urban
                                         whole        whole         rural-          rural-
                                                                                                  migrants
                                        sample       sample         urban           urban
                                                                                                  & hh head
                                                                   migrants        migrants
                                                                                                    <=30
                                                                                                    years
   Telephone                             0.20          0.68          0.79             0.68            0.63
                                                       0-12          0-12             0-12            0-10
   Electricity                           0.09          0.57          0.64             0.58            0.56
                                                       0-12          0-11             0-12            0-10
   Tap water                             0.12          0.63          0.68             0.64            0.65
                                                       0-12          0-10             0-12            0-10
   Constructed floor                     0.28          0.79          0.87             0.81            0.79
                                                       0-11          0-12             0-11            0-10
   Flush toilet                          0.02          0.30          0.33             0.29            0.25
                                                       0-12           0-9             0-10             0-7
   Number of sleeping rooms              0.59          0.59          0.48             0.59            0.65
                                                       1-3            5-0             3-3              0-4
   Cook inside with solid fuel           0.64          0.38          0.34             0.33            0.32
                                                       6-0            6-0             6-0              6-0

  Note: This table reports measures of durables ownership, public goods, housing quality and indoor air
  pollution across the 12 countries for which we have migration data. The fourth and fifth data columns report
  the averages for regions in the densest quartile of the country with the fewest migrants and most migrants.
  The two numbers below the averages x- y represent the number of countries with a difference between the
  least dense quartile (Q1) that is statistically significant at the one-percent level and either negative (x) or
  positive ( y).



reproduce the averages for the least dense quartile (Q1) and densest quartile (Q4) in our whole
sample. The next three data columns report averages for several alternative definitions of
migrant households. We are somewhat limited by the way the DHS defines the individual-level
sample: individual questionnaires are only administered to a subset of household members that


                                                       31
fulfill certain eligibility criteria (mostly being in the right age range); furthermore, men are only
surveyed in a fraction of all households. If we were to count migrant adults per household we
would falsely assign a lower number of migrants to households in which fewer individuals
were asked about their migration history. To overcome this, we limit the sample to households
that were selected for both male and female individual-level interviews, which leaves us with
about 50 percent of the whole sample.

The first definition of migrant households we consider is households with at least two adults
who have migrated from a rural area in the last five years (the third data column). By this
definition, migrant households in Q4 have similar characteristics to other households in Q4,
with somewhat higher telephone ownership rates and electricity connections, on average, and
somewhat fewer sleeping rooms per adult. More importantly, migrant households in Q4 are
still far better than the average households in Q1. We next consider households where at least
50 percent of the adults are rural-urban migrants. The averages for this metric again point to
comparable characteristics between migrant households and other urban households, and far
better characteristics of migrant households than the average rural household.

Finally, we look at rural-urban households where at least 50 percent of household residents are
rural-urban migrants, and where the household head is 30 years old or younger. This definition
allows us to make sure we are excluding migrants that have gone to live with (say) a wealthy,
established older relative. These migrant households appear similar or marginally worse than
other urban households by most of our metrics. But they are still far better than the average ru-
ral households of Q1. In 10 of 12 countries, the migrants have statistically significantly higher
telephone ownership rates, electricity and tap water connections, and constructed floors. Mi-
grant households have marginally more sleeping rooms per adult, and substantially lower rates
of cooking with solid fuels indoors.

Overall, at least among these living standards metrics, there is little support for the hypothesis
that rural-urban migrants tend to be worse off than households living in rural areas, on average.
Instead, rural-urban migrants appear to have far better living conditions than households that
remain in rural areas.


6. Net Migration and Secondary Amenities

The descriptive statistics of outcomes across population densities in Section 4 suggest that there
is no easily observable measure of consumption or amenity that is decreasing with population
density. We turn now to measures of migration. Taken literally, the spatial equilibrium in our
model predicts that we should observe no migration across regions. Taken more liberally, the


                                                 32
model suggests that we should see roughly similar movements of workers from less dense to
more dense regions, than from more dense to less dense areas. We ask whether this is the case.
We then turn to some secondary amenities to ask how those vary across space.

6.1. Net Migration Rates

We now compute, for the subset of countries with appropriate data, the fraction of all surveyed
individuals in the DHS that are rural-to-urban migrants and the fraction of all individuals that
are urban-to-rural migrants. Ideally, we would know the exact location from which an individ-
ual migrated. Unfortunately the DHS data do not contain this information. However, we know
if an individual moved from the capital, from a large city or town, or from the countryside. We
define an urban-rural migrant as someone who has been residing in the lowest-density quartile
for five years or less, and who previously lived in the capital or a large city. Similarly, we define
a rural-urban migrant as someone who has been residing in the highest-density quartile for
five years or less, and who previously lived in the countryside.15

Table 6 displays the fractions of all individuals that are rural-to-urban migrants, urban-to-rural
migrants, and their difference. In every country, there are substantially more rural-to-urban
migrants than the opposite. The differences are starkest in Kenya, where 7.6 percent are rural-
urban migrants, compared to 0.6 percent urban-to-rural migrants, and Malawi, which has 7.2
percent rural-urban migrants and less than 0.5 percent moving in the opposite direction. All
other countries but one have positive net migration.16

The table shows clearly that for all but one country, rural-urban migration is larger in absolute
terms than urban-rural movements, and in all cases, the net flows are significantly positive.
This view is consistent with cities being seen as attractive places to live, and workers voting
with their feet to move there. It is hard to reconcile this evidence with a spatial equilibrium.
To most development economists, of course, this may not be a new or controversial claim;
the literature has long emphasized the importance of rural-urban migration as one feature of
structural transformation. But policy makers continue to worry about excessive urbanization,
and many academic economists use models that explicitly or implicitly assume that population
movements are associated with some kind of sorting that is consistent with a steady-state dis-
  15
     We do not consider individuals who reported that they previously lived in a town due to the difficulty of
assigning the person to a high- or low-density area. We keep them in the sample to compute the appropriate
population-weighted cut-off for density quartiles.
  16
     Our finding is not in contrast to Young (2014), who reports that urban-to-rural migration as a fraction of the
rural population is as large as rural-to-urban migration as a fraction of the urban population. He states that “the
difference relative to shares of destination arises because of the smaller average urban population share (0.41
versus 0.59 for rural). Overall, net migration is in favor of urban areas with, on average, 0.126 of the aggregate
young adult female population moving to urban areas and only 0.07 to rural areas.”



                                                       33
              Table 6: Rural-Urban and Urban-Rural Migrants as Percent of Adults

                                                     Rural-to-Urban Urban-to-Rural Difference
                                                                       Percent of Adults
     Dem. Republic of the Congo (2007)                       2.39                 0.47             1.92∗∗∗
     Ethiopia (2005)                                         3.08                 0.15             2.93∗∗∗
     Ghana (2008)                                            4.82                 1.18             3.64∗∗∗
     Kenya (2008-2009)                                       7.60                 0.58             7.02∗∗∗
     Liberia (2007)                                          2.46                 2.24               0.23
     Madagascar (2008-2009)                                  4.16                 0.19             3.97∗∗∗
     Malawi (2010)                                           7.23                 0.45             6.77∗∗∗
     Mali (2006)                                             4.46                 0.66             3.80∗∗∗
     Nigeria (2008)                                          4.83                 0.37             4.46∗∗∗
     Senegal (2005)                                          2.75                 0.92             1.83∗∗∗
     SierraLeone (2008)                                      4.44                 0.36             4.08∗∗∗
     Zambia (2007)                                           4.00                 0.56             3.44∗∗∗

     Note: The first column lists the country and year of survey. The first two data columns report the
     percent of adults that are rural-to-urban migrants and urban-to-rural migrants, respectively, in the last
     five years. The third data column reports the simple difference. ***,**,* mean statistically significant
     at the one-, five- and ten-percent levels. Test statistics are computed taking into account the stratified
     sampling design.



tribution of population. For these reasons, we find it useful to emphasize that the net flow of
people in these economies is clearly single-directional.

6.2. Secondary Amenities Measures

We turn next to a set of issues that we view as secondary amenities, by which we mean that
they are somewhat less tangible than, for example, pollution and crime, considered above.
In particular, we focus on measures of social networks, social insurance and stress. By bring-
ing together large numbers of people, cities can create stress and lead to feelings of isolation
and anonymity. Urban dwellers may find that they have weaker social links to supportive net-
works and communities than rural people have. This may be important if would-be migrants
worry about their access to the insurance provided by their social networks. If individuals
have sufficiently strong preferences for the social integration – and perhaps also for smoother

                                                        34
consumption or lower deviation from the consumption of those around them – then these char-
acteristics of urban life could explain some of the stark differences in living standards that we
observe.

The Afrobarometer asks a number of questions that allow us to further investigate these possi-
ble explanations related to shortages of necessities, stress and trust. To examine consumption
variability, we look at whether and how often a household has gone without enough food or
medicines in the past year. Representing crucial consumption goods, these variables are pos-
sibly good proxies for insurance provided by community members. We define a household as
lacking food or medicines if they state that they lacked the good several times, many times or
always. Finally, the Afrobarometer asks: “In the past month, how much of the time: Have you
been so worried or anxious that you have felt tired, worn out, or exhausted?” If respondents reply
with “many times” or “always” we take this as a measure of anxiety.

There are also a number of questions related to trust towards people in general, as well as
towards various distinct groups of people, including neighbors and relatives. The questionnaire
asks: “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you must be very
careful in dealing with people?" We create a dummy variable that is equal to one if the individual
responds with “most people can be trusted” and zero otherwise. The questions related to specific
groups are framed slightly differently: whether respondents trust their neighbors or relatives
on a scale from 0 to 3 (not at all, just a little, somewhat, a lot). In line with our framing of
lower levels of trust as a downside of city life, we define a dummy variable equal to one if
respondents say that they trust their neighbors not at all or just a little.

The top panel of Figure 8 plots the proportion of individuals reporting a lack of medicines
and food in the top and bottom quartile while the bottom panel shows trust in general and
towards relatives; Table A.4 presents the quartile averages. Overall, the data do not support
the idea that people find cities to be places with less certain access to food or medicine. To
the extent that this represents the effective functioning of social insurance and networks, the
data are not consistent with the idea that people in cities face weaker insurance. Individuals
residing in the highest-density quartile are eight percentage points less likely to have reported
lacking food, and 12 percentage points less likely to have reported lacking medicine. In the
majority of countries in our sample, this difference is significant. One explanation is that rural
communities face covariate shocks, causing a failure of mutual insurance. But especially in the
case of medicine, we would expect a significant idiosyncratic component. To further explore
this question, we also used data from the Financial Inclusion Insights program, which surveys
a representative sample of individuals in Uganda, Kenya, Nigeria and Tanzania. The survey
asks whether an individual could get extra money from relatives in an emergency. In all four


                                                35
                                            Figure 8: Social Insurance and Anxiety


                .8                                                                                           TGO
                                                                                       SEN

                                                                                             MDG ZWE
                                                                          ZWE                  CIV
                                                                  SLE    SLE
                       .6
  Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                        SEN         UGA         NER
                                                                                     BFA
                                                                            BEN   MWI                         NER
                                                                          MDG ZMB LBR           LBR
                                                                                     BFA CMR
                                                                                   TZA
                                                                   KEN           MWI        TGO   CIV
                                                                     KEN
                                                                          UGA
                                                                           MLI
                                                                   NGAZMB
                                                                    MLI
           .4




                                                                         TZA MOZ
                                                                       NGA MOZ                  CMR
                                                                                 BEN
                                          GHA
                                          GHA
 .2             0




                             0                         .2                    .4                              .6                       .8
                                                                   Highest Density Quartile

                                                        Lack of medicines                     Lack of food


                                                                                                                                     NER
              1




                                                                                                                            CIV    SEN
                                                                                                                           TGO
                                                                                                                           TZA
                                                                                                                       BFAMWIMLI

                                                                                        BEN                   ZWE MOZ
                                                                                                       GHA      MDG CMR
                                                                                                              UGA
                                                                                                                SLE
                                                                                                          ZMB
                                                                                                            KEN
                        .8




                                                                                               NGA
Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                                              LBR
              .6




                                                 BEN                             NER
     .4




                                                   BFA
                                                   MDG
                                             SEN
                                   ZWE LBR        MLI       SLE
                                     CMRUGATGO
                                    NGA
              .2




                                       MOZ
                                     GHA
                                     MWI
                                       TZA
                                     CIV
                                 ZMB KEN
              0




                             0               .2                       .4            .6                            .8                  1
                                                                   Highest Density Quartile

                                                                   Anyone              Relatives




                                                                                36
countries, the proportion answering “yes” is higher in the most densely populated quartile
(31 percent) compared to the least densely populated quartile (25 percent). A parsimonious
explanation is that higher income levels in urban areas lead to strengthening of insurance,
though future research is needed on this topic.

As for anxiety, measured levels generally appear to be higher in the countryside than in cities,
weakening the argument that people prefer the countryside due to its higher level of tranquil-
lity and reduced stress. However, the differences are significant only in a small number of
countries. For trust, however, the story is different. First, all measures of trust – trust towards
anyone, relatives, neighbors and one’s own ethnic group – are higher in the lowest-population
density quartile than in the quartile with the highest population density: cities appear to be
low-trust environments. Second, there appear to be very low levels of trust in general among
the population: most trusting are individuals in Madagascar, where 30 percent think that peo-
ple, in general, can be trusted. Other countries have much lower levels of trust; for example,
about 90 percent of respondents in Tanzania and Kenya report that "one must be very care-
ful with people." One could imagine that the problem in cities is simply that people live with
more-diverse neighbors, including people from other ethnicities, whom they trust less than
co-ethnics. But it is striking that trust in co-ethnics also declines in cities relative to rural areas.
However, the difference is significant only for a handful of countries.17

There are many issues with these kinds of self-reported data, both within the same cultural
contexts and even more so across different contexts. Still, the higher level of mistrust offers
one possible compensating differential for the many tangible advantages of densely populated
areas, but we lack a clear way of quantifying this in monetary terms, to compare with the higher
income and other benefits of city life. Nevertheless, we think these results are interesting and
potentially point towards avenues for further research.


7. Conclusion

One appealing explanation of the higher real consumption levels of urban areas in the devel-
oping world is a “spatial equilibrium,” where the higher amenities of rural life are enough to
offset the greater monetary rewards of living in cities. In this paper, we go searching for a
  17
    We are not the first to find that mistrust is higher in denser areas in Africa. Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) use
the 2005 Afrobarometer survey, demonstrating that a higher historical exposure to the slave trade appears to be
linked to reduced levels of trust in the present day. They control for urban location as classified by the survey, but
the coefficient is not reported in the main paper. We geo-locate two further rounds of the same survey and link
the data with spatial population density data. Replicating their results, we find that the coefficient on the urban
dummy is negative in all their models and highly significant. The patterns found in the two papers are, therefore,
similar in that urban locations are associated with higher levels of mistrust.



                                                         37
spatial equilibrium in 20 African countries using new spatial disaggregated evidence on non-
monetary amenities. We focus on measures of child health, public goods access, property and
violent crime, fear of crime, and outdoor and indoor air pollution, which can be measured
consistently across space within and across our countries. We find that almost all metrics in al-
most all countries are unrelated or improving with population density. The only real exception
is crime, though when differences exist they are modest in magnitude and dwarfed in mone-
tary value by the size of the rural-urban wage gaps. When looking at migration rates, every
country for which we have data shows that rural-to-urban migrants are far more common than
urban-to-rural migrants. That is, net migration is overwhelmingly towards denser areas.

Our findings are hard to reconcile with a spatial equilibrium in the developing world, at least
in a static sense. Instead, they point to a world in which individuals in developing countries
are moving, on net, to cities, which, on average, offer a better mix of consumption and ameni-
ties. This kind of mobility may be limited by a range of frictions, which prevent utility from
being instantaneously equalized. In this way, our conclusions are consistent with the hypoth-
esis of Chauvin, Glaeser, Ma, and Tobio (2016) that a spatial equilibrium emerges only when
economies are sufficiently developed.

The distinction between a model with spatial equilibrium and a model with frictions to mobility
is not simply a theoretical nicety. These two types of models have very different implications
for our understanding of rural-urban differences and for policies and government investments.
In a world in which urban disamenities account for a spatial equilibrium with big differences
in average incomes and productivity between rural and urban locations, policies might focus
on increasing well-being still further in urban areas — for example, by increasing the quality
of housing and transport, reducing pollution, and otherwise investing in cities. These are
surely worthwhile investments, and they would presumably induce further movement from
rural areas to urban ones. But these are not investments that would equalize utility across
locations; if our analysis is correct, such investments would tend to exacerbate those disparities
in utility.

An alternative approach might focus on reducing frictions to movement – perhaps by address-
ing the social disruptions and start-up costs associated with mobility. If a model with frictions is
better matched to the data, investments of this kind might serve to equalize utility across loca-
tions and to allocate labor to its most productive uses. Although our data cannot conclusively
reject the existence of a spatial equilibrium, we argue that the preponderance of the evidence
suggests that, at least for this set of African countries, the data are more consistent with a
model in which developing countries are undergoing dynamic structural change and moving,
albeit with frictions, toward more-productive urban areas and non-agricultural activities.


                                                38
References
ADHVARYU, A., N. KALA, AND A. NYSHADHAM (2014): “Management and Shocks to Worker Pro-
  ductivity: Evidence from Air Pollution Exposure in an Indian Garment Factory,” Unpublished
  Working Paper, University of Michigan.

AHLFELDT, G., S. J. REDDING, D. M. STURM,         AND    N. WOLF (2015): “The Economics of Density:
  Evidence from the Berlin Wall,” Econometrica, 83(6), 2127–2189.

ALBOUY, D. (2012): “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across
  Metropolitan Areas,” Unpublished Working Paper, University of Michigan.

ALLEN, T.,   AND   C. ARKOLAKIS (2014): “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1085–1140.

AVERY, S. (2012): “Lake Turkana and the Lower Omo: Hydrological Impacts of Major Dam and
  Irrigation Developments,” Unpublished Working Paper, African Studies Centre, Oxford.

BANZHAF, H. S.,    AND   R. P. WALSH (2008): “Do People Vote With Their Feet? An Empirical Test
  of Tiebout’s Mechanism,” The American Economic Review, pp. 843–863.

BAUM-SNOW, N.,      AND   R. PAVAN (2012): “Understanding the City Size Wage Gap,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 79(1), 88–127.

BAZZI, S., A. GADUH, A. ROTHENBERG ,        AND   M. WONG (2016): “Skill Transferability, Migration,
  and Development: Evidence from Population Resettlement in Indonesia,” American Economic
  Review, 106(9), 2658–98.

BISHOP, K. C.,   AND   A. D. MURPHY (2011): “Estimating the Willingness to Pay to Avoid Violent
  Crime: A Dynamic Approach,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101(3),
  625–629.

BRUECKNER, J. K.,      AND   S. V. LALL (2015): “Cities in Developing Countries: Fueled by Rural-
  Urban Migration, Lacking in Tenure Security, and Short of Affordable Housing,” in Hand-
  book of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by G. Duranton, J. V. Henderson, and W. Strange,
  vol. 5B, pp. 1399–1451.

BRYAN, G., S. CHOWDHURY,          AND   A. M. MOBARAK (2014): “Underinvestment in a Profitable
  Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 82(5), 1671–
  1748.



                                                    39
BRYAN, G.,    AND   M. MORTEN (2015): “Economic Development and the Spatial Allocation of
  Labor: Evidence From Indonesia,” Unpublished Working Paper, Stanford University.

CALIENDO, L., M. DVORKIN,     AND   F. PARRO (2015): “Trade and Labor Market Dynamics,” Unpub-
  lished Working Paper, Yale University.

CASELLI, F. (2005): “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Handbook of Eco-
  nomic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf., 679-741. Elsevier.

CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL EARTH SCIENCE INFORMATION NETWORK (2015): “Gridded Popu-
  lation of the World, Version 4 (GPWv4), Preliminary Release 2 (2010),” Accessed 23 Septem-
  ber 2015; available: http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/gpw-v4, Columbia University.

CHAUVIN, J. P., E. GLAESER, Y. MA, AND K. TOBIO (2016): “What is Different about Urbanization
  in Rich and Poor Countries? Cities in Brazil, China, India and the United States,” Journal of
  Urban Economics.

CICCONE, A.,   AND    R. E. HALL (1996): “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,”
  American Economic Review, 86(1), 54–70.

COHEN, M. A., R. T. RUST, S. STEEN,        AND   S. T. TIDD (2001): “Willingness-to-Pay for Crime
  Control Programs,” Unpublished Working Paper, Vanderbilt University.

COMBES, P.-P., G. DURANTON,       AND   L. GOBILLON (2008): “Spatial Wage Disparities: Sorting
  Matters!,” Journal of Urban Economics, 63(2), 723–742.

COSTA, D. L., AND M. E. KAHN (2006): “Public Health and Mortality: What Can We Learn from
  the Past?,” in Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, ed. by D. C. Alan Auerbach,
  and J. Quigley. Russell Sage.

CUMMINS, J. R. (2013): “On the Use and Misuse of Child Height-for-Age Z-score in the Demo-
  graphic and Health Surveys,” Unpublished Working Paper, University of California Riverside.

CURRIE, J., E. A. HANUSHEK, M. E. KAHN, M. NEIDELL, AND S. G. RIVKIN (2009): “Does Pollution
  Increase School Absences?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4), 682–694.

CURRIE, J.,   AND   R. WALKER (2011): “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
  E-ZPass,” American Economic Journal. Applied Economics, 3(1), 65.

CUTLER, D.,   AND   G. MILLER (2005): “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Ad-
  vances: the Twentieth-Century United States,” Demography, 42(1), 1–22.


                                                   40
DEMOMBYNES, G.,       AND   B. OZLER (2002): “Crime and Local Inequality in South Africa,” World
  Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2925.

DESMET, K., AND E. ROSSI-HANSBERG (2013): “Urban Accounting and Welfare,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 103(6), 2296–2327.

         (2014): “Spatial Development,” American Economic Review, 104(4), 1211–1243.

DHS (2013): “DHS Sampling and Household Listing Manual,” Discussion paper, ICF Interna-
  tional.

DONALDSON, D.,       AND   R. HORNBECK (2016): “Railroads and American Economic Growth: A
  “Market Access” Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 799–858.

DOXSEY-WHITFIELD , E., K. MACMANUS, S. B. ADAMO, L. PISTOLESI, J. SQUIRES, O. B ORKOVSKA,
  AND   S. R. BAPTISTA (2015): “Taking Advantage of the Improved Availability of Census Data:
  A First Look at the Gridded Population of the World, Version 4,” Papers in Applied Geography,
  1(3), 226–234.

ECKERT, F.,   AND   M. PETERS (2017): “Spatial Structural Change,” Unpublished Working Paper,
  Yale University.

FABER, B.,    AND   C. GAUBERT (2016): “Tourism and Economic Development: Evidence from
  Mexico’s Coastline,” Unpublished Working Paper, UC Berkeley.

FAFCHAMPS, M.,       AND   C. MOSER (2003): “Crime, Isolation and Law Enforcement,” Journal of
  African Economies, 12(4), 625–671.

FAFCHAMPS, M., AND F. SHILPI (2009): “Isolation and Subjective Welfare: Evidence from South
  Asia,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 57(4), 641–683.

FELER, L., AND J. V. HENDERSON (2011): “Exclusionary Policies in Urban Development: Under-
  servicing Migrant Households in Brazilian cities,” Journal of Urban Economics, 69(3), 253–
  272.

FERRÉ, C., F. H. G. FERREIRA,      AND   P. LANJOUW (2012): “Is There a Metropolitan Bias? The
  Relationship Between Poverty and City Size in a Selection of Developing Countries,” World
  Bank Economic Review, 26(3), 351–382.

GEDDES, J. A., R. V. MARTIN, B. L. B OYS,     AND   A. VAN DONKELAAR (2016): “Long-Term Trends
  Worldwide in Ambient NO2 Concentrations Inferred from Satellite Observations,” Environ-
  mental Health Perspectives, 124(3), 281–289.

                                                    41
GLAESER, E.,   AND   J. V. HENDERSON (2017): “Urban Economics for the Developing World: An
  Introduction,” Journal of Urban Economics, 98, 1–5.

GLAESER, E. L.,   AND   J. D. GOTTLIEB (2009): “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies
  and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47(4), 983–
  1028.

GLAESER, E. L., AND D. C. MARE (2001): “Cities and Skills,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(2),
  316–342.

GOLLIN, D., R. JEDWAB,       AND   D. VOLLRATH (2016): “Urbanization with and without Industrial-
  ization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 21, 35–70.

GOLLIN, D., D. LAGAKOS, AND M. E. WAUGH (2014): “The Agricultural Productivity Gap,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 939–993.

GRAFF ZIVIN, J.,     AND   M. NEIDELL (2012): “The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity,”
  American Economic Review, 102(7), 3652–73.

          (2013): “Environment, Health, and Human Capital,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  51(3), 689–730.

HAMORY HICKS, J., M. KLEEMANS, N. Y. LI,         AND   E. MIGUEL (2017): “Reevaluating Agricultural
  Productivity Gaps with Longitudinal Microdata,” Unpublished Working Paper, U.C. Berkeley.

HARRIS, J. R.,    AND   M. P. TODARO (1970): “Migration, Unemployment and Development: A
  Two-Sector Analysis,” American Economic Review, 60(1).

HENDERSON, J. V., A. STOREYGARD ,         AND   U. DEICHMAN (2017): “Has Climate Change Driven
  Urbanization in Africa?,” Journal of Development Economics, 124, 60–82.

HENDERSON, V., A. STOREYGARD,           AND   D. WEIL (2012): “Measuring Economic Growth from
  Outer Space,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 994–1028.

HERRENDORF, B.,      AND   T. SCHOELLMAN (2014): “Wages, Human Capital, and Structural Trans-
  formation,” Unpublished Working Paper, Arizona State University.

JEDWAB, R.,    AND   D. VOLLRATH (2017): “The Urban Mortality Transition and Poor Country
  Urbanization,” Unpublished Working Paper, George Washington University.

KAHN, M. E., AND R. WALSH (2015): “Cities and the Environment,” in Handbook of Regional and
  Urban Economics, ed. by G. J. Duranton, V. Henderson, and W. C. Strange, vol. 5 of Handbook
  of Regional and Urban Economics, chap. 7, pp. 405 – 465. Elsevier.

                                                   42
KESZTENBAUM, L., AND J.-L. ROSENTHAL (2016): “The Democratization of Longevity: How the
  Poor Became Old in Paris, 1880-1913,” in New Approaches to Death in Cities during the Health
  Transition, ed. by D. R. Fariñas, and M. Oris. Springer, Cham.

KINNEY, P. L., M. G. GICHURU, N. VOLAVKA-CLOSE, N. NGO, P. K. NDIBA, A. LAW, A. GACHANJA,
  S. M. GAITA, S. N. CHILLRUD,      AND   E. SCLAR (2011): “Traffic Impacts on PM 2.5 Air Quality
  in Nairobi, Kenya,” Environmental Science and Policy, 14(4), 369–378.

KLINE, P., AND E. MORETTI (2014a): “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
  and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(1), 275–331.

       (2014b): “People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare Economics of Local
  Economic Development Programs,” Annual Review of Economics, 6, 629–662.

LAGAKOS, D., AND M. E. WAUGH (2013): “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productiv-
  ity Differences,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 948–980.

LINARD, C., M. GILBERT, R. W. SNOW, A. M. NOOR,          AND   A. J. TATEM (2012): “Population Distri-
  bution, Settlement Patterns and Accessibility Across Africa in 2010,” PLoS One, 7(2), 1–8.

LUDWIG, J.,   AND   P. J. COOK (2001): “The Benefits of Reducing Gun Violence: Evidence from
  Contingent-Valuation Survey Data,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 22(3), 207–226.

MCMILLAN, M. S.,     AND   D. RODRIK (2011): “Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity
  Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 17143.

MORTEN, M. (2013): “Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in Village India,”
  Unpublished Working Paper, Stanford University.

MORTEN, M., AND J. OLIVEIRA (2017): “The Effects of Roads on Trade and Migration: Evidence
  from a Planned Capital City,” Unpublished Working Paper, U.C. Berkeley.

MUNSHI, K., AND M. ROSENZWEIG (2016): “Networks and Misallocation: Insurance, Migration,
  and the Rural-Urban Wage Gap,” American Economic Review, 106(1), 46–98.

NUNN, N., AND L. WANTCHEKON (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,”
  American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221–52.

PEREZ-HEYDRICH, C., J. WARREN, C. BURGERT,         AND   M. EMCH (2013): “Guidelines on the use of
  DHS GPS data,” Discussion paper, Demographic and Health Surveys.


                                                  43
POPE, C. A. I.,   AND   D. W. DOCKERY (2006): “Health Effects of Fine Particulate Air Pollution:
  Lines that Connect,” Journal of Air and Waste Management Association, 56, 709–742.

RAFFO, J. (2015): “MATCHIT: Stata Module to Match Two Datasets Based on Similar Text
  Patterns,” Statistical Software Components, Boston College Department of Economics.

REDDING, S.,   AND   E. ROSSI-HANSBERG (Forthcoming): “Spatial Development,” Annual Review
  of Economics.

REDDING, S. J.,   AND   D. M. STURM (2008): “The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence from German
  Division and Reunification,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 1766–1797.

RESTUCCIA, D., D. T. YANG,      AND   X. ZHU (2008): “Agriculture and Aggregate Productivity: A
  Quantitative Cross-Country Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 234–250.

ROBACK, J. (1982): “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy, 90(6),
  1257–1278.

ROSEN, S. (1979): “Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life,” in Current Issues in Urban
  Economics, ed. by P. Mieszkowski, and M. Straszheim. Johns Hopkins University Press.

TATEM, A. J., P. W. GETHING, D. L. SMITH,     AND   S. I. HAY (2013): “Urbanization and the Global
  Malaria Recession,” Malaria Journal, 12(1), 133.

TOPEL, R. H. (1986): “Local Labor Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), S111–S143.

VAN   DONKELAAR, A., R. MARTIN, M. BRAUER,           AND   B. B OYS (2015): “Use of Satellite Obser-
  vations for Long-Term Exposure Assessment of Global Concentrations of Fine Particulate
  Matter.,” Environmental Health Perspectives, 123(2), 135–144.

VOLLRATH, D. (2009): “How Important are Dual Economy Effects for Aggregate Productivity?,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 88(2), 325–334.

VRIJHEID, M., D. MARTINEZ, S. MANZANARES, P. DADVAND, A. SCHEMBARI, J. RANKIN,                  AND

  M. NIEUWENHUIJSEN (2011): “Ambient Air Pollution and Risk of Congenital Anomalies: A
  Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Environmental Health Perspectives, 119(5), 598–606.

WHO (2006): Air Quality Guidelines: Global Update 2005: Particulate Matter, Ozone, Nitrogen
  Dioxide, and Sulfur Dioxide. World Health Organization.

         (2014): Indoor air quality guidelines: household fuel combustion. World Health Orga-
  nization.


                                                    44
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (2015): “Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS):
  Children 6-23 months of age who receive a minimum acceptable diet,” Accessed 1 september
  2015; available: here, World Health Organization.

YOUNG, A. (2014): “Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap and Migration,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 129(2), 939–993.




                                            45
                             Appendix (For Online Publication)
              Figure A.1: Consumption and Amenity Gradients in a Spatial Equilibrium




                                                                                                20
            15




                                                                                                19
 Consumption/Amenities
              10




                                                                                                18
                                                                                                     Utility
                                                                                                17
   5




                                                                                                16
                                                                                                15
            0




                         0    2             4            6              8                  10
                                           Population Density

                             Consumption               Amenities                 Utility


Notes: The figure illustrates the relationship between consumption, amenities, and utility as pre-
dicted in a standard spatial equilibrium, described in Section 2, using Ū = 20, α = 0.5, and h = 1.
Consumption c is proxied with an asset and housing quality index, taking an average across 20
African countries.




                                                  46
               Table A.1: Set of Countries Studied

Country                  Households in Sample Country Population
Benin                          17,332                10,050,702
Burkina Faso                   13,617                16,460,141
Cameroon                       14,189                21,699,631
Dem. Republic of Congo         16,344                65,705,093
Ethiopia                       16,037                91,728,849
Ghana                          11,574                25,366,462
Ivory Coast                     9,394                19,839,750
Kenya                           9,033                43,178,141
Liberia                         9,333                 4,190,435
Madagascar                     17,578                22,293,914
Malawi                         24,210                15,906,483
Mali                           10,105                14,853,572
Mozambique                     13,899                25,203,395
Nigeria                        38,170                168,800,000
Senegal                         7,780                13,726,021
Sierra Leone                   12,629                 5,978,727
Tanzania                        9,282                47,783,107
Uganda                          8,939                36,345,860
Zambia                          7,164                14,075,099
Zimbabwe                        9,442                13,724,317
Total                          276,051               769,082,846




                               47
                                                      Figure A.2: Housing Quality

                1

                                                                                                                    BEN
                          .8



                                                                                                                                    CMR
  Lowest Density Quartile




                                                                                                                                      GHA
                                                                                                                                    ZWE
                                                                                                                      CMR          CIV
                                                                                                                                    NGA
                                                                                                                     MWI
                                                                                                                    TZA             SLE
                .6




                                                                                                                                     SEN
                                                                                                             UGA                     LBR
                                                                                                                          ZMB      GHA
                                                                                                                          UGACIV
                                                                                                                         MLI      SEN
                                                                                          KEN                                  NGAZWE
                                                                                                                               TZA
       .4




                                                                                        ETH                          BEN
                                                                                                                           BFA
                                                                                                 BFA
                                                                                        MWI                       SLE
                                                                                          MDG
                                                                                         MDG
                .2




                                                                                                    MOZCOD
                                                                                                                    COD           LBR
                                                                                                                                 ZMB
                                                                            MOZ               MLI
                                        ETH
                                                KEN
                0




                               0                .2              .4            .6                             .8                         1
                                                             Highest Density Quartile

                                                        Finished roof        Finished Wall
              1         .8
Lowest Density Quartile
              .6




                                                                                                                                 CMR
     .4




                                                                                                                          GHA
                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                             SEN
                                                                                                                           CIV
                                                                                                             BEN
              .2




                                                                         ETH             MLI                       ZWE
                                                       CMR                    NGA MOZ      SEN
                                           MLI                             MDG                                            ZWE
                                   ETH            MWI             GHATZA
                                                                   BFA UGA COD KEN
                                                                          ZMB    CIV
                                     MWI
                                     BFA MDG SLECOD
                                       UGA       MOZLBR TZA ZMB
                                                   BEN            LBR
                                                                  KEN       SLE
              0




                               0                .2             .4            .6                          .8                             1
                                                            Highest Density Quartile

                                                            Flush toilet          Electricity




                                                                     48
                       Table A.2: Child Health Characteristics by Density

                                                         Population Density Quartile
                                                          Q1        Q2        Q3        Q4
                Anemic                                    .69       .68       .64       .6
                                                                   0-0†      3-0†      7-0†
                Stunted (low height for age)               .4       .4        .38       .29
                                                                    0-0       3-1      11-0
                Wasted (low height for weight)             .1       .1        .09       .09
                                                                    1-0       3-1      6-1
                Below minimum diet                        .93       .91       .9        .87
                                                                    1-0       2-0      5-0

Note: This table reports child health across quartiles across our set of 20 countries. The two numbers
below the averages x- y represent the number of countries with a difference between the least dense
quartile (Q1) that is statistically significant at the one-percent level and either negative (x) or positive
( y).
†
    We do not have data on anemia for Kenya, Liberia, Nigeria and Zambia, so the total number of countries
for this variable is 16.




                                                    49
                                 Figure A.3: Outdoor Air Pollution – NO2

                                                                                      TGO         NGA
              .5




                                                                                            BEN
                                                                     GHA                    SEN
                        .4




                                                                           BFA
Lowest Density Quartile




                                          CIV
              .3




                                            SLE
                                                         ZWE

                                                     MWI MOZ
                                                     UGA
                                                     ZMB
                                                    TZA
     .2




                                    MDG                 CMR
                                                      KEN      MLI

                                 LBR
              .1




                                                               NER
              0




                             0    .1               .2            .3              .4                     .5
                                                Highest Density Quartile

                                                         NO2




                                                       50
            Table A.3: Pollution Differences by Density Quartile

                                               Population Density Quartile
                                            Q1         Q2            Q3        Q4
     Nitrogen Dioxide                      .27         .28           .26       .27
                                                       6-7           8-6       9-6
     PM2.5                                 20.1      20.42          19.1     18.56
                                                       4-6           9-5      12-6
     Cook inside with solid fuel           .63         .64           .58       .38
                                                      0-4†           5-3†     15-1†

Note: This table reports pollution exposure quartiles across our set of 20 countries.
The two numbers below the averages x- y represent the number of countries with a
difference between the least dense quartile (Q1) that is statistically significant at the
one-percent level and either negative (x) or positive ( y). Here, we use within-country
quartiles rather than across-country quartiles to ensure that all countries have observa-
tions across quartiles; results are similar if we use across-country quartiles and exclude
                                                                †
countries that do not have observations across all quartiles.       The Tanzania DHS does
not contain information on the type of cooking fuel and indoor cooking, so the total
number of countries for this variable is 19.




                                           51
                                                 NO2 (micrograms/cubic meter) India and China                                               PM25 (micrograms/cubic meter) India and China
                                                 0       2       4       6         8       10                                                0        20        40          60        80




                                  2
                                                                                                                             2




     China
                                                                                                China




52
     India
                                                                                                India




                                    4
                                                                                                                               4




                     Log of population density
                                                                                                                Log of population density




                                  6
                                                                                                                             6




     United States
                                                                                                United States




                                                 1        1.5        2        2.5          3                                                6            6.5            7             7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure A.4: Outdoor Air Pollution in China, India and the United States




                                                      NO2 (micrograms/cubic meter) U.S.                                                          PM25 (micrograms/cubic meter) U.S.
Figure A.5: Electricity by Highest Education of Household Head in Nigeria




           .61
             .8
  Electricity
 .4          .2
             0




                  4               5              6            7                    8               9
                                           Log of population density


                         Histogram of hh heads with complete secondary or more schooling
            .15
 Fraction
            .1
            .05
            0




                                          Log of population density


                  Histogram of hh heads with complete primary and incomplete secondary schooling
            .15
 Fraction
            .1
            .05
            0




                                          Log of population density


                           Histogram of hh heads with no or incomplete primary schooling
            .2
 Fraction
            .15
            .1
            .05
            0




                                          Log of population density




                                                    53
       Table A.4: Secondary Amenity Differences by Density Quartile

                                             Population Density Quartile
                                             Q1        Q2         Q3        Q4
            Lack of food                     .44       .47        .43       .36
                                                       1-1       2-1       11-1
            Lack of medicine                 .52       .52        .47        .4
                                                       0-1       1-0       11-0
            Anxiety                          .34       .34        .33       .29
                                                       0-1†      2-1†      3-0†
            Trust anyone                     .22       .22        .22       .14
                                                       0-1       2-1        7-0
            Trust relatives                  .87       .85        .83       .81
                                                       3-0       3-0        5-0
            Trust neighbor                   .67       .65        .6        .52
                                                       2-0       5-0        9-0
            Trust own ethnic group           .67       .65        .59       .55
                                                       0-0†      1-1†      5-0†

Note: The first three columns report the average differences from the second, third and
fourth density quartiles relative to the first (least dense) quartile across our set of 20
countries. The fourth column reports the average standard deviation across regions
across our set of 20 countries. Numbers below the average differences are the number
of countries with a difference that is statistically significant at the one-percent level.
†
    Data on anxiety and trust towards one’s own ethnic group is not available for Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Niger, Sierra Leone and Togo; Zimbabwe also
does not record information on trust towards one’s own ethnic group. The total number
of countries for anxiety and trust towards one’s own ethnic group is therefore 13 and
12, respectively.




                                            54
A. Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) Data

1.1. DHS sample

While the DHS aim to make survey instruments and samples comparable across countries,
the exact sampling differs according to the particular survey.18 The target population of most
DHS surveys are women aged 15-49 and children under the age of five living in residential
households with the most common sampling following a two-stage cluster sampling procedure
(DHS, 2013). If a recent census is available, the sampling frame of the census is used to
define primary sampling units which are usually enumeration areas. Alternative sample frames
include lists of electoral zones, estimated structures per pixel derived from high-resolution
satellite imagery or lists of administrative units. Clusters will then be stratified depending on
the number of domains that are desired for the particular survey, where a typical stratification
is first at the geographical level and then at rural/urban clusters. In the first stage, from each
of the strata a random sample of enumeration areas is selected inversely proportional to size.
Unless a reliable listing of households exists, households will be listed for each of the selected
primary sampling units. In the second stage, households are selected with equal probability.

If the sampling frame is not specifically selected to match the population along the lines of pop-
ulation density, it is likely that the distribution of the survey sample according to population
density might not match that of the entire population. In practice, the cases we have examined
show very little effort to oversample or undersample with respect to population density. For
Tanzania, we can compare the population density distribution of the Afrobarometer and DHS
clusters with those of the overall population from the census data, where we weight the pop-
ulation density of enumeration areas by the population. As is evident from Figure A.6, both
the Afrobarometer survey and the DHS appear to capture a sample that covers a wide range of
population densities.




 18
      For further information, see: http://www.dhsprogram.com.


                                                     55
Figure A.6: Distribution of population, DHS and Afrobarometer respondents in Tanzania




                                           .4.3
                       Frequency of census EAs
                                 .2        .1
                                           0




                                                                    0    4                        8   12
                                                                        Log of population density
                                           .4
                       Frequency of DHS Households
                        .1          .2     0  .3




                                                                0       4                        8    12
                                                                         Log of population density
                                           .4
                       Frequency of Afrobarometer Individuals
                           .1           .2 0        .3




                                                                0       4                        8    12
                                                                         Log of population density


           Notes: The top figure shows the distribution of the population using the 2002
           enumeration area census data and the total population in each enumeration
           area as sample weights. The middle graph shows the distribution of population
           densities from the DHS data. The bottom graph shows distribution of clusters
           from Afrobarometer data. For expositional simplicity the top graph excludes
           112 enumeration areas that have a log of population density above 12.




                                                                               56
                                                               Table A.5: Surveys

                   Household                     Malaria                        Migration                     Crime (Afrobarometer)   Crime (LSMS)
     Benin         Benin 2011-12 Standard DHS    Benin 2011-12 Standard DHS                                             x
     BurkinaFaso   Burkina Faso 2010 Standard    Burkina Faso 2010 Standard
                   DHS                           DHS
     Cameroon      Cameroon 2011 Standard DHS    Cameroon 2011 Standard DHS
     DRC           Congo Democratic Republic     Congo Democratic Republic      Congo Democratic Republic
                   2013-14 Standard DHS          2013-14 Standard DHS           2007 Standard DHS
     Ethiopia      Ethiopia 2011 Standard DHS    Ethiopia 2011 Standard DHS     Ethiopia 2005 Standard DHS                            2013/14 Ethiopian
                                                                                                                                      Socioeconomic Sur-
                                                                                                                                      vey
     Ghana         Ghana 2008 Standard DHS                                      Ghana 2008 Standard DHS                x
     IvoryCoast    Cote d’Ivoire 2011-12 Stan-   Cote d’Ivoire 2011-12 (14)
                   dard DHS                      Standard DHS
     Kenya         Kenya 2008-09 Standard DHS                                   Kenya 2008-09 Standard DHS             x
     Liberia       Liberia 2013 Standard DHS     Liberia 2011 MIS               Liberia 2007 Standard DHS
     Madagascar    Madagascar 2008-09 Standard   Madagascar 2013 MIS DHS-VI     Madagascar 2008-09 Standard            x
57




                   DHS                                                          DHS
     Malawi        Malawi 2010 Standard DHS      Malawi 2012 MIS                Malawi 2010 Standard DHS               x              LSMS 2004/05
     Mali          Mali 2012-13 Standard DHS     Mali 2012-13 Standard DHS      Mali 2006 Standard DHS                 x
     Mozambique    Mozambique 2011 Standard      Mozambique 2011 Standard                                              x
                   DHS                           DHS
     Nigeria       Nigeria 2013 Standard DHS     Nigeria 2010 MIS               Nigeria 2008 Standard DHS              x              NGHS, Panel Wave
                                                                                                                                      2, 2012-2013; Post-
                                                                                                                                      harvest household
                                                                                                                                      questionnaire
     Senegal       Senegal 2010-11 Standard      Senegal   2010-11   Standard   Senegal 2005 Standard DHS              x
                   DHS                           DHS
     SierraLeone   Sierra Leone 2013 Standard                                   Sierra Leone 2008 Standard
                   DHS                                                          DHS
     Tanzania      Tanzania 2010 Standard DHS    Tanzania 2011-12 Standard                                             x              Tanzania NPS 2008
                                                 AIS
     Uganda        Uganda 2011 Standard DHS      Uganda 2009 MIS                                                       x              Uganda         NPS
                                                                                                                                      2009/10
     Zambia        Zambia 2007 Standard DHS                                     Zambia 2007 Standard DHS               x
     Zimbabwe      Zimbabwe 2010-11 Standard
                   DHS
1.2. Linking DHS data with population density data

To link the DHS data with population density, we draw a buffer of 5km around each cluster and
extract the average population density around each cluster. We perform these calculations in
WGS1984, since the different areas of the pixel sizes when moving away from the equator has
been taken into account when constructing the population density grid, which is defined as the
population count divided by the area. Many urban DHS clusters are in proximity closer than 5
km so that buffer polygons around clusters are overlapping. Therefore, we compute our zonal
statistics using the Spatial Analyst Supplemental Tools in ArcGIS, a supplemental toolbox that
allows computing zonal statistics for overlapping polygons. All computations were performed
in ArcGIS 10.4.

1.3. Spatial linking of DHS

                           Figure A.7: DHS clusters in Dar Es Salaam




     Notes: Figure shows a 5km circle around a DHS cluster in Dar Es Salaam; the gridded data come
     from WorldPop.



1.4. DHS Variables

The main variables to measure durables are whether the household has a television (hv208=1),
mobile phone, or landline (hv221=1 or hv243a=1). For housing consumption, we examine

                                                  58
whether the household has electricity (hv206=1), running water (hv201<21), a constructed
floor (hv213>13), a flush toilet (hv205<20), finished walls (hv214>=30), a finished roof
(hv215>=30) and the number of sleeping rooms per adult over five (hv216/(hv009-hv014)).
For the highest level of education completed by the household head we use variable hv109.
Indoor cooking is determined using variables hv226 and hv241. Variable hv204 captures the
time required to fetch water.

The World Health Organization (2015) defines a minimum acceptable diet as follows:

“The composite indicator of a minimum acceptable diet is calculated from: (i) the proportion
of breastfed children aged 6-23 months who had at least the minimum dietary diversity and
the minimum meal frequency during the previous day and (ii) the proportion of non-breastfed
children aged 6-23 months who received at least two milk feedings and had at least the min-
imum dietary diversity not including milk feeds and the minimum meal frequency during the
previous day.

Dietary diversity is present when the diet contained four or more of the following food groups:

   • grains, roots and tubers;

   • legumes and nuts;

   • dairy products (milk, yogurt, cheese);

   • flesh foods (meat, fish, poultry, liver or other organs);

   • eggs;

   • vitamin A-rich fruits and vegetables; and

   • other fruits and vegetables.

The minimum daily meal frequency is defined as:

   • twice for breastfed infants aged 6-8 months;

   • three times for breastfed children aged 9-23 months;

   • four times for non-breastfed children aged 6-23 months.”

To compute a child’s minimum dietary diversity from the DHS, we use data on breastfeeding
(m4), age of the child (hw1), the number of times the child ate (m39), the type of food groups
the child consumed (v414a-v414j), the consumption of powdered/tinned/fresh milk and infant

                                               59
formula (469e and 469f). If the survey is from Phase 5, there is no information on milk feedings
for children who are no longer breastfed; in this case, we calculate the minimum acceptable
diet only for children who are breastfed.

Migration status is determined using the years lived in the current location (v104) and the type
of the previous residence which is classified into capital, large city; city; town; countryside; and
abroad (v105). Following Young (2014), we exclude individuals who lived abroad, and check
that all variables are coded consistently across countries; for example, abroad is sometimes
coded as 4 and sometimes as 5.

Our data for malaria incidence comes from a combination of DHS, MIS and AIS. In a subset
of countries, blood samples were collected for children aged 6-59 months as part of the DHS
data collection in households that were selected for the men’s questionnaire (every one out
of eight households). If the data are not available as part of the DHS, we use data from the
most recent geo-referenced AIS survey or Malaria Indicators Survey (MIS) during which blood
samples from children aged 0-59 or 6-59 months were taken depending on the specific survey.
Table A.5 shows the exact survey used for each country. Malaria tests were administered via
rapid diagnostic testing and blood smear microscopy.19 We construct a dummy variable that is
equal to one if the malaria rapid test for a child was positive (hml25).


B. Afrobarometer

2.1. Geo-locating Afrobarometer respondents

Afrobarometer surveys collect data on attitudes towards democracy and governance, as well
as a range of other quality-of-life measures.20 The Afrobarometer surveys do not record coor-
dinates of respondents, but record the village, district and region names. The 2011 round pro-
vides four different administrative names. We use a matching algorithm that matches village
names and other provided administrative names to locations as listed in gazetteers; specifi-
cally, we follow Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) and use the geonames gazeteer available on
www.geonames.com. This website provides a list of locations, each assigned an ID along with
several names: the geographical name of the point in utf8 and plain ascii characters; alter-
native names and the associated latitude and longitude coordinate. There is also auxiliary
information such as the modification date of each entry, administrative codes, elevation, and
feature classes. If a name is associated with several entries, we keep the most recent entry.

Our matching algorithm uses a mixture of exact matches and fuzzy matches in multiple stages
 19
      Note that in Madagascar, areas without malaria have been excluded from the survey.
 20
      For further information, see http://www.afrobarometer.org.


                                                      60
(depending on the survey round, between 13 and 21). Whenever a location name is identified,
we assign it the latitude and longitude and remove it from the dataset that is fed into the next
stage. In essence, matching is achieved in the following way: first, we perform a series of
exact matches based on the village name from Afrobarometer with the asciiname listed in the
gazetteer; if there are no exact matches with the village name and the asciiname, we search
through the next four alternative names listed in the gazeteer for the specific location. In this
first stage we find almost forty percent of locations. We then use the most precise administrative
classification. For example, if the data set has information on the village name, district and
region, this would be the district. We perform the exact same series of matches on the district
name, using again the ascii name and four possible alternative names listed in the gazetteer.
In rounds three and four of the survey in which we have only district and region names in
addition to the village names, this step finds 49–52 percent of the locations.

Third, we match on the region name which finds another four to six percent of the sample.
Finally, to catch any remaining misspellings, we perform a fuzzy match based on similar text
patterns between the village name and the ascii name using a command developed by Raffo
(2015). We use a similarity score of above 0.70 and a vectorial decomposition algorithm (3-
gram). This finds another one to three percent of locations. In total, we are able to match
between 92 and 95 percent of individuals in each round.

In addition to random checks of the identified locations, we use the 2005 data to check the
consistency between our algorithm and the location data of Nunn and Wantchekon (2011). For
the subset of locations for which they provide geo-locations, we find that the median distance
between their location and our locations is 12.5 km. Further, considering that the population
density data vary largely at the district and region levels, we expect the difference to be even
smaller when looking at the resulting population densities. Indeed, the correlation coefficient
between the population density from their and our data is 0.65 with a p-value of 0.000.

We use variables related to feeling unsafe walking in one’s neighborhood (q9a), fear of crime in
one’s own home (q9b); theft (q9b); physical attack (q9c); trust in general (q83); trust towards
relatives (q84a); trust toward neighbors (q84b); trust toward one’s own ethnic group (q84c);
frequency of lack of food (q8a) and medicine (q8c); and anxiety (q96b).


C. Pollution data

Our pollution data for PM2.5 and NO2 concentrations come from van Donkelaar, Martin,
Brauer, and Boys (2015) and Geddes, Martin, Boys, and van Donkelaar (2016), respectively.
As the date for the Gridded Population of the World v4 (GPWv4) data is approximately 2010,


                                               61
we take the pollution measures that are closest in time: the tri-annual mean (2009-2011) for
both PM2.5 series; for NO2, we have the exact year 2010. The estimated PM2.5 and NO2
concentrations are available at a resolution of 0.1 decimal degrees (about 10km at the equa-
tor). We construct a fishnet of the same resolution and, for each pixel, compute the average
pollution measure and the average population density from the GPWv4. PM2.5 is measured
in µg/m3 , while NO2 is measured in ppb (parts per billion). Following Vrijheid, Martinez,
Manzanares, Dadvand, Schembari, Rankin, and Nieuwenhuijsen (2011), we use a conversion
of 1ppb= 1.88 f µg/m3 , which assumes ambient pressure of 1 atmosphere and a temperature
of 25 degrees celsius.




                                            62
                      Table A.6: Afrobarometer Sample

                         Individuals     Round 3 Round 4 Round 5
       Benin                 3,543            x           x            x
       Burkina Faso          2,255                        x            x
       Cameroon              1,072                                     x
       Cote D’Ivoire         1,192                                     x
       Ghana                 4,089            x           x            x
       Kenya                 4,659            x           x            x
       Liberia               2,282                        x            x
       Madagascar            3,881            x           x            x
       Malawi                4,784            x           x            x
       Mali                  3,663            x           x            x
       Mozambique            4,744            x           x            x
       Niger                 1,199                                     x
       Nigeria               6,961            x           x            x
       Senegal               3,596            x           x            x
       Sierra Leone          1,190                                     x
       Tanzania              4,791            x           x            x
       Togo                  1,056                                     x
       Uganda                7,191            x           x            x
       Zambia                3,590            x           x            x
       Zimbabwe              4,344            x           x            x

Note: Column (2) shows the number of individuals in our sample for each of the coun-
tries; columns (3)–(5) indicate when a country was added to the Afrobarometer sample.
Round 3 took place in 2005, Round 4 in 2008, and Round 5 in 2011.




                                         63
                                  Figure A.8: Pollution and population density in Nigeria



                       40
     PM2.5 (micrograms per cubic meter)
               20      10   30




                                          3       4               5                6               7
                                                       Log of population density

                                               PM2.5           PM2.5 (dust and sea salt removed)
                       .52
     NO2 (micrograms per cubic meter)
            .48        .46 .5




                                          3       4               5                6               7
                                                       Log of population density

                                                                    NO2


Notes: The figure shows a kernel-weighted local polynomial regression of the level
of pollution on the log of population density in Nigeria using data from the entire
country, and plotting 95 percent confidence intervals. The top panel shows the results
for PM2.5, and the bottom panel shows NO2 levels across population density space.
Taking the log of population density removes uninhabited pixels. We remove the top
and bottom five percentiles of the population density distribution.




                                                              64
                                                        Figure A.9: Crime - LSMS



                                      Ethiopia                                                                Malawi
                               Theft, robbery, other violence                                        Anything stolen, personal attack
.01 .02 .03




                                                                            .4 .42 .44 .46 .48
0




                         2       4       6        8               10                             2      4       6        8              10
                              Log of population density                                              Log of population density


                                       Nigeria                                                              Tanzania
                         Theft/kidnapping/hijacking/robbery/assault                                  Anything stolen/personal assault
.02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                            .2
                                                                            .15
                                                                            .1
                                                                            .05
0




                         2       4       6        8               10                             2      4       6        8              10
                              Log of population density                                              Log of population density


                                       Uganda
                                   Theft/violence/conflict
.02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12




                         2       4       6        8               10
                              Log of population density




                                                                       65
