                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PATENT EXAMINER SPECIALIZATION

                                         Cesare Righi
                                       Timothy Simcoe

                                     Working Paper 23913
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23913


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




We thank Jim Bessen, Christian Catalini, Iain Cockburn, Stuart Graham, Deepak Hegde, Evgeny
Klochikhin, Alan Marco, Michael Meurer, Arti Rai, Bhaven Sampat, Andrew Toole, Joel
Waldfogel, Heidi Williams along with seminar participants at the BU Technology Policy
Research Initiative (IP Day), the BU Strategy & Innovation department, the Copenhagen
Business School, the Max Planck Institute for Innovation and Competition and the NBER
productivity lunch for useful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Cesare Righi and Timothy Simcoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Examiner Specialization
Cesare Righi and Timothy Simcoe
NBER Working Paper No. 23913
October 2017
JEL No. H83,K11,L98,O3,O34

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the matching of patent applications to examiners at the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office. Using test statistics originally developed to identify industry agglomeration, we find
strong evidence that examiners specialize in particular technologies, even within relatively
homogeneous art units. Examiner specialization is more pronounced in the biotechnology and
chemistry fields, and less in computers and software. Evidence of specialization becomes weaker,
but does not completely disappear, if we condition on technology sub-classes. There is no
evidence that certain examiners specialize in applications that have greater importance or broader
claims. More specialized examiners have a lower grant rate and produce a larger narrowing of
claim-scope during the examination process. We discuss implications for instrumental variables
based on examiner characteristics.


Cesare Righi
Boston University
School of Law
Technology & Policy Research Initiative
765 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
crighi@bu.edu

Timothy Simcoe
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
tsimcoe@bu.edu
1       Introduction
In 2015, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) received 589,410
utility patent applications. Matching each application to a qualified examiner
is a fundamental part of the examination process. This matching proceeds in
two steps. First, each application is assigned to an “art unit” comprised of
several examiners who specialize in a particular technology. Then the appli-
cation is assigned to an individual examiner within that art unit. Motivated
by the accounts in Cockburn, Kortum & Stern (2002) and Lemley & Sampat
(2012), several studies have suggested that the second step in this process is
more-or-less random, and then, building on an idea first proposed by Sampat
& Williams (2015), used examiner characteristics as an instrumental variable
for examination outcomes.1
    We re-examine the random matching assumption, and find strong evi-
dence of technological specialization by patent examiners within art units.
Examiner specialization is more pronounced in the art units that exam-
ine Biotechnology and Chemistry patent applications, and less so in the
computer-related technology centers. Evidence of specialization becomes
weaker, but does not completely disappear, when we condition on U.S. Patent
Classification System (USPC) sub-classes. However, we find no evidence that
certain examiners specialize in applications that have greater importance or
broader claims. Finally, we show that more specialized examiners have a
lower grant rate and produce a larger narrowing of claim-scope during the
examination process.
    These findings have implications for instrumental variables strategies based
on examiner characteristics. Random assignment would suffice to make leave-
one-out grant rates (or any other examiner characteristic) uncorrelated with
potential outcomes. But when examiners specialize, their individual charac-
teristics are likely to be correlated with technology, suggesting an alternative
path through which the instrument could influence outcomes. To see whether
this matters in practice, we estimate “first stage” OLS regressions for two
    1
   Papers adopting variants on this identification strategy include Farre-Mensa, Hegde
& Ljungqvist (2015), Feng & Jaravel (2016), Gaulé (2015), Kuhn (2016), Kuhn, Roin &
Thompson (2016), and Sampat & Williams (2015).


                                          1
examination outcomes (patent issuance and first-claim scope) and find that
adding USPC subclass fixed-effects modestly changes our estimates. This
does not necessarily invalidate examiner-based instruments. However, it im-
plies that the IV strategy rests on a stronger assumption than is typically
acknowledged: potential outcomes must be uncorrelated with (unobserved)
technological heterogeneity, despite observed technological sorting.
    This is the first paper to systematically test the random matching hypoth-
esis across all of the technology areas examined by the USPTO. Our methods
for detecting specialization are borrowed from the literature on industry ag-
glomeration (Mori, Nishikimi & Smith 2005). Specifically, we compute a pair
of test statistics that ask whether application characteristics (e.g. technology
subclass) are less dispersed across examiners than we would expect under
random assignment.2 Our main tests are performed at the art-unit-year
level, and we examine the entire distribution of p-values for various applica-
tion characteristics, including technology subclass, assignee, and indicators
of patent value (family size) and scope (first independent claim length).
    At a substantive level, our findings illustrate how the USPTO manages a
tension between efficiency and fairness (Merges 1999). One way to promote
fairness is through uniform application of patentability criteria, but prior
research suggests that this is difficult. Some examiners are simply tougher
than others (Sampat & Williams 2015, Kuhn et al. 2016), and experienced
examiners are more lenient on average, partly because of time constraints
(Lemley & Sampat 2012, Frakes & Wasserman 2014). Random matching
provides another path to fairness, but forgoes the efficiency benefits of fur-
ther technological specialization. Our analysis shows that the amount of
specialization varies across art units, leading some applicants to get tougher
examiners on average. But we find no evidence that particularly important
applications (with large families) or broad applications (with short first in-
dependent claims) are assigned to specific examiners.
    We discuss two plausible explanations for our finding that examiners are
   2
    These methods focus specifically on the null hypothesis of random assignment, unlike
IV falsification tests that ask the slightly different question of whether examiner and
application characteristics are correlated.



                                           2
more specialized in Chemistry and Biotechnology than in the computer-
related art units. One possibility is that “generalist examiners” are able
to evaluate computing inventions, while more specialized skills and knowl-
edge are required in chemistry and life sciences. Another possibility is that
the USPC technology classification system works better in chemistry and
biotech, so we fail to observe much of the specialization that takes place
within computer-related art units. Distinguishing between these hypotheses
is a good topic for future research.
    Finally, we find a positive correlation between specialization and a more
stringent examination process, suggesting that it is easier for examiners who
specialize to find relevant prior art. Under random matching, these esti-
mates have a causal interpretation. Alternatively, they remain important for
showing how non-random matching is related to examination outcomes.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes how the USPTO
assigns applications to examiners. Section 3 explains our methods and data.
Section 4 discusses results and implications, and Section 5 concludes.


2       Patent Examiner Assignment at the USPTO
When a patent application is filed, the Office of Patent Application Pro-
cessing reviews the formality requirements of the application and assigns it
a serial number. A contractor defines the technological classification of the
application using USPC class and subclass codes.3 Each application has at
least one mandatory classification, which is defined as a unique combination
of class and subclass identifiers. The current version of the USPC has roughly
450 classes and more than 150,000 subclasses.
    The USPTO has eight Technology Centers (TCs) responsible for exami-
nation of utility patent applications in broad technological areas. Each TC
    3
    The two main purposes of the USPC are to facilitate the retrieval of technical docu-
ments and to ease the allocation of applications to the examining personnel specialized in
a particular technology. For details, see http://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/
patents/resources/classification/overview.pdf. Although it was replaced by the
Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) on January 1, 2013, the USPC is the relevant
classification for the entire period of our study.


                                            3
is comprised of several art units, or teams of patent examiners who specialize
in a particular technology. Technological classifications are used to assign
each new patent application to a specific art unit.4
    Within each art unit the initial assignment of a new application is handled
by a Supervisory Patent Examiner (SPE). The SPE can refine the techno-
logical classification of a new application if it is incorrect, or request that an
application be transferred to another art unit.5 But in most cases, the SPE
will assign the application to an examiner within her art unit. This is the
step we analyze below.
    Previous research documents that SPEs have substantial discretion in
examiner assignment. Some SPEs interviewed by Lemley & Sampat (2012)
mention assigning applications to examiners essentially randomly within sub-
classes. Other SPEs give the oldest unassigned application to an examiner
when she finishes the examination of another application. Although these
practices suggest random matching, some SPEs may encourage technologi-
cal specialization of examiners within their art-unit, and specialization could
also emerge through trading among individual examiners. Cockburn et al.
(2002) suggest that the degree of technological specialization varies across
art units – in some art units an individual examiner is responsible for almost
all applications in a specific technology class, and in others the examiners
are less specialized.
    Although the USPTO constantly monitors the performance of art units
and examiners to ensure a certain level of quality of the examination process,
the assignment to a particular art unit and to a specific examiner can have
important consequences for an application. Different practices across art
units and the personal approach of each examiner can affect whether an
application is eventually granted (Sampat & Williams 2015), how quickly a
decision is reached (Farre-Mensa et al. 2015), and the scope and strength of
an issued patent (Kuhn et al. 2016). This variation in standards led Cockburn
   4
      For the current list of classes and subclasses examined by each art unit,
see          http://www.uspto.gov/patents-application-process/patent-search/
understanding-patent-classifications/patent-classification.
    5
      The Manual of Patent Examining Procedure sec. 903.08 describes the rules governing
assignment and transfer of applications between art units.


                                           4
et al. (2002) to conclude that “there may be as many patent offices as patent
examiners.”


3       Methods and Data
We use two statistical tests originally developed to analyze industry agglom-
eration. In our application, patent examiners are analogous to cities, and
technology subclasses (or other application characteristics) are analogous to
industries. Each test compares observed frequencies to the distribution under
a null of random assignment.


3.1     Agglomeration Test Statistics
3.1.1    Divergence Index

The D-index was developed by Mori et al. (2005), building on Kullback &
Leibler (1951), and is based on the concept of relative entropy.6 Suppose
we have a set of applications characterized by category i ∈ I = {1, ..., I},
assigned to a set of examiners denoted by r ∈ R = {1, ..., R}. In our applica-
tion, the categories i may correspond to USPC subclasses, assignees or any
other predetermined observable characteristic of a patent application. Un-
der random allocation, examiner r’s share of all applications from category i
should equal her share of the overall population.
    To formalize that idea, define nir as the number of applications in cat-
egory i assigned to examiner r, and Ni = R
                                             P
                                               r=1 nir as the total number of
applications in
              PI
                 category i. The reference distribution p0 = (p0r : r ∈ R),
                   nir
where p0r = Pi=1I      measures examiner r’s share of all applications, is the
                i=1 Ni
share we expect her to be allocated from each category under the null of
random assignment.
    Let pir denote the true probability that a randomly sampled application
in category i is assigned to examiner r, so the distribution across examiners
    6
    Statisticians often refer to the D-index as a G test statistic. The main advantage of a
G-test relative to a chi-squared test of independence occurs when some cells in a frequency
table have very small expected counts, which is the case in our application.


                                            5
for the category is pi = (pir : r ∈ R). We can measure the divergence
between pi and p0 using the relative entropy of pi with respect to p0 , called
the D-index by Mori et al. (2005):
                                                                    
                                             X                   pir
                             D(pi |p0 ) =          pir ln             .
                                             r∈R
                                                                 p0r

D(pi |p0 ) is nonnegative, achieves its minimum at pi = p0 and its local maxima
when all applications in category i are assigned to a single examiner.
    To estimate the D-index, we use the observed data to estimate the prob-
abilities pir , with p̂ir = nNiri , thus estimating:
                                                                     
                                             X                   p̂ir
                             D(p̂i |p0 ) =         p̂ir ln             .                  (1)
                                             r∈R
                                                                 p0r

These probability estimates converge to the true value exponentially fast with
the increase in sample size for a given category Ni .
    As shown by Mori et al. (2005) the D-index can be related to the the log
likelihood ratio (λ):
                                                          
                         ln λ X nir                 p̂ir
                       −     =         ln                      = D(p̂i |p0 ).
                          Ni   r∈R
                                   N i              p0r

   Given that −2 ln λ is distributed asymptotically as a chi-square with R−1
degrees of freedom, we can use this relationship to test the null hypothesis
that pi = p0 (see Mori et al. (2005) for details).7 In our application, the
number of tests will equal the number of categories (e.g. one per technology
subclass) and we examine the distribution of p-values from all of these tests
conditional on a given sample-size threshold (e.g. Ni > 20).

3.1.2    Multinomial Test for Agglomeration and Dispersion

MTAD computes multinomial likelihood functions for an allocation of agents
to a set of discrete locations. In our application, the agents are patent ap-
   7
     In practice, we compute 2Ni D(p̂i |p0 ) and use it for a chi-square test with R−1 degrees
of freedom.


                                              6
plications and locations correspond to examiners. If the likelihood of the ob-
served data is lower (higher) than the likelihood under random choice, MTAD
indicates that the agents are agglomerated (dispersed). This approach differs
from the D-index because the statistic is computed for an entire art unit, and
because it can detect whether deviations from random assignment are due
to agglomeration or over-dispersion.
      To provide a brief formal description of MTAD, we adapt the notation
provided in Rysman & Greenstein (2005). Suppose we have R examiners,
each receiving nr applications, with r = 1, ..., R. The variable nr is bounded
between n = 0 and n = ∞ and distributed according to the discrete distri-
bution f (nr ). Each examiner can be assigned applications of c types. The
unconditional probability of being assigned type c is pc for c = 1, ..., C. The
observed number of applications of type c assigned to examiner r is xcr . De-
fine xr as the vector of elements x1r , ..., xCr , p as the vector of probabilities
p1 , ..., pC , n as the R×1 vector of applications assigned to each examiner, and
X as the R × C matrix of allocations. If examiners are assigned applications
independently, the likelihood of observing outcome xr for examiner r is the
multinomial pdf
                                                        
                                                 nr         x1       xC
                     L(xr , nr , p) =        1         C
                                                           p1 r ... pCr
                                            xr , ..., xr

and the average log-likelihood for the data is

                                     R                  
                                  1X
                     l(X, n, p) =       ln L(xr , nr , p) .
                                  R r=1

    We want to compare this log-likelihood with the value we would observe
under independent random assignment. Let the random variable l(f, p) be
distributed according to the distribution l(X, n, p) if X was actually drawn
from a multinomial distribution and nr was drawn from f . Then the expected
log-likelihood under random allocation is given by

                        X X                                          
         E[l(f, p)] =                   ln L(z, nr , p) × L(z, nr , p) f (nr )
                        nr   z∈Φ(nr )


                                             7
where Φ(nr ) is the set of all possible allocations of the nr applications. To
compute E[l(f, p)] we treat p as known and take f to be the empirical
distribution of nr . The MTAD test-statistic is

                       t(X, n, p) = l(X, n, p) − E[l(f, p)].                        (2)

    A negative (positive) value of t(X, n, p) signals agglomeration (disper-
sion) of patent applications compared to the null of random assignment.
This statistic is distributed asymptotically normal and we use simulation to
generate its confidence intervals.8


3.2     Data
Our main data source is the USPTO Patent Examination Research Dataset
(Graham, Marco & Miller 2015), which is based on information from the Pub-
lic Patent Application Information Retrieval system (Public PAIR). We also
use information from PatentsView (http://www.patentsview.org), PAT-
STAT, the USPTO Patent Assignment Dataset (Marco, Myers, Graham,
D’Agostino & Kucab 2015) and the Patent Claims Research Dataset (Marco,
Sarnoff & deGrazia 2016).
    We restrict our analysis to published utility patent applications filed on
or after the enactment of the American Inventor’s Protection Act of 1999
(November 29, 2000) and before January 1st 2013, whose examiner is affili-
ated with one of the eight technology centers responsible for the examination
of utility patent applications. The USPTO Patent Examination Research
Dataset provides information on the examiner of record for each application
as of January 24, 2015. This is the examiner as of that date for pending ap-
plications and the examiner at the time of disposal for disposed applications.
We assign art units based on the examiner of record at the time of the last
office action recorded for an application. Under the AIPA, regular utility
   8
    See Rysman & Greenstein (2005) for details on the test. Timothy Simcoe developed
a software module to easily perform this test in Stata, available at the following link:
https://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s457205.html




                                           8
patent applications are generally published eighteen months after filing.9
    The data have several limitations. First, applications will not appear in
our data if they are abandoned before publication, or if the applicant files
only in the United States and requests that the application not be published.
Previous research suggests that these outcomes are relatively rare.10 A second
limitation is that we do not observe whether applications are transferred from
one examiner to another.
    We exclude applications filed after 2012 to avoid problems related to pub-
lication lags and a change in the USPTO technological classification scheme.
We also exclude serialized continuations (continuation applications, contin-
uations in part and divisional applications) because these applications are
usually assigned to the same examiner of the original application, and would
therefore lead us to overstate the extent of agglomeration. Our primary
analysis sample contains 2,717,032 applications examined by 12,338 unique
examiners affiliated with 590 art units. Table 1 shows the distribution of ap-
plications, art units, examiners, classes and subclasses by technology center.


3.3     Variables
We focus on several application characteristics (indexed by i or c above) that
may influence the assignment of applications to individual patent examiners
within an art-unit-year.11 The first of these characteristics is the primary
USPC classification of the application, which is defined by a unique combi-
nation of primary class and primary subclass codes (for brevity, subclass). If
patent examiners specialize in evaluating applications related to particular
technologies, we expect to see agglomeration on this variable.
   We use technology classification data from published applications, rather
than granted patents, to avoid measuring any specialization created by the
   9
     As in Graham et al. (2015) and in the Public PAIR data, we use the term “regular
utility patent application” to distinguish nonprovisional utility patent applications from
provisional, PCT, reissue or re-examination applications.
  10
     Graham et al. (2015) show that about 95% of the regular non-provisional utility patent
applications filed between 2001 and 2012 can be found in Public PAIR.
  11
     We typically compute our test statistics within a filing-year-art-unit cell to account for
possible changes in assignment practices over time and turnover in the pool of examiners.


                                              9
examination process. In particular, because the USPC classification of an
application is based on its claims, which are usually amended during exami-
nation, the subclass of many applications changes over time.12,13 This could
lead to spurious agglomeration if certain examiners are more likely to reject
claims in particular classes.
    Table 1 shows that for patents granted before July 21, 2015, twenty per-
cent of all applications change primary class during the examination process,
and almost seventy percent change primary subclass. There is heterogene-
ity across technology centers, with patents in Biotechnology and Chemicals
changing classification more often than those in other areas.14
    The identity of the applicant is a second variable that could influence the
allocation of applications — either directly or due to technological special-
ization. We measure this with the assignee of an application. Specifically,
we retrieve information on the assignment of applications, identify the as-
signments made by the inventors to their employers before the application
is docketed to an examiner, clean and standardize the assignee names and
create clusters of names that are likely to belong to the same organization, to
which we assign a unique identifier.15 After completing this process, we have
missing assignee data for 584,313 applications. To check the robustness of our
assignee measurement, we utilize a second measure of the applicant identity:
the customer number assigned by USPTO to each application. This number
  12
      The data in Public PAIR provide only the most recent classification of an application,
so we utilize the primary classification of applications at publication from PatentsView,
which is more likely to reflect the classification contractor’s original assignment. We thank
Evgeny Klochikhin for access to the PatentsView patent applications database.
   13
      In a previous version of the paper we utilized the class/subclass codes provided by
Public PAIR for our agglomeration analysis. The results were similar to those reported in
the current version of the paper, but showed a greater degree of agglomeration. We thank
Deepak Hegde, Bhaven Sampat, Andrew Toole and Heidi Williams for helpful conversa-
tions that improved our understanding of the classification process.
   14
      Many papers utilize USPC (sub)classes as a control variable, and future research might
usefully consider whether it is better to measure this variation at the time of application
publication or grant.
   15
      We employ an assignee name cleaning and standardization routine that builds
upon Thoma, Torrisi, Gambardella, Guellec, Hall & Harhoff (2010) and the
name standardization routines developed for the NBER Patent Data Project
available     at    https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home/posts/
namestandardizationroutinesuploaded. Details are available upon request.


                                             10
identifies the correspondent for application-related matters and is usually ei-
ther the law firm representing the applicant or the legal department of the
firm filing the application.16
    We would like to examine whether some examiners are assigned a larger
share of “high value” applications. The size of a patent family is often used
as a proxy for economic value of the invention because increased value leads
patentees to file in more countries (Harhoff, Scherer & Vopel 2003, Putnam
1996). We count the number of applications in the same DOCDB patent
family, with filing dates on or before the focal application date, to construct
an indicator variable that equals one if a focal application is above the 95th
percentile in the family size distribution (within an art-unit and filing-year).
We call this variable “DOCDB Family Size.”17
    Finally, we consider whether some examiners are assigned applications
seeking greater scope of protection. Kuhn et al. (2016) show that the length
of the first independent claim in a patent is a good measure of patent scope.
The idea behind this measure is that shorter claims provide broader scope
of patent protection because every word added to the text of the claims
can potentially introduce additional elements or characteristics that must be
present to establish infringement. We create an indicator variable that equals
one if and only if a patent application falls below the 5th percentile of the
word count distribution for the first independent claim in the subsample of
applications with the same filing year examined by the same art unit.18 We
call this variable “Words in 1st Claim.”19
  16
     Results of the customer-number analysis are similar to those for the assignee and are
available upon request.
  17
     We test the robustness of these results using the INPADOC patent families. The
results are similar to those for DOCDB patent families and are available upon request.
  18
     Kuhn et al. (2016) note that this measure of scope is not suitable for the analysis of
patent scope in biotechnology. So we exclude the Biotechnology technology center from
the analysis of this variable. We also check the robustness of results based on the length
of the first independent claim utilizing measures built upon the number of claims and
independent claims. The results are similar and available upon request.
  19
     Summary statistics for all variables used in the analysis are in Table A1.




                                            11
4     Results
This section presents evidence of patent examiner specialization, and then
regression results linking specialization to examination outcomes.


4.1     Examiner Specialization
Figure 1 shows that patent examiners handle more applications from a given
USPC subclass or assignee than we would expect under random allocation.
Specifically, each panel shows a histogram of p-values from a sample of hy-
pothesis tests. For the D-index (top row), we run a separate test for each
art-unit-year by subclass or assignee cell containing more than 20 applica-
tions. For MTAD (bottom row) we run a separate test for each art-unit-year
cell containing more than 50 applications.20
    Under the null of random assignment, the p-values in Figure 1 should
be uniformly distributed between zero and one. However, in each panel a
large share of the test-statistics fall below the 1 percent statistical signifi-
cance threshold, providing strong evidence of specialization. The two his-
tograms in the left column indicate that about 25 percent of the D-index
and MTAD tests for random USPC assignment have a p-value below 0.01.
The two histograms in the right column show somewhat weaker evidence of
specialization by assignee, with about 10 to 20 percent of the p-values falling
below the 1-percent threshold. The agglomeration by assignee becomes much
weaker if tests are conducted within USPC subclasses (see below), suggest-
ing that these findings are primarily a result of technological specialization
of examiners and applicants. Overall, Figure 1 shows that the allocation of
applications within art units is often far from random, and that SPEs take
into account the technological classification when assigning applications to
an examiner, as described in Lemley & Sampat (2012).
  20
     All of our results are robust to varying the within-cell sample size cutoffs, but going
much below these thresholds leads to large numbers of uninformative tests. Figure A1
shows the distributions of p-values of D-index and MTAD for subclass and assignee with
thresholds equal to, respectively, 10 and 25. Figure A2 uses these lower thresholds to
check the robustness of the analysis in Figure 2.



                                            12
     Table 2 examines the degree of examiner specialization in different Tech-
nology Centers, and for an additional pair of application characteristics.
Specifically, the table reports the share of D-index or MTAD tests that
reject the null hypothesis of random allocation at a 1-percent significance
level.21 Panel A shows that there is evidence of examiner specialization in
every technology center. However, the “Computer Architecture” and “Com-
puter Networking” areas are less agglomerated than Biotechnology, Chem-
istry, Semiconductors and Mechanical Engineering. The results in Panel B
are similar.
     Although our data do not speak to the underlying causes of variation
in examiner specialization across technology centers, there are several pos-
sible explanations for this pattern. First, examiners in the less agglomer-
ated technology centers may be “generalists” who are capable of evaluating
most applications within their art-unit. This would naturally lead SPEs to
adopt a more random allocation process, and might also influence examiners’
application-trading practices. Alternatively, patent examiners in the Com-
puters and Communications technology centers might be just as specialized
as their counterparts, but this is not apparent to us because the USPC clas-
sification system is less representative of actual technological differences in
these fields.
     The lower half of Table 2 examines agglomeration for a pair of dichoto-
mous variables: “DOCDB Family Size” and “Words in 1st Claim.” Both
of these variables focus on extreme outcomes because we are interested in
whether SPEs assign unusual applications to a specific set of examiners. The
data suggest that, for the most part, they do not. There is some evidence that
applications from very large families are concentrated among a smaller set
of examiners for Chemicals, Communications, Semiconductors, Mechanical
Engineering and the technology center we labeled as “Miscellaneous”. And
there is some evidence that certain examiners specialize in broader patents
(as measured by length of the first claim) in the Chemical and Materials En-
gineering and Semiconductors technology centers. But these effects are not
  21
     Table A3 in the appendix reports analogous figures with a cutoff at the 5-percent
threshold for statistical significance.


                                         13
large, and might easily be caused by the technological specialization observed
in Panel A.
    The results presented thus far beg the question of whether examiner spe-
cialization is purely technological. To explore that idea, we test for ag-
glomeration within art-unit-year-USPC-subclasses to see whether condition-
ing on observed technological heterogeneity changes our results. There are
two caveats to keep in mind. First, we cannot condition on unobserved tech-
nological heterogeneity. And second, many USPC subclasses receive only a
few applications per year, so these tests exclude a large amount of data. How-
ever, if examiners seem to be randomly assigned within large sub-classes, we
might be more comfortable that most of the specialization we observe within
art-unit-years is based on technology rather than other patent characteristics.
    Figure 2 examines agglomeration by assignee, within art-unit-years, both
within and without conditioning on USPC subclass. Each panel presents a
quantile-quantile plot that compares the distribution of the D-index (top row)
or MTAD statistic (bottom row) for the observed data to the distribution
under simulated random assignment. For the D-index, agglomeration leads
observed values of Di to exceed simulated values of Di , so that scatter points
fall below the 45-degree line. For MTAD, a negative value of t(X, n, p) in-
dicates agglomeration, and a positive test-statistic indicates over-dispersion.
So the scatter points will fall above the 45-degree for t < 0 when there is ag-
glomeration, and below the 45-degree for t > 0 when there is over-dispersion.
    The left column in Figure 2 shows that the observed quantiles of the D-
index are higher, and the observed quantiles of MTAD are lower (for t < 0),
than the simulated quantiles under random allocation. In other words, there
is strong evidence of specialization, as we saw above. The righthand column
shows that the evidence for agglomeration is much weaker once we condition
on the USPC subclass, although the MTAD test does appear to detect some
specialization by assignee.22 Note how the sample size falls dramatically as
we move from the left to the right column in this figure.23
  22
     In both columns, we observe a similar distribution of t(X, n, p) when the statistic is
positive, suggesting that any over-dispersion is in fact random.
  23
     The D-index discards any assignee that does not submit more than 20 applications to
a given art-unit in a particular year (and, for the analysis conditional on USPC subclasses,


                                            14
    Table 3 examines agglomeration within art-unit-application-year-class-
subclass bins, and reports results by technology center.24 For the analysis
in Panel A we retain all the applications with at least one secondary sub-
class (1,311,532 applications) and generate a data set with observations at
the application-secondary-subclass level. The D-index analysis rejects ran-
dom assignment for about 20% of the tests in Biotechnology, suggesting
agglomeration. However, about 13% of the MTAD tests in Biotechnology
and Chemicals reject random assignment in favor of dispersion.
    Panel B focuses on the allocation of assignees. For the D-index, we often
have a small number of tests, because it is unusual for a single assignee to file
many applications in a single subclass-year. Nevertheless, the D-index tests
reject random assignment more than 15 percent of the time in the Biotech-
nology technology center and almost 10 percent of the time in the Chemistry
technology center. MTAD rejects random assignment less often, but also
finds more agglomeration in biotechnology and, to a lower extent, chemistry.
Because several technology centers have only a few subclasses large enough
to produce reliable inference, we re-ran this analysis after pooling all years
in our sample, and found very similar results (see Appendix Tables A5 and
A6).
    Panels C and D in Table 3 find no evidence that SPEs in any technology
center allocate “outlier applications” (in terms of family size or first indepen-
dent claim scope) to a specific set of examiners after conditioning on observed
technological differences.
    Overall, these results show that patent examiners specialize in particu-
lar technologies, even within relatively homogeneous art units. We find no
evidence that certain examiners specialize in “outlier” patent applications.
Moreover, much of the agglomeration by assignee disappears if we condition
on primary USPC subclasses. However, we do find evidence of agglomera-
tion or over-dispersion by secondary USPC subclass and assignee, even within
primary USPC subclasses, for the Biotechnology and Chemistry technology
in a particular subclass). This excludes the large majority of applicants. MTAD retains
more data because it uses all applications filed to an art unit-year-(subclass).
  24
     Table A4 presents the same analysis using a 5% statistical significance threshold.



                                          15
centers. This last result suggests that there may be examiner specialization
based on unobserved technological differences in some art units even after
conditioning on the observed USPC subclasses.25


4.2     Implications for Examiner-based Instruments
Examiner specialization undermines a common justification for using exam-
iner characteristics as instrumental variables. Under random matching, ex-
aminer characteristics are uncorrelated with potential outcomes by construc-
tion. But specialization implies that these characteristics can be correlated
with technology, which might lead to a violation of the exclusion restriction.
    It is not possible to test the exclusion restriction. However, it is possible
to examine whether observed technologies are correlated with examiner char-
acteristics. We do this by estimating a “first stage” OLS regression with and
without subclass fixed-effects, and testing whether the coefficient on a pro-
posed instrument changes. This exercise can be viewed as an additional test
of the random assignment hypothesis, since random matching implies that
observed (and unobserved) technology is uncorrelated with examiner char-
acteristics. Alternatively, one can take it as a test of the weaker assumption
that the proposed instrument is uncorrelated with subclass effects.
    Table 4 presents first stage OLS estimates for two instruments used in
the literature: (1) an examiner’s leave-one-out grant rate on patent issuance,
and (2) an examiner’s leave-one-out “scope change” (i.e. the mean number of
words added to the first independent claim of other applications) on the scope
of a focal patent.26 The sample for this analysis contains all applications in
our primary sample that were either granted or abandoned by the end of
  25
     To complement the analysis describe in this section, we also run a set of Kolmogorov-
Smirnov tests of the equality of distributions of the statistics produced by the D-index and
MTAD analysis and their p-values for the tests on the real allocations and the simulations
of random assignment. The results are consistent with those reported in the paper and
are available upon request.
  26
     Since examiners can change art unit within a given year, we compute both leave-one-
out variables within art-unit-filing-year-examiner. Given the results of our agglomeration
analysis, we would like to compute the two instruments within subclasses. However, this
would exclude more than 90 percent of our data because many subclasses have only a very
small number of applications in a given year.


                                            16
the sample period; whose leave-one-out IV is computed with at least 10
applications; and whose art-unit-filing-year-subclass cell in the estimation
sample contains at least two applications. The estimates for the patent scope
models use only granted applications. Each coefficient reported in the table
is based on a separate OLS regression. To ease the interpretation of the
results, we standardize the two instruments, and report the ratio of the two
estimates (with and without subclass effects) in a third column.
    The full sample estimate in the first row of Table 4 implies that a one stan-
dard deviation increase in the leave-one-out grant rate is associated with a
16.3% increase in the probability that a focal application is granted. Adding
subclass fixed effects causes this coefficient to fall by 10 percent. The re-
mainder of columns (1) and (2) show that adding subclass effects produces
a decline in the first-stage IV coefficient within every technology center.
The changes are larger in Biotech and Chemistry, where evidence of special-
ization is stronger, and weaker in the computer-related technology centers.
All of these differences are statistically significant at the 5 percent level.27
Columns (3) and (4) in Table 4 present similar findings for the leave-one-out
scope-change instrument. For the latter variable, we find a particularly large
change in coefficient estimates for applications assigned to art-units in the
Chemicals technology center, and no change for applications in computing
technology center 2100.
    Based on these results, we can (again) reject the random matching hy-
pothesis, and also the conjecture that observed technology is uncorrelated
with a specific pair of examiner-based instruments. On the other hand, con-
trolling for subclass produces only modest changes in the first-stage esti-
mates, particularly for several of the computing-related technology centers.
    We propose the following implications for those who still wish to use ex-
  27
     To test whether differences between the coefficients in columns (1) and (2) are sta-
tistically significant, we demean the leave-one-out variables within art-unit-filing-year and
within art-unit-filing-year-subclass, re-run the models (without the fixed effects, as de-
meaning within groups at the level of the fixed effects produces the same coefficients) and
test the statistical significance of the differences in the coefficients. We also run a battery
of likelihood ratio tests to compare models analogous to those in columns (1)-(2) and (3)-
(4) without clustering the standard errors. All tests are statistically significant at the 1
percent level.


                                              17
aminer characteristics as instruments, perhaps because (like us) they see it as
a clear step forward in terms of measuring the causal impacts of intellectual
property. First, it is important to carefully control for any observable differ-
ences in technology. Subclass fixed effects are not a panacea, since there is
almost certainly some residual unobserved technological specialization, but
they are a step in the right direction. Second, instead of claiming that appli-
cations are randomly matched to examiners, authors should clearly explain
the key identification assumption: conditional on observables, examiner char-
acteristics must be uncorrelated with potential outcomes, regardless of any
technological sorting. Finally, the assumption that technology is uncorrelated
with potential outcomes appears most plausible for information technology
art-units, a bit less so for mechanical and miscellaneous technologies, and
potentially problematic for art-units examining chemical and biotechnology
applications.


4.3     Specialization and Examination Outcomes
As a final step in our empirical analysis, we explore the relationship between
examiner specialization and patent prosecution outcomes. We focus on three
outcomes: (i) whether an application is granted, (ii) the change in the number
of words in the first independent claim between the published application
and the granted patent, and (iii) the number of days required to process the
application (the difference between the date an application is docketed to
an examiner for the first time and its disposal date).28 Our sample consists
of all applications belonging to an art-unit by examiner by filing year cell
containing more than 10 applications. To account for truncation, we exclude
pending applications and those filed after year 2009.
    Our unit of analysis is the application, and we adopt a measure of special-
ization that varies across both examiners and applications. Specifically, our
main explanatory variable is the share of an examiner’s applications (within
   28
      An application is never ultimately rejected by the USPTO. If an applicant is not
granted a patent, she can file a Request for Continued Examination (RCE), a continua-
tion application or a continuation-in-part. We do not study the implications for RCE or
continuation filings in this paper.


                                          18
an art unit-filing year cell) having the same USPC subclass as a focal ap-
plication. To be more precise, define the set kit (j) of all patents (except for
patent i) assigned to examiner j in year t.29 Let njt represent the total num-
ber of patents reviewed by examiner j in year t, and define an indicator 1mn
that equals one if and only if two patents (m and n) have the same USPC
subclass. Our main explanatory variable can be written as:
                                             P
                                                  m∈kit (j)   1mi
                               Shareijt =                           .
                                                  njt − 1
Intuitively, Shareijt equals the probability that a random draw from the pool
of applications assigned to examiner j in year t has the same USPC subclass
as the focal application.
    Table 5 presents estimates from a series of OLS panel-data regressions
that examine the correlation between Shareijt and prosecution outcomes.
To ease interpretation, we standardize Shareijt and the outcome variables
except the dummy for granted patents.30 Standard errors are clustered at
art-unit-filing-year level in all models.
    Columns (1) through (3) report coefficient estimates from a within-examiner
regression with art-unit-examiner-filing-year fixed effects. The coefficients of
Shareijt are all positive but very close to zero. Columns (4) through (6)
report the results from a between-examiner analysis, where we regress the
mean outcome for each art-unit-examiner-filing-year on the mean of Shareijt
(i.e. the probability that two random draws from the pool of patents assigned
to that examiner will belong to the same USPC subclass).
    The coefficient in Column (4) indicates that a one standard deviation in-
crease in Shareijt leads to a 4 percentage point drop in the grant rate. This
suggests that specialized examiners are also more stringent. The coefficient
in column (5) also suggests that specialization leads to more stringent ex-
amination. However, the economic magnitude of this result is rather small:
a one standard deviation change in Shareijt produces a 0.08 standard de-
viation change in the number of words added to the first claim. Finally, in
  29
     For this analysis we consider an examiner affiliated with two (or more) different art
units in the same year as two (or more) examiners.
  30
     Table A2 displays summary statistics for all variables used in this part of the analysis.

                                             19
column (6) we find a small but statistically significant positive association
between specialization and the time required to process a patent examina-
tion.31
    The overall message of this part of the analysis is that examiner spe-
cialization is related to more stringent examination, although the economic
magnitudes are not dramatic. This relationship is driven by differences across
examiners, as showed by the “between” estimators in Table 5, while we do
not find important differences in the relationship between specialization and
examination outcomes “within” examiners. One plausible explanation for
the finding is that it is easier for examiners that are more specialized to find
relevant prior art because they are more familiar with certain fields of tech-
nology, leading to narrower claims and an increased probability of application
abandonment. Under random assignment, these estimates are causal. We
prefer a descriptive interpretation. Nevertheless, these results confirm the
importance of differences across examiners for examination outcomes.


5       Conclusions
We study a key stage of patent prosecution: the assignment of applications
to examiners. The first half of our empirical analysis focuses on charac-
terizing the degree of examiner specialization. Using two statistical tests
designed to study industry agglomeration, we find strong evidence that ex-
aminers specialize in particular technologies, even within relatively homoge-
neous art units. The degree of specialization varies across fields. The USPTO
technology centers associated with Computers and Communications exhibit
relatively little specialization, while examiners in the “Biotechnology and Or-
ganic Chemistry” and “Chemical and Materials Engineering” technology are
relatively more specialized. In the latter technology centers, we find assignee
agglomeration even after conditioning on USPC subclasses.
    The second part of our analysis shows that observed technological classi-
fications are correlated with potential instruments based on examiner char-
 31
      Results of the analysis in Table 5 by technology center are available on request.



                                             20
acteristics. And our last set of results shows that more specialized examiners
are more stringent on average — they have a lower grant rate, and produce
a larger reduction in the scope of issued patents’ first independent claim.
    It may not seem surprising that we can reject the hypothesis of random
matching between applications and examiners. After all, one reason for hav-
ing a patent classification system is to help route applications to appropriate
examiners. However, several studies have argued that more-or-less random
matching (within art-units) provides a justification for using examiner char-
acteristics as an instrument for examination outcomes. While our findings do
not invalidate this identification strategy – patent examiner characteristics
might still satisfy the relevant exclusion restrictions – they do imply that
we cannot rely on random assignment to justify the approach. Our findings
suggest that examiner-based instruments are more plausible in studies that
include subclass fixed effects and focus on computer-related art units.
    On a more positive note, our results suggest that the USPTO’s patent
examination process strikes a reasonable balance between efficiency and fair-
ness. Technological specialization is efficient. Fairness can be achieved by
enforcing uniform examination standards, which is difficult, or through ran-
dom assignment, which guarantees all applicants an equal shot at the more
friendly examiners. Conditional on technology, examiner assignment appears
relatively random in the computer-related technology centers. And even
without controlling for technology, there is no evidence that certain examin-
ers within a given art unit handle more patents with large families or broad
claims. We leave to future researchers the question of whether procedural
fairness to applicants is also the best policy in terms of social welfare.




                                      21
References
Cockburn, I. M., Kortum, S. & Stern, S. (2002), ‘Are all patent examiners
    equal? The impact of examiner characteristics’, NBER Working Paper
    8980 .

Farre-Mensa, J., Hegde, D. & Ljungqvist, A. (2015), ‘The bright side of
     patents’, Working Paper .

Feng, J. & Jaravel, X. (2016), ‘Who feeds the trolls? patent trolls and the
    patent examination process’, Working Paper .

Frakes, M. D. & Wasserman, M. F. (2014), ‘Is the Time Allocated to Re-
    view Patent Applications Inducing Examiners to Grant Invalid Patents?:
    Evidence from Micro-Level Application Data’, (NBER Working Paper
    20337).

Gaulé, P. (2015), ‘Patents and the Success of Venture-Capital Backed Star-
    tups: Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects’, Working
    Paper .

Graham, S. J. H., Marco, A. C. & Miller, R. (2015), ‘The USPTO Patent
    Examination Research Dataset: A Window on the Process of Patent
    Examination’, Working paper .

Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. M. & Vopel, K. (2003), ‘Citations, family size, oppo-
    sition and the value of patent rights’, Research policy 32(8), 1343–1363.

Kuhn, J. M. (2016), ‘The right to exclude: Property rights and frictions in
   the sale of patents’, Working Paper .

Kuhn, J. M., Roin, B. N. & Thompson, N. C. (2016), ‘Causal inference on
   patent protection’, Working Paper .

Kullback, S. & Leibler, R. A. (1951), ‘On information and sufficiency’, The
    annals of mathematical statistics 22(1), 79–86.



                                     22
Lemley, M. A. & Sampat, B. (2012), ‘Examiner characteristics and patent
    office outcomes’, Review of Economics and Statistics 94(3), 817–827.

Marco, A. C., Myers, A. F., Graham, S., D’Agostino, P. & Kucab, J. (2015),
    ‘The USPTO Patent Assignment Dataset: Descriptions, Lessons, and
    Insights’, Working paper .

Marco, A. C., Sarnoff, J. D. & deGrazia, C. (2016), ‘Patent Claims and
    Patent Scope’, Working paper .

Merges, R. P. (1999), ‘As many as six impossible patents before breakfast:
    Property rights for business concepts and patent system reform’, Berke-
    ley Technology Law Journal pp. 577–615.

Mori, T., Nishikimi, K. & Smith, T. E. (2005), ‘A divergence statistic for
    industrial localization’, Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4), 635–
    651.

Putnam, J. (1996), ‘The value of international patent protection’, Unpub-
    lished Ph. D. Dissertation, Yale University .

Rysman, M. & Greenstein, S. (2005), ‘Testing for agglomeration and disper-
    sion’, Economics Letters 86(3), 405–411.

Sampat, B. & Williams, H. L. (2015), ‘How do patents affect follow-on in-
   novation? Evidence from the human genome’, NBER Working Paper
   15851 .

Thoma, G., Torrisi, S., Gambardella, A., Guellec, D., Hall, B. H. & Harhoff,
   D. (2010), ‘Harmonizing and combining large datasets–an application
   to firm-level patent and accounting data’, NBER Working Paper 21666
   .




                                    23
Tables and Figures

Figure 1: Distribution of P-values from D-index (top) and MTAD (bottom)
for USPC subclass and Assignee
                                                     D index - USPC subclass                                                                                              D index - Assignee
     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                                                                   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
             Percent




                                                                                                                           Percent
                   5




                                                                                                                                 5
                   0




                                                                                                                                 0
                                  0      .1     .2     .3     .4      .5     .6   .7     .8     .9        1                                     0      .1     .2     .3      .4      .5     .6   .7    .8     .9        1
                                                                   p value                                                                                                        p value
                                  Number of tests: 11998                                                                                        Number of tests: 9716
                                  Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 38.67 (28.46)                                           Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 40.95 (29.93)




                                                      MTAD - USPC subclass                                                                                                MTAD - Assignee
     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                                                                   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
             Percent




                                                                                                                           Percent
                  5




                                                                                                                                5
                  0




                                                                                                                                0




                                  0      .1     .2     .3     .4      .5     .6   .7     .8     .9        1                                     0      .1     .2     .3      .4      .5     .6   .7    .8     .9        1
                                                                   p value                                                                                                        p value
                                  Number of tests: 5582                                                                                         Number of tests: 5405
                                  Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 481.59 (415.72)                                         Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 388.81 (338.11)




Distribution of p-values of D-index and MTAD analysis for USPC subclass and Assignee
codes. Tests on subsamples with more than 20 applications for D-index and 50 applications
for MTAD. Vertical red lines are standard thresholds for statistical significance (0.01, 0.05
and 0.10)




                                                                                                              24
Figure 2: Quantile-Quantile Plots of D-index (top) and MTAD (bottom) by
Art-Unit-Year (left) and Art-Unit-Year-USPC-Subclass (right) for Assignee
                                                                   Assignee - Di                                                                                                    Assignee - Di




                                                                                                                                     1.5
                    3
     Di of random allocation




                                                                                                                      Di of random allocation
                                                                                                                                       1
                     2




                                                                                                                         .5
        1           0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                     0                     1                           2              3                                               0                     .5                             1              1.5
                                                                  Di of real allocation                                                                                            Di of real allocation
                                     Number of tests: 9716                                                                                            Number of tests: 310
                                     Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 40.95 (29.93)                                              Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 32.86 (24.07)




                                                               Assignee - t(X,n,p)                                                                                           Assignee - t(X,n,p)

                                                                                                                                     5
                    5
     t(X,n,p) of random allocation




                                                                                                                      t(X,n,p) of random allocation
                    -5        0




                                                                                                                                     0
          -10       -15




                                                                                                                                     -5




                                          -15             -10                   -5            0              5                                              -4              -2                   0             2            4
                                                                t(X,n,p) of real allocation                                                                                      t(X,n,p) of real allocation
                                     Number of tests: 5405                                                                                            Number of tests: 1333
                                     Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 388.81 (338.11)                                            Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 81.1 (39.4)




Each panel plots the quantiles of the D-index (top row) or MTAD statistic (bottom row)
for the observed distribution (X-axis) against a simulated distribution under random as-
signment (Y-axis). Tests on subsamples with more than 20 applications for D-index and
50 applications for MTAD. If the observed distribution is random, the quantiles should be
the same and the scatter points will fall along the 45-degree line. We observe large devi-
ations from random assignment at the art-unit-year level, but much less evidence within
art-unit-year-USPC-subclasses.




                                                                                                                 25
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics by Technology Center

                                                     Art                                  Sub-        Class        Subclass
                                  Applications      Units     Examiners      Classes     Classes     Changed†      Changed†
      Biotechnology (1600)           221,586          57         1,013         268        11,530        32.3          75.3

      Chemicals (1700)               367,371          75         1,377         411        34,509        31.3           77.7

      Comp/Comm (2100)               208,102          79         1,733         303        7,314         23.4           70.7

      Comp/Comm (2400)               157,852          77         1,289         159        4,492         18.5           59.7

      Comp/Comm (2600)               338,088          82         2,046         310        14,393        15.4           65.7

      Electrical (2800)              637,929          80         2,161         382        31,815        17.5           65.2




26
      Miscellaneous (3600)           360,691          75         1,617         410        38,760        16.8           68.8

      Mechanical (3700)              425,413          65         1,949         411        40,240        18.6           68.9

      Full sample                   2,717,032        590        12,338         452       119,448        20.4           68.5
     † Percent  of applications with change in (sub)class conditional on grant before July 21, 2015. Classification data for pub-
     lished applications and granted patents from PatentsView. Full sample counts remove duplicates across technology centers.
     Abbreviated technology center names from Graham et al. (2015). Full names of the technology centers currently responsible
     for examination of utility patent applications are:
           • 1600 - Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry
           • 1700 - Chemical and Materials Engineering
           • 2100 - Computer Architecture, Software, and Information Security
           • 2400 - Computer Networks, Multiplex communication, Video Distribution, and Security
           • 2600 - Communications
           • 2800 - Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems and Components
           • 3600 - Transportation,Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License & Review
           • 3700 - Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products
Table 2: D-index and MTAD Tests within Art-Unit-Application-Year (share
rejecting random allocation at 1% significance level, by technology center)

                                     Panel A: USPC subclass
                                                        D-index                                      MTAD
   Technology Center                                 Rej.     N                              Agg.    Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry               32.9    906                             19.6     0.2        551
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                58.6    814                             55.8     0.0        721
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security      2.2   1,170                             0.7     0.0        723
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution        6.5     753                              0.8     0.0        628
   Communications                                    17.7   2,268                            16.7     0.0        694
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems    37.4   3,389                            39.5     0.0        843
   Miscellaneous†                                    15.4   1,162                            21.7     0.1        742
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 38.9     1,536                            39.4     0.0        680
   All tests                                                        27.5     11,998          25.0      0.0      5,582

                                        Panel B: Assignee
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.     N                             Agg.    Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry                50.2    225                             9.1     0.0        527
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                 46.1    866                            30.9     0.0        699
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       4.2    970                             0.0     0.0        709
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          5.3    509                             0.2     0.0        616
   Communications                                     11.0   1,879                            6.3     0.0        668
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems     19.6   3,360                           15.0     0.1        824
   Miscellaneous†                                     29.3    818                            13.4     0.0        703
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 36.0      1,089                           19.1     0.0        659
   All tests                                                        21.4      9,716          12.0      0.0      5,405

                                  Panel C: DOCDB Family Size
                                                     D-index                                         MTAD
   Technology Center                               Rej.      N                               Agg.    Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry             0.8      772                               3.1     0.0        549
   Chemical and Materials Engineering              3.7     1,018                             5.4      0.0        716
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security   0.5      860                              2.1      0.0        723
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution      0.3      742                              1.1      0.0        627
   Communications                                  2.5     1,011                              4.5     0.0        690
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems  3.8     1,427                             6.1      0.0        841
   Miscellaneous†                                  2.4     1,149                              4.7     0.0        738
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 3.9     1,089                             7.2      0.0        678
   All tests                                                         2.5      8,068           4.4      0.0      5,562

                                   Panel D: Words in 1st Claim
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.      N                            Agg.    Disp.        N
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                  3.5    1,129                          5.1      0.0        721
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.0     895                           0.1      0.0        723
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0     755                           0.0      0.0        627
   Communications                                      0.2    1,052                           0.1     0.0        693
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      2.1    1,524                          5.1      0.0        843
   Miscellaneous†                                      0.7    1,194                           1.8     0.0        741
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     0.8    1,160                          0.7      0.0        679
   All tests                                                         1.2      7,709           2.0      0.0      5,027
   For D-index, columns labelled “Rej.” report the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of equality between
  the observed and the reference distribution at 1% level. For MTAD, columns labelled “Agg.” (“Disp.”) report the
  share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of random allocation at 1% level in favor of agglomeration (dispersion).
  All tests are conducted within art-unit-year cells with more than 20 applications for the D-index and more than
  50 applications for MTAD. † Miscellaneous = “Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture,
  National Security and License & Review.”


                                                           27
Table 3: D-index and MTAD Tests within Art-Unit-Application-Year-
Subclass (1% significance level, by technology center)

                                Panel A: USPC secondary subclass
                                                       D-index                                    MTAD
   Technology Center                                Rej.      N                          Agg.     Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry              21.1     720                          1.5      13.8 1,613
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                3.4     147                          0.4      13.4  516
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security     0.0      99                         0.0       0.0   143
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution        0.0      33                         0.0       0.0   35
   Communications                                    0.0     120                          0.0       0.0  212
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems    0.0     104                         0.0       0.9   531
   Miscellaneous†                                    3.8      26                         0.0       0.7   150
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products   0.0      55                         0.0       1.2   168
   All tests                                                      12.1     1,304          0.8       8.9      3,368

                                        Panel B: Assignee
                                                         D-index                                  MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.     N                         Agg.     Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry                16.2     37                         8.7      0.0        104
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                  9.1     33                        2.5       1.2         80
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.0     13                        0.0       0.0        120
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0     1                         0.0       0.0         46
   Communications                                      0.0     84                        0.0       0.0        363
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      0.0     82                        0.3       0.0        392
   Miscellaneous†                                      0.0     10                        0.0       0.9        115
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     6.0     50                        0.0       0.0        113
   All tests                                                       3.9      310           0.9       0.2      1,333

                                  Panel C: DOCDB Family Size
                                                     D-index                                      MTAD
   Technology Center                               Rej.      N                           Agg.     Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry             0.0      844                           0.0      0.0        151
   Chemical and Materials Engineering              0.0      768                           3.2      0.0         93
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security   0.0     1,082                         0.0       0.0        174
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution      0.0      698                          0.0       0.0         62
   Communications                                  0.0     2,147                          0.2      0.0        429
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems  0.0     3,184                         0.4       0.0        458
   Miscellaneous†                                  0.0     1,097                          0.0      0.0        169
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 0.0     1,419                         0.7       0.0        144
   All tests                                                       0.0    11,239          0.4       0.0      1,680

                                   Panel D: Words in 1st Claim
                                                         D-index                                  MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.      N                        Agg.     Disp.        N
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                  0.0     747                        0.0      0.0         99
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.0    1,058                      0.0       0.0        191
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0     684                       0.0       0.0         64
   Communications                                      0.0    2,109                       0.0      0.0        456
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      0.0    3,109                      0.4       0.0        520
   Miscellaneous†                                      0.0    1,062                       0.0      0.0        190
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     0.0    1,409                      0.0       0.0        185
   All tests                                                       0.0    10,178          0.1       0.0      1,705
   For D-index, columns labelled “Rej.” report the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of equality between
  the observed and the reference distribution at 1% level. For MTAD, columns labelled “Agg.” (“Disp.”) report
  the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of random allocation at 1% level in favor of agglomeration
  (dispersion). All tests are conducted within art-unit-year-subclass cells with more than 20 applications for the
  D-index and more than 50 applications for MTAD. † Miscellaneous = “Transportation, Construction, Electronic
  Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License & Review.”


                                                         28
          Table 4: IV “First-Stage” With and Without Subclass Effects

 Outcome†                                           1[Granted]                         Words-in-1st -claim

                                                 Leave-one-out                           Leave-one-out
 Potential Instrument
                                                   grant rate                            scope change
                                             (1)      (2)     (1)/(2)                (3)      (4)    (3)/(4)
 Full Sample                               0.163       0.147        0.90           0.224        0.211       0.94
                                          (0.001)     (0.001)                     (0.003)      (0.004)
 Art-unit-year FEs                           X                                        X
 Art-unit-year-subclass FEs                                X                                      X

 Biotechnology (1600)                      0.149       0.132        0.89
                                          (0.002)     (0.003)
 Chemicals (1700)                          0.174       0.144        0.83           0.146        0.060        0.41
                                          (0.002)     (0.003)                     (0.012)      (0.016)
 Comp/Comm (2100)                          0.143       0.140        0.98           0.207        0.208        1.00
                                          (0.002)     (0.002)                     (0.009)      (0.009)
 Comp/Comm (2400)                          0.121       0.115        0.95           0.226        0.217        0.96
                                          (0.003)     (0.004)                     (0.009)      (0.011)
 Comp/Comm (2600)                          0.163       0.156        0.96           0.236        0.226        0.96
                                          (0.002)     (0.002)                     (0.009)      (0.010)
 Electrical (2800)                         0.170       0.160        0.94           0.247        0.240        0.97
                                          (0.001)     (0.002)                     (0.005)      (0.005)
 Miscellaneous (3600)                      0.161       0.136        0.84           0.218        0.193        0.89
                                          (0.002)     (0.002)                     (0.009)      (0.009)
 Mechanical (3700)                         0.171       0.150        0.88           0.220        0.194        0.88
                                          (0.002)     (0.002)                     (0.008)      (0.008)
 † Outcome is the endogenous variable in an IV regression.

Each “first-stage” estimate in this table comes from a separate OLS regression of Outcome on Potential In-
strument for applications assigned to a given technology center. Robust standard errors, clustered by art-unit-
filing-year, in parentheses. All estimates are statistically significant at the 1% level. See text for a discussion of
the estimation sample, and variable definitions. We exclude biotechnology patents (Technology Center 1600)
from the second set of estimates because Kuhn et al. (2016) suggest that counting words in the first claim does
not yield a meaningful measure of claim-scope for those applications.




                                                      29
         Table 5: Examiner Specialization and Examination Outcomes.


 Model                                    Within Examiner                  Between Examiner
 Outcome                          Granted      Words        Days      Granted     Words       Days
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)

 Shareijt                         0.00***       0.00       0.01***    -0.04***    0.08***   0.10***
                                   (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.01)    (0.01)
 Art-unit-year-examiner FEs          X           X            X
 Observations                    1,750,211   1,069,834    1,749,990    48,973     44,036    48,973
 Art-unit-year-examiners           48,973     44,036       48,973
 All models estimated with OLS. Unit of observation is a patent application for the within regressions
and an art-unit-year-examiner for the between regressions. Variables Shareiijt , Words and Days are
standardized. The mean of the outcome of the regression in column 1 is 0.65. Between regressions
estimated on the group means. Standard errors clustered by art unit-filing year in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10




                                                 30
A                                 Appendix: Online Publication Only

Figure A1: Distribution of P-values from D-index (top) and MTAD (bottom)
for USPC subclass and Assignee (lower thresholds)
                                                     D index - USPC subclass                                                                                              D index - Assignee
     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                                                                   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
             Percent




                                                                                                                           Percent
                   5




                                                                                                                                 5
                   0




                                                                                                                                 0
                                  0      .1     .2     .3     .4      .5     .6   .7     .8     .9        1                                     0      .1     .2     .3      .4      .5     .6   .7     .8     .9       1
                                                                   p value                                                                                                        p value
                                  Number of tests: 35479                                                                                        Number of tests: 25204
                                  Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 22.48 (20.32)                                           Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 24.6 (22.75)




                                                      MTAD - USPC subclass                                                                                                MTAD - Assignee
     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                                                                   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
             Percent




                                                                                                                           Percent
                  5




                                                                                                                                5
                  0




                                                                                                                                0




                                  0      .1     .2     .3     .4      .5     .6   .7     .8     .9        1                                     0      .1     .2     .3      .4      .5     .6   .7     .8     .9       1
                                                                   p value                                                                                                        p value
                                  Number of tests: 6071                                                                                         Number of tests: 5926
                                  Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 445.75 (416.62)                                         Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 357.84 (337.97)




Distribution of p-values of D-index and MTAD analysis for USPC subclass and Assignee
codes. Tests on subsamples with more than 10 applications for D-index and 25 applications
for MTAD. Vertical red lines are standard thresholds for statistical significance (0.01, 0.05
and 0.10)




                                                                                                              31
Figure A2: Quantile-Quantile Plots of D-index (top) and MTAD (bottom) by
Art-Unit-Year (left) and Art-Unit-Year-USPC-Subclass (right) for Assignee
(lower thresholds)
                                                                   Assignee - Di                                                                                                 Assignee - Di




                                                                                                                                     2.5
                    4




                                                                                                                                                2
     Di of random allocation




                                                                                                                        Di of random allocation
                           3




                                                                                                                                     1.5
                2




                                                                                                                                1
     1




                                                                                                                      .5
                    0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                     0                1                     2                 3              4                                        0             .5           1               1.5          2             2.5
                                                                  Di of real allocation                                                                                         Di of real allocation
                                     Number of tests: 25204                                                                                           Number of tests: 1957
                                     Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 24.6 (22.75)                                               Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 16.71 (12.09)




                                                            Assignee - t(X,n,p)                                                                                              Assignee - t(X,n,p)
                                                                                                                                     10
                    5
     t(X,n,p) of random allocation




                                                                                                                      t(X,n,p) of random allocation
                              0




                                                                                                                                           5
                    -5




                                                                                                                             0
          -10       -15




                                                                                                                                     -5




                                          -15             -10                   -5                0          5                                        -5                     0                           5                  10
                                                                t(X,n,p) of real allocation                                                                                   t(X,n,p) of real allocation
                                     Number of tests: 5926                                                                                            Number of tests: 5719
                                     Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 357.84 (337.97)                                            Mean # of applications per test (standard deviation): 45.04 (28.14)




Each panel plots the quantiles of the D-index (top row) or MTAD statistic (bottom row)
for the observed distribution (X-axis) against a simulated distribution under random as-
signment (Y-axis). Tests on subsamples with more than 10 applications for D-index and
25 applications for MTAD. If the observed distribution is random, the quantiles should be
the same and the scatter points will fall along the 45-degree line. We observe large devi-
ations from random assignment at the art-unit-year level, but much less evidence within
art-unit-year-USPC-subclasses.




                                                                                                                 32
                Table A1: Summary statistics for sample of applications

                                                     Panel A: categorical variables


 Variable               # of categories                                 Applications per category
                                                                           5th        1st               3rd       95th
                                             Mean      Std dev   Min                           Median                              Max
                                                                        percentile quartile           quartile percentile


 Examiners                       12,338     220.22   227.54         1           2         48        156       313         714 1,655
 Art units                          590   4,605.14 3,942.42         3         446      2,007   3,228.50     6,157      13,459 21,905
 USPC subclasses                119,448      22.75   106.65         1           1          2          5        14          85 13,836
 Assignees                      164,195      12.99   301.16         1           1          1          1         3          19 59,998


                                                     Panel B: quantitative variables


                                                                           5th       1st                    3rd       95th
 Variable                             N      Mean      Std dev   Min                           Median                              Max
                                                                        percentile quartile               quartile percentile


 DOCDB family size            2,716,195       2.88        5.66      1           1         1          2          3            8    378
 Words in 1st claim           2,712,367     124.95      128.00      1          35        70        103        151          269 46,194

 The number of applications characterized by a big DOCDB family and a low number of words in the first independent claim are respectively
106,408 and 116,665.




Table A2: Summary statistics for examiners’ specialization and examination
outcomes.


 Variable                         N        Mean           Std dev                       Min        Median                       Max


 Shareijt           1,750,211   0.04                           0.09               0.00                 0.00      1.00
 Granted            1,750,211   0.65                           0.48               0.00                 1.00      1.00
 Days               1,749,990 918.09                         510.19               0.00               826.00 17,835.00
 Words              1,069,834 49.16                           87.56         -10,351.00                30.00 9,248.00




                                                                  33
Table A3: D-index and MTAD Tests within Art-Unit-Application-Year
(share rejecting random allocation at 5% significance level, by technology
center)

                                     Panel A: USPC subclass
                                                        D-index                                      MTAD
   Technology Center                                 Rej.     N                              Agg.    Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry               43.8    906                             28.1     0.2        551
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                66.3    814                             64.6     0.0        721
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security      7.1   1,170                             1.4     0.1        723
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution        14.9    753                              2.1     0.2        628
   Communications                                    22.5   2,268                            20.6     0.0        694
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems    46.5   3,389                            47.1     0.1        843
   Miscellaneous†                                    23.2   1,162                            28.8     0.3        742
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 49.0     1,536                            49.3     0.0        680
   All tests                                                        35.3     11,998          31.0      0.1      5,582

                                        Panel B: Assignee
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.     N                             Agg.    Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry                65.8    225                            13.3     0.0        527
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                 56.0    866                            40.3     0.0        699
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security      11.3    970                             0.3     0.0        709
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution         15.5    509                             0.3     0.0        616
   Communications                                     17.0   1,879                           10.0     0.1        668
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems     31.4   3,360                           22.6     0.1        824
   Miscellaneous†                                     40.2    818                            21.1     0.0        703
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 51.1      1,089                           29.1     0.0        659
   All tests                                                        31.7      9,716          17.6      0.0      5,405

                                  Panel C: DOCDB Family Size
                                                     D-index                                         MTAD
   Technology Center                               Rej.      N                               Agg.    Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry             2.8      772                               6.4     0.0        549
   Chemical and Materials Engineering              6.9     1,018                             9.4      0.0        716
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security   0.8      860                               4.4     0.0        723
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution      0.7      742                              2.6      0.0        627
   Communications                                  4.0     1,011                              6.5     0.0        690
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems  7.6     1,427                             10.5     0.0        841
   Miscellaneous†                                  5.3     1,149                              8.5     0.0        738
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 8.2     1,089                             11.9     0.0        678
   All tests                                                         5.0      8,068           7.7      0.0      5,562

                                   Panel D: Words in 1st Claim
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.      N                            Agg.    Disp.        N
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                  7.2    1,129                          9.7      0.0        721
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.1     895                           1.5      0.0        723
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0     755                           0.0      0.0        627
   Communications                                      0.5    1,052                           0.9     0.0        693
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      5.0    1,524                          8.8      0.1        843
   Miscellaneous†                                      3.4    1,194                           4.2     0.1        741
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     3.2    1,160                          4.7      0.1        679
   All tests                                                         3.1      7,709           4.5      0.1      5,027
   For D-index, columns labelled “Rej.” report the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of equality between
  the observed and the reference distribution at 5% level. For MTAD, columns labelled “Agg.” (“Disp.”) report the
  share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of random allocation at 5% level in favor of agglomeration (dispersion).
  All tests are conducted within art-unit-year cells with more than 20 applications for the D-index and more than
  50 applications for MTAD. † Miscellaneous = “Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture,
  National Security and License & Review.”
                                                           34
Table A4: D-index and MTAD Tests within Art-Unit-Application-Year-
Class-Subclass (share rejecting random allocation at 5% significance level,
by technology center)

                                Panel A: USPC secondary subclass
                                                       D-index                                    MTAD
   Technology Center                                Rej.      N                          Agg.     Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry              24.7     720                          2.0      27.3 1,613
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                7.5     147                          0.8      21.7  516
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security     0.0      99                         0.0       0.7   143
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution        0.0      33                         0.0       0.0   35
   Communications                                    0.8     120                          0.0       0.5  212
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems    0.0     104                         0.4       3.0   531
   Miscellaneous†                                    3.8      26                         0.0       1.3   150
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products   1.8      55                         0.0       1.8   168
   All tests                                                      14.7     1,304          1.1      17.1      3,368

                                        Panel B: Assignee
                                                         D-index                                  MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.     N                         Agg.     Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry                27.0     37                        11.5      0.0        104
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                 24.2     33                         3.8      2.5         80
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.0     13                        0.0       0.0        120
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0      1                        0.0       0.0         46
   Communications                                      0.0     84                        0.3       0.0        363
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      0.0     82                        0.3       0.0        392
   Miscellaneous†                                      0.0     10                        0.9       0.9        115
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 10.0        50                         1.8      0.0        113
   All tests                                                       7.4      310           1.5       0.2      1,333

                                  Panel C: DOCDB Family Size
                                                     D-index                                      MTAD
   Technology Center                               Rej.      N                           Agg.     Disp.        N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry             0.0      844                           0.0      0.0        151
   Chemical and Materials Engineering              0.0      768                           5.4      0.0         93
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security   0.0     1,082                         0.0       0.0        174
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution      0.0      698                          0.0       0.0         62
   Communications                                  0.0     2,147                          0.5      0.0        429
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems  0.0     3,184                         0.4       0.0        458
   Miscellaneous†                                  0.0     1,097                          3.0      0.0        169
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 0.1     1,419                         0.7       0.0        144
   All tests                                                       0.0    11,239          0.9       0.0      1,680

                                   Panel D: Words in 1st Claim
                                                         D-index                                  MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.      N                        Agg.     Disp.        N
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                  0.0     747                        2.0      0.0         99
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.0    1,058                      0.0       0.0        191
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0     684                       0.0       0.0         64
   Communications                                      0.0    2,109                       0.0      0.0        456
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      0.0    3,109                      0.6       0.0        520
   Miscellaneous†                                      0.0    1,062                       0.0      0.0        190
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     0.0    1,409                      0.5       0.0        185
   All tests                                                       0.0    10,178          0.4       0.0      1,705
   For D-index, columns labelled “Rej.” report the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of equality between
  the observed and the reference distribution at 5% level. For MTAD, columns labelled “Agg.” (“Disp.”) report
  the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of random allocation at 5% level in favor of agglomeration
  (dispersion). All tests are conducted within art-unit-year-subclass cells with more than 20 applications for the
  D-index and more than 50 applications for MTAD. † Miscellaneous = “Transportation, Construction, Electronic
  Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License & Review.”
                                                         35
Table A5: D-index and MTAD Tests within Art-Unit-Class-Subclass (share
rejecting random allocation at 1% significance level, by technology center)

                                Panel A: USPC secondary subclass
                                                       D-index                                       MTAD
   Technology Center                                Rej.      N                              Agg.    Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry              15.4    1,425                            1.5       8.3 2,132
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                6.0     431                              0.5     10.6 1,474
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security     0.4     253                             0.0      0.0   470
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution        1.3     154                             0.0      0.0   280
   Communications                                    0.6     362                              0.0      0.0  639
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems    1.6     741                             0.1      0.2  1,847
   Miscellaneous†                                    2.7     222                             0.0      0.6   464
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products   2.5     314                              0.6     0.8   893
   All tests                                                         7.1      3,902           0.5      4.2      8,199

                                        Panel B: Assignee
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.     N                             Agg.    Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry                25.9     81                             3.1     0.3   355
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                 13.4    134                             1.8     3.3   389
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.4    274                            0.0      0.0   569
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          1.2     85                            0.0      0.0   475
   Communications                                      0.5    430                             0.0     0.0   948
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      1.6    880                            0.1      0.1  1,819
   Miscellaneous†                                      2.3    219                            0.8      0.2   525
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     2.8    396                             0.6     0.3   797
   All tests                                                         2.9      2,499           0.5      0.3      5,877

                                  Panel C: DOCDB Family Size
                                                     D-index                                         MTAD
   Technology Center                               Rej.      N                               Agg.    Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry             0.1     1,590                              1.0     0.0   512
   Chemical and Materials Engineering              0.0     2,266                             0.4      0.0   470
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security   0.0     1,879                             0.3      0.0   616
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution      0.0     1,605                             0.0      0.0   526
   Communications                                  0.0     2,802                              0.0     0.0   981
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems  0.0     5,806                             0.2      0.0  1,952
   Miscellaneous†                                  0.1     2,789                              0.4     0.0   711
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 0.0     3,759                             0.8      0.0  1,126
   All tests                                                         0.0     22,496           0.3      0.0      6,894

                                   Panel D: Words in 1st Claim
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.      N                            Agg.    Disp.   N
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                  0.0    2,226                          0.2      0.0   496
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.0    1,880                          0.0      0.0   657
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0    1,588                          0.0      0.0   553
   Communications                                      0.0    2,794                           0.1     0.0  1,068
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      0.0    5,745                          0.1      0.0  2,076
   Miscellaneous†                                      0.0    2,791                           0.0     0.0   748
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     0.0    3,723                          0.0      0.0  1,187
   All tests                                                         0.0     20,747           0.1      0.0      6,785
   For D-index, columns labelled “Rej.” report the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of equality between
  the observed and the reference distribution at 1% level. For MTAD, columns labelled “Agg.” (“Disp.”) report the
  share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of random allocation at 1% level in favor of agglomeration (dispersion).
  All tests are conducted within art-unit-subclass cells with more than 20 applications for the D-index and more than
  50 applications for MTAD. † Miscellaneous = “Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture,
  National Security and License & Review.”


                                                           36
Table A6: D-index and MTAD Tests within Art-Unit-Class-Subclass (share
rejecting random allocation at 5% significance level, by technology center)

                                Panel A: USPC secondary subclass
                                                       D-index                                       MTAD
   Technology Center                                Rej.      N                              Agg.    Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry              23.3    1,425                            2.2      16.2 2,132
   Chemical and Materials Engineering               10.4     431                              0.5     19.3 1,474
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security     1.2     253                             0.0      0.0   470
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution        4.5     154                             0.0       0.7  280
   Communications                                    1.7     362                              0.0      0.2  639
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems    3.4     741                             0.1      0.7  1,847
   Miscellaneous†                                    6.3     222                             0.2      1.9   464
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products   6.4     314                              0.8      1.6  893
   All tests                                                        11.6      3,902           0.8      8.1      8,199

                                        Panel B: Assignee
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.     N                             Agg.    Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry                38.3     81                             4.5     0.8   355
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                 20.1    134                             2.3     6.9   389
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       1.5    274                            0.0      0.0   569
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          7.1     85                            0.0      0.0   475
   Communications                                      1.2    430                             0.1     0.0   948
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      3.0    880                            0.2      0.5  1,819
   Miscellaneous†                                      5.5    219                            1.0      0.6   525
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     8.6    396                             1.5     0.4   797
   All tests                                                         5.8      2,499           0.8      0.8      5,877

                                  Panel C: DOCDB Family Size
                                                     D-index                                         MTAD
   Technology Center                               Rej.      N                               Agg.    Disp.   N
   Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry             0.1     1,590                              1.4     0.0   512
   Chemical and Materials Engineering              0.0     2,266                             1.5      0.0   470
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security   0.1     1,879                             0.3      0.0   616
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution      0.0     1,605                             0.0      0.0   526
   Communications                                  0.0     2,802                              0.1     0.0   981
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems  0.0     5,806                             0.5      0.0  1,952
   Miscellaneous†                                  0.2     2,789                              0.7     0.0   711
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products 0.1     3,759                             1.0      0.0  1,126
   All tests                                                         0.1     22,496           0.6      0.0      6,894

                                   Panel D: Words in 1st Claim
                                                         D-index                                     MTAD
   Technology Center                                  Rej.      N                            Agg.    Disp.   N
   Chemical and Materials Engineering                  0.0    2,226                          1.0      0.0   496
   Computer Architecture, Software, and Security       0.0    1,880                          0.2      0.0   657
   Computer Networking and Video Distribution          0.0    1,588                          0.0      0.0   553
   Communications                                      0.0    2,794                           0.2     0.0  1,068
   Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems      0.1    5,745                          0.5      0.0  2,076
   Miscellaneous†                                      0.0    2,791                           0.3     0.0   748
   Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, Products     0.0    3,723                          0.5      0.0  1,187
   All tests                                                         0.0     20,747           0.4      0.0      6,785
   For D-index, columns labelled “Rej.” report the share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of equality between
  the observed and the reference distribution at 5% level. For MTAD, columns labelled “Agg.” (“Disp.”) report the
  share of tests that reject the null hypothesis of random allocation at 5% level in favor of agglomeration (dispersion).
  All tests are conducted within art-unit-subclass cells with more than 20 applications for the D-index and more than
  50 applications for MTAD. † Miscellaneous = “Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture,
  National Security and License & Review.”


                                                           37
