NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GENTRIFICATION AND THE AMENITY VALUE OF CRIME REDUCTIONS: EVIDENCE
FROM RENT DEREGULATION
David H. Autor
Christopher J. Palmer
Parag A. Pathak
Working Paper 23914
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23914

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

We thank seminar participants at NBER Summer Institute (Crime and Real Estate Sessions),
Berkeley-Haas, UBC-Sauder, and the Urban Economics Association, as well as our discussants
Ingrid Gould Ellen, Kevin Lang, and Jacob Macdonald for helpful comments and suggestions.
Anthony Braga and Sara Heller provided terrific comments. We acknowledge generous financial
support from the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy (TDA051711), the National Science
Foundation (SES-962572), and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (B2009-47). Palmer thanks the
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (grant 0645960) and the Fisher
Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics. We are grateful to Sookyo Jeong, Andrew Garin,
Sam Hughes, Karen Scott, Yuqi Song, and Daniel Sullivan for their extraordinary research
assistance, and to Rich Sevieri and Lt. Daniel Wagner of the Cambridge Police Department for
facilitating extensive access to Cambridge Police archives. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by David H. Autor, Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gentrification and the Amenity Value of Crime Reductions: Evidence from Rent Deregulation
David H. Autor, Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 23914
October 2017
JEL No. D61,R21,R23,R28
ABSTRACT
Gentrification involves large-scale neighborhood change whereby new residents and improved
amenities increase property values. In this paper, we study whether and how much public safety
improvements are capitalized by the housing market after an exogenous shock to the
gentrification process. We use variation induced by the sudden end of rent control in Cambridge,
Massachusetts in 1995 to examine within-Cambridge variation in reported crime across
neighborhoods with different rent-control levels, abstracting from the prevailing city-wide decline
in criminal activity. Using detailed location-specific incident-level criminal activity data
assembled from Cambridge Police Department archives for the years 1992 through 2005, we find
robust evidence that rent decontrol caused overall crime to fall by 16 percent—approximately
1,200 reported crimes annually—with the majority of the effect accruing through reduced
property crime. By applying external estimates of criminal victimization’s economic costs, we
calculate that the crime reduction due to rent deregulation generated approximately $10 million
(in 2008 dollars) of annual direct benefit to potential victims. Capitalizing this benefit into
property values, this crime reduction accounts for 15 percent of the contemporaneous growth in
the Cambridge residential property values that is attributable to rent decontrol. Our findings
establish that reductions in crime are an important part of gentrification and generate substantial
economic value. They also show that standard cost-of-crime estimates are within the bounds
imposed by the aggregate price appreciation due to rent decontrol.
David H. Autor
Department of Economics, E52-438
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu
Christopher J. Palmer
Sloan School of Management, E62-539
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
cjpalmer@mit.edu

Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics, E52-426
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Neighborhood prosperity and safety typically trend in opposite directions: affluent households enter;
criminal activity falls; other amenities improve; low-income residents vacate; additional affluent residents enter; and so on.1 These changes in neighborhood characteristics are ultimately equilibrated
by price responses in the housing market. In fact, the premise of the popular hedonic method to
valuing non-priced neighborhood amenities rests on the existence of such price effects. In a pioneering contribution, Thaler (1978) estimates that a one-standard deviation increase in property
crime reduces property values by 3 percent.2 However, the feedback between neighborhood amenities and prices makes it difficult to isolate the contribution of any particular part of the cycle of
neighborhood change on prices, absent a large exogenous shock.3 In this paper, we use the largely
unanticipated elimination of rent control regulations in Cambridge Massachusetts in 1995 to study
how rent-control induced gentrification affects criminal activity and is capitalized by the housing
market.4
Gentrification, which we define as the inflow of households with higher socioeconomic status to
urban neighborhoods, can increase or decrease crime.5 On one hand, crime may increase with the
influx of relatively affluent residents, who make targets more lucrative. The “collective socialization”
view of neighborhoods (see, e.g., Wilson, 1987; Sampson, Raudenbush and Earls, 1997) suggests that
gentrification-induced turnover may reduce social cohesion and also increase crime. By contrast,
several other forces would cause gentrification to reduce crime. Wealthier residents are more likely to
invest in private security measures, such as alarm systems, which deter crime (Farrell, Tilley, Tseloni
and Mailley, 2011). Increases in the local property tax base and wealthier residents’ influence on
municipal priorities may increase resources devoting to crime-fighting. The “broken windows” theory
holds that upgrading properties, which generally accompanies gentrification, may deter criminal
activity (Wilson and Kelling, 1982). Furthermore, increasing rents may force local residents who
commit crimes to relocate. Finally, if gentrification supports increased local economic opportunity,
incumbent criminals move away from criminal activity. Mirroring these ambiguous theoretical
1

See Guerrieri, Hartley and Hurst (2013) for theory and evidence on the self-reinforcing cycle of gentrification
and property value appreciation.
2
In more recent studies, Gibbons (2004) finds a 10 percent decrease in property values for a one standard
deviation increase in property crime. Bishop and Murphy (2011) employ a dynamic hedonic model to estimate
a $472 willingness-to-pay to avoid a 10% increase in nearby violent crime. Pope and Pope (2012) exploits time series
variation across zip codes to estimate the elasticity of property value with respect to crime between -0.15 to -0.35.
3
Several papers describe issues with the hedonic method and assumptions needed to consistently estimate the
willingness to pay (e.g., Bartik (1987), Epple (1987), Bajari and Benkard (2005)). Recent papers have focused on
challenges related to omitted variables bias by exploiting comparisons across fine geographic areas such as Black’s
(1999) study of school quality, and the Linden and Rockoff (2008) and Pope (2008) studies on the housing market
impacts of registered sex offenders. Several papers in environment economics exploit quasi-experimental variation
stemming from policies such as the Clean Air Act to construct market-driven estimates of the costs of pollution
from the housing market (see, e.g., Chay and Greenstone (2005), Sullivan (2017), and Isen, Rossin-Slater and Walker
(2017)). See Hilber (2017) for a survey of capitalization effects.
4
There is no consensus definition of gentrification (see, e.g., Vigdor (2002)). Guerrieri et al. (2013), for instance,
define it as an expansion of the footprint of wealthy residents.
5
A parallel literature examines the reverse channel; for example, Cullen and Levitt (1999) and Ellen, Horn and
Reed (2017) document changes in neighborhood composition resulting from changes in local crime.

1

predictions, the existing empirical evidence on the relationship between crime and neighborhood
change is mixed (McDonald, 1986; Van Wilsem, Wittebrood and De Graaf, 2006; Covington and
Taylor, 1989; Taylor and Covington, 1988; Lee, 2010; Papachristos, Smith, Scherer and Fugiero,
2011; Aliprantis and Hartley, 2015).
In this paper, we exploit a unique policy change which generates quasi-experimental variation in
gentrification to estimate causal effects on crime and validate measures of the potential victimization
costs of crime using housing market price reactions. Like many urban areas in the U.S., Cambridge
saw sharply rising house prices and falling crime rates during the 1990s. Prior to 1995, Cambridge
had widespread stringent rent regulations that depressed housing values, as shown by Autor, Palmer
and Pathak (2014). A referendum eliminated rent control in 1995 and generated cross-sectional
differences among neighborhoods with varied exposure to rent decontrol. Using data assembled
from the archives of the Cambridge Police Department from 1992-2005, we relate these differences
across neighborhoods to the spatial distribution of criminal activity over time. We then relate these
effects to widely-used external estimates on the victimization costs of crime by Cohen and Piquero
(2009) and examine whether they are reasonable since they should not be greater than the overall
amount of price appreciation due to rent decontrol.6
Several distinctive features of Cambridge’s rent control regime make it particularly well-suited to
the analysis of neighborhood-level effects. The rent-control ordinance only applied to a fixed, nonexpanding set of residential units—specifically, non-owner occupied rental houses, condominiums, or
apartments built prior to 1969. While only about one third of residential units were subject to rent
controls prior to 1995, this fraction frequently exceeded sixty percent in neighborhoods that had
older housing stocks and substantial numbers of renters when rent control was enacted in 1970. This
neighborhood-level variation allows us to assess the impact of rent decontrol on criminal activity
by comparing pre- and post-decontrol changes in the incidence of crime among neighborhoods with
different exposures to rent control. Using unique location-specific data on every verified crime in
Cambridge between 1992 and 2005, we track the evolution of criminal activity by drawing tight
geographic comparisons across narrow slices of the city, while also accounting for aggregate citylevel trends in criminal activity and detailed neighborhood-specific trends at the level of Census
tracts. We find robust evidence that rent decontrol caused overall crime to fall by 16 percent—
approximately 1,200 reported crimes annually—with the majority of the effect accruing through
reduced property crime and public disturbances.
We then quantify the relative importance of neighborhood change’s impact on public safety
by asking how our estimates on crime and its external costs compare to changes in Cambridge
property values due to rent deregulation. Rent decontrol improved housing values through many
channels, including upgrading of properties, turnover of tenants and improvements in public safety.
The total market valuation of the reduction in crime due to rent control is bounded above by
6

Cohen and Piquero (2009) is an updated version of the Miller, Cohen and Wiersema (1996) report, and has
been widely used in cost-benefit calculations and other economic applications. Some examples include Lochner and
Moretti (2004), Kling, Ludwig and Katz (2005), Heckman and Masterov (2007), Linden and Rockoff (2008), Dahl
and DellaVigna (2009), Deming (2011), and Carpenter and Dobkin (2011).

2

the total appreciation of the Cambridge housing stock driven by decontrol. We therefore compare
price effects from widely-used estimates on the victimization costs of crime by Cohen and Piquero
(2009) to the overall price appreciation to gauge whether these external estimates are plausible.7
Autor et al. (2014) show that additional investment activity could at most explain 12 percent of the
appreciation of Cambridge residential properties, leaving the rest explained by the capitalization
of other benefits of rent decontrol. We find that the crime reduction due to rent deregulation
generated approximately $10 million (in 2008) dollars of annual direct benefit to potential victims.
Capitalizing this benefit into property values, this crime reduction accounts for 16 percent of the
contemporaneous growth in Cambridge residential property values due to rent decontrol. This
fact implies that the standard cost-of-crime estimates are within the bounds imposed by price
appreciation driven by rent decontrol.
We also contribute to a recent literature measuring the indirect consequences of rent-control
policies.8 Sims (2007) and Sims (2011) study other aspects of the end of rent control in Cambridge,
and study changes to housing-unit quality and neighborhood demographics, respectively. Fetter
(2016) finds that strict rent control ordinances contributed to the post-war rise in homeownership.
Diamond, McQuade and Qian (2017) use variation from rent-control eligibility changes in San
Francisco to estimate the welfare effects of rent control on tenants and landlords. Complementing
this body of work, our paper emphasizes how changes in public safety are an important side-effect
of housing-market regulations.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides brief background on Cambridge’s rent control
and its demographic changes in the 1990s. Section 3 details our data sources for neighborhood crime
and housing markets as well as our measure of exposure to gentrification. Section 4 introduces our
empirical strategy and baseline results, and section 5 corroborates these results with several robustness exercises. Section 6 estimates the economic magnitude of the changes in criminal activity we
observe and quantifies their relative importance in explaining the housing-market boom experienced
by Cambridge from 1995–2005. Section 7 concludes.

2

Cambridge Rent Control and Demographic Changes

Seeking to provide affordable rental housing and encourage further development, the state of Massachusetts permitted local municipalities to enact their own rent control ordinances provided they
conformed to state guidelines. Cambridge’s rent control law went into effect at the end of 1970 and
only applied to structures built before January 1, 1969. The ordinance attempted to fix landlord
profits at real 1969 levels. The law’s administration involved apartment-specific rent ceilings and
made it difficult to remove housing units from the rental market. By 1987, rent-controlled units
7

Cohen and Piquero (2009) is an updated version of the Miller et al. (1996) report, and has been widely used
in cost-benefit calculations and other economic applications. Some examples include Lochner and Moretti (2004),
Kling et al. (2005), Heckman and Masterov (2007), Linden and Rockoff (2008), Dahl and DellaVigna (2009), Deming
(2011), and Carpenter and Dobkin (2011).
8
In more theoretical work, Andersson and Svensson (2014) develop a price equilibrium concept suited to a rentcontrol regime wherein units must be rationed.

3

were priced about 40% below market rates.9
By the early 1990s, only Cambridge, Boston, and Brookline had surviving rent-control ordinances. Rent control was relatively popular in those places, and hence local referenda to curtail or
eliminate rent control consistently failed. Rent control opponents overcame this impasse by fielding
a state-wide ballot initiative that succeeded in putting a rent control question on the November
1994 ballot. The referendum eliminating rent control passed 51% to 49%, with almost 60% of
Cambridge voters opposed. Rent deregulation in Cambridge began shortly thereafter on January
1, 1995, with a limited number of tenants receiving a 1 to 2 year grace period of protection before
complete deregulation.
The top panel of Figure 1 plots the geographic distribution of exposure to rent control by 1990
Census block. In the figure, exposure to rent control, or rent control intensity (RCI), is the fraction
of units in the block that were rent controlled. Darker-shaded blocks indicate higher RCI quintiles.
While 38% of residential housing was actively rent controlled in 1994, there is significant spatial
variation in RCI across blocks. Denser areas with more rental housing and pre-1969 housing stock
often have rent control-market shares exceeding 60% and are frequently located near blocks with
relatively less rent-control exposure. This cross-sectional variation allows us to relate pre- and postderegulation spatial trends in criminal activity to the local gentrification that was induced by the
sudden end of rent control in January 1995.
As discussed in Autor et al. (2014), in the years following deregulation, resident turnover increased markedly, rents at newly-deregulated units jumped 40-80%, landlord investment in deregulated rental units intensified, and property values rose for both deregulated units and never-regulated
owner-occupied properties situated in neighborhoods with significant pre-1994 rent-control shares.
Table 1 details the demographic changes in Cambridge between the 1990 and 2000 Decennial Censuses, measured at the census tract level.10 Overall, the population of Cambridge became denser,
more multiracial, higher income, and more educated. The average tract’s share of white-collar workers increased by 23 percentage points. To investigate whether some of these demographic changes
were accelerated by the end of rent control, we estimate difference-in-difference regressions that
control for tract and time effects. Let ygt be a demographic characteristic in census tract geography
g in year t ∈ {1990, 2000}. Our estimating equation is
ygt = αg + δt + γ RCIg × Postt + εgt ,
where αg are Census tract fixed effects, δt are time effects, RCIg is Rent Control Intensity measured
as the fraction units in the tract subject to rent control, and Postt is an indicator for 2000. The
estimates of γ shown in column 4 of Table 1 show that, for the most part, demographic trends
were similar in neighborhoods with high and low exposure to rent control. Notably, neighborhoods
with high levels of rent control experienced statistically significant relative decreases in the share
9

Additional details of Cambridge’s rent control regime and the process of decontrol are provided in Autor et al.
(2014). See also Sims (2007), who found that upkeep in regulated units was worse than in unregulated units.
10
To make tract boundaries comparable, we use geographically harmonized census data provided by Geolytics.

4

of juveniles living therein and significant increases in the share of residents currently attending
college.11

3

Data and Measurement

We briefly discuss our data sources and measurements of rent control intensity in this section, with
further details in the Data Appendix.

3.1

Cambridge Crime Data

Our microdata on reported crime comes from the Cambridge Police Department archives. The data
begin in 1992 and comprise all incidents recorded in real time by the police department as “Calls for
Service.” Each record contains information on the reported crime, including its date and location.
From 1992–1996, the data were recorded on shift logs by typewriter. In 1997, the department
switched to an electronic database. To form our sample, we manually enter each incident’s relevant
details from the physical typewritten pages for 1992–1996 and then append the electronic data for
1997–2005. Occasionally, the location of an incident is specified without an address, e.g., a local
business name is provided as the address. In such cases, we manually look up each location and
record its nearest street address using tools like Google Maps. We then determine the latitude and
longitude of each address so that we can allocate it to various geographies. The crime count in our
data set closely tracks the city-wide counts that the Cambridge Police Department provides to the
FBI, as discussed further in the Data Appendix.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots the geographic distribution of criminal activity by 1990
Census block, averaged across reporting years 1992–2005. Darker-shaded blocks indicate higher
quintiles of criminal activity. To measure criminal activity, we average the annual number of total
crimes reported in a given block, normalized by block area (1,000 square meters). Criminal activity
is most concentrated along commercial thoroughfares and around town squares that also serve as
public transit hubs. In comparing the top and bottom panels of Figure 1, criminal activity appears
to move more smoothly in space than does exposure to rent control. Nevertheless, there is still
substantial within-neighborhood variation in criminal activity.
To measure the effect of rent decontrol on crime, it seems reasonable that changes in crime
should be proportional to changes in the level of reported crime. For instance, neighborhoods with
little crime may not experience the same reduction in their crime levels as neighborhoods with
high levels of crime. A natural specification would therefore examine log of crime as the dependent
variable. However, the high frequency of zero reported crimes at the block × year level prevents
such a specification. Instead, we normalize our count of crimes by area, following strategies used
in criminology research, and use the number of crimes per 1,000 square meters (see Bowes and

11

Using data at a finer geographic level and more sophisticated racial composition measures, Sims (2011) found
evidence that post-rent control turnover decreased minority shares, although segregation decreased slightly as well.

5

Ihlanfeldt, 2001; Ihlanfeldt and Mayock, 2010; City of New York Police Department, 2015). We also
investigate count specifications using Poisson regressions.
We classify each crime incident into crime categories based on the Cambridge Police Department
classification system, which closely resembles the FBI Uniform Crime Reporting categories. The
four categories and their most frequent components are:
1. Property Crime: Larceny, Burglary, Fraud, Shoplifting, Arson;
2. Public Disturbances: Public Disturbance, Simple Assault, Destruction of Property, Property
Damage, Vandalism, Trespassing, Prostitution, Illegal Firearm Possession;
3. Drugs and Alcohol: Possession of Hypodermic Needle, Possession of Class A/B/C/D/E Drugs,
Trafficking, Alcohol in Minor’s Possession, Unlawful Sale of Alcohol, Possession of Heroin or
Marijuana;
4. Violent Crime: Abduction, Murder and Attempted Murder, Rape, Robbery, Aggravated Assault.
Panel A of Table 2 reports summary statistics by crime category at the block level, describing the
annual number of crimes per 1,000 square meters by Census block. The table shows that property
crime and public disturbance crimes are the most common types of crime in Cambridge, while
violent crime and reported drug/alcohol crime are relatively infrequent. There are blocks with zero
reported crimes in a given year; there are also blocks with reported crime counts over fifty times
the average block’s crimes per area, such that the spatial distribution skews right.
Figure 2 plots proportional trends in reported crime by category by plotting log crime counts
by category, each normalized to be 0 in 1992. The blue-circles line shows total crime declining
significantly and steadily from 1994–1997. By 2000, while each category declined city-wide from
1992 levels by 20% or more, violent crime and public disturbances fell the most, declining 40–50 log
points from 1992–2000.12
Since the 1990s are widely seen as a period of improving public safety in urban neighborhoods,
it’s possible that the decrease in crime in Cambridge is not unusual relative to other cities and
therefore has little to do with rent deregulation. To investigate whether Cambridge’s experience
is distinct and plausibly related to the 1995 policy change, we use data from the FBI Uniform
Crime Reports on annual total crimes from 1985–2012 for the 147 cities with populations between
75,000 and 150,000. We chose these comparison cities because Cambridge’s population was about
94,000 in 1994. To test whether Cambridge’s city-wide experience seems atypical of the urban
renaissance experienced by many medium-sized cities during this time period, we estimate the
following difference-in-difference specification at the city c × year t level:
log(total crimesct ) = αc + γt + β Treatedc × Postt + εct ,
12

(1)

Appendix Figure A1 presents a version of Figure 2 in levels to compare trends in the relative frequencies of each
crime category.

6

treating each city as the treated city and the rest as controls. That is, we fit equation (1) a total
of 147 times, looping over all cities and counting each city as treated (e.g., Treatedc = 1) one at
a time to characterize where in the distribution of comparison cities Cambridge’s crime pattern
lies. We define Postt to be a dummy for whether year t is greater than or equal to 1995, and αc
and γt are city and year fixed effects, respectively. Figure 3 plots the kernel density of these 147
estimated β̂ coefficients. The modal city’s estimate of β is negative, and roughly 60% of city-level
coefficients were negative, a result that is consistent with the view that most cities enjoyed declining
crime rates throughout the 1990s, as compared to pre-1995, although several medium-sized cities
in the data had an increase in total crimes reported post-1995 relative to pre-1995. Cambridge
is at the 8.8th percentile of the coefficient distribution, corresponding to a rank of 13 out of 147.
This result—that Cambridge’s decrease in crime significantly exceeded the average similarly sized
city’s drop in crime—also speaks to whether the relative decreases in crime we document below
merely represent within-Cambridge displacement of criminal activity from treated neighborhoods
to untreated neighborhoods. The fact that crime decreased city-wide in Cambridge after 1994
relative to similarly sized cities across the country over the same time period suggests that our
estimated public safety improvements had non-negligible aggregate effects.

3.2

Defining Neighborhoods and Exposure to Gentrification

Since our research design exploits cross-neighborhood comparisons of rent control exposure induced
by the elimination of rent control, it is necessary to define neighborhoods as well as rent-control
exposure. Neighborhoods are commonly defined in terms of Census geographies. However, one
drawback of using Census boundaries is that census blocks often align with street center lines,
meaning that houses on opposite sides of a street are assigned to different blocks. As a result,
blocks do not closely correspond to the geographies perceived by neighborhood residents.
Following best practices in criminology (e.g., Weisburd, Groff and Yang, 2012), we manually
adjust Census block boundaries to ensure that both sides of the street are in the same block. We
refer to these as adjusted blocks; they can be seen as block faces, i.e. street segments bounded by
the two closest cross-streets, as in Ellen, Lacoe and Sharygin (2013), merged to mimic the size of
Census blocks. Figure 4 provides an example of this procedure by outlining two blocks in Harvard
Square. The left-hand panel shows that the block boundaries in the red and blue rectangles run
down the middle of Church Street and JFK Street, meaning that opposite sides of the same street
are in different official Census blocks. The adjusted blocks in the right-hand panel, by contrast, have
been moved north of Church Street and West of JFK Street so that both sides of the same street
are in the same adjusted block. We utilize this adjusted-block concept throughout our analysis.
To measure exposure to gentrification induced by the end of rent control in Cambridge, we
calculate the fraction of nearby units (weighted by distance) that were rent controlled prior to
January 1995. Autor et al. (2014) show that resident turnover rates, appreciation in rents and
property values, and improvements in the quality of the housing stock that accompanied the end
of rent control were proportional to the rent-control density of the area. We measure this exposure
7

using an exponential decay function to determine the Rent Control Intensity of each adjusted block
in Cambridge g as a function of its distance from all other RC (rent controlled) units j in Cambridge,
where the weight given to each unit j is declining in its distance from g. Let dgj be the shortest
distance between the boundary of adjusted block g and the location of housing unit j measured in
miles (with dgj = 0 if housing unit j falls inside of block g), λ > 0 be a positive constant, J be the
complete set of residential units in Cambridge, and RCj be a dummy variable equal to 1 if unit j is
rent controlled and 0 otherwise. For adjusted block g, our distance-based measure of gentrification
RCIλ is

RCj × e−λdgj

P
RCIλg

=

j∈J

P

j∈J

e−λdgj

.

(2)

Higher values of λ put less weight on units far away from the current block. As λ grows large,
this measure puts all of the weight on own-block gentrification. Following Autor et al. (2014), we
present results using λ = 12 and examine robustness to alternative specifications using higher and
lower values of λ, including specifications we refer to as λ = ∞ that only measure RCI at the block
level. Panel B of Table 2 reports summary statistics for RCIλ for a range of parameter values for
λ. Average RCI is falling in λ while the standard deviation of each RCI measure is increasing in λ
as larger weights put more emphasis on smaller (and thus more volatile) areas in the exponential
decay functional form in (2).

4

Empirical Strategy

4.1

Research Design

Disentangling the simultaneous relationship between public safety improvements and gentrification
poses a significant empirical challenge due to their co-determination. The unique natural experiment
afforded by the sudden end of rent control mitigates many of these issues by providing a clean
exogenous measure of exposure to subsequent gentrification forces. Panel data on criminal activity
at fine geographies allows us to account for fixed differences across space—most importantly, the
heterogeneity that exists in baseline crime levels across neighborhoods within Cambridge—and
ascertain whether and how the frequency of reported crimes changed in response to post-rent control
gentrification.
Our empirical specifications explain changes in the level of crimes per 1,000 square meters after
the end of rent control, as discussed in Section 3.1. Denoting annual crimes per area measure as
ygt , our baseline specification is
ygt = αg + δt + β0 RCIλg + β1 RCIλg × Postt + εgt ,

(3)

where αg and δt are adjusted Census block and year fixed effects, respectively; RCIλg is the Rent
Control Intensity (exposure measure) of block g given exponential-decay parameter λ as specified in
equation (2) above, and Postt is an indicator for years 1995 through the end of the sample (2005).

8

We cluster our standard errors at the level of the adjusted block, since reported criminal activity in
a block is not independent across years.13
The coefficient of interest in this specification is β1 , which measures the differential change in
crime in high versus low RCI areas after rent control’s elimination. For estimates of β1 to represent
the causal effect of rent decontrol (and the resulting gentrification) on local crime, we require the
following identifying assumptions. First, the change in rent control status needs to be exogenous.
This seems plausible given the uncertain and close nature of the rent control ballot referendum
coupled with strong local opposition to ending rent control. This assumption is also consistent with
our event studies, which show that criminal activity in high RCI areas did not seem to be on a
differential trend prior to 1995. Second, conditional on the exposure variable RCI, and conditional
on our detailed geographic and time fixed effects, RCI × Post needs to measure only the change in
criminal activity caused by the end of rent control and not other factors correlated with rent control
intensity but not caused by the end of rent control.
The end of rent control in 1995 coincided with a nationwide period of urban renaissance, which
raises the possibility of confounding trends. The time effects δt in our estimating model will absorb
these changes to the degree that they affect the overall level of reported crimes in Cambridge. Time
effects do not absorb any differential safety improvement in rent control-intensive neighborhoods.
We address this concern by estimating specifications containing tract trends, in addition to 816 geographic main effects for Cambridge blocks, thereby allowing the rate of falling crime to differ across
Census tracts. Section 5 discusses and addresses remaining potential concerns with identification in
the context of equation (3).

4.2

Main Results

Table 3 presents results from estimating equation (3) for rent decontrol’s causal effect on annual
reported total crimes per 1,000 square meters at the Census block level from 1992–2005. Each
column reports results using a different value of λ to calculate Rent Control Intensity, as in equation
(2), and the top and bottom panels reflect specifications without and with linear tract trends,
respectively. The negative coefficients on RCI × Post mean that, relative to a given block’s fixed
effects, a block with higher exposure to post-rent control gentrification saw a larger annual decrease
in crime. To put each coefficient into more readily interpretable units, the table converts each point
estimate into a measure of the annual effect on reported crimes of a one standard deviation higher
value of Rent Control Intensity (recall from Table 2 that the standard deviation of RCI increases in
λ). Focusing on our preferred value of λ = 12 in column 2 of panel A, a block with a one standard
deviation higher exposure to rent deregulation can be expected to have a 11.3% decrease in total
crime. Different values of λ affect the point estimates somewhat, but with no discernible impact on

13

Appendix Table A1 reports spatial standard errors for our main estimates following Conley (1999). For each
estimate in the table, spatial standard errors are smaller than clustered standard errors. Accordingly, we report
clustered standard errors in the main tables to be conservative.

9

R2 .14 Estimates of the effect of a one standard deviation increase in rent control exposure on crime
range from a low of -11.3% to a high of -15.4%, showing our preference for λ = 12 to be the most
conservative.
We control for differential neighborhood crime pre-trends that could invalidate the estimates in
panel A in two ways. First, panel B reports results based on specifications that allow each tract to
have its own linear time trend. If public safety on blocks in high-RCI areas is improving faster even
before the end of rent control, then the decrease in criminal activity after the end of rent control
in those locations could be unrelated to the end-of-rent-control–induced gentrification and instead
simply a continuation of secular improvements in certain neighborhoods. Allowing for tract-specific
linear time trends allows us to learn whether the decrease in criminal activity we saw in panel A is
consistent with not only a decrease in crime relative to baseline crime levels (block fixed effects) but
also relative to prevailing trends. The estimated RCI × Post coefficients in columns 1–5 of panel B
are each smaller than their panel A counterparts, but still statistically significant. Instead of a one
standard deviation higher exposure to rent control corresponding to a 11–15% decrease in crime
in panel A, the results in panel B suggest that after accounting for tract trends, a one standard
deviation higher RCI measure corresponds to a 7–12% decrease in criminal activity after the end of
rent control.
The second way we test whether our results are driven by differential neighborhood trends
is to estimate an event study version of equation (3), replacing RCI × Post with a full set of
interactions between RCI and calendar year dummies. Because of the fixed effects αg , we omit
RCIg × 1(t = 1994). This normalization means that the event study coefficients plotted in Figure 5
reflect how criminal activity changed in Cambridge along the dimension of exposure to rent control
relative to the relationship between RCI and crime in 1994. Panel A extends the specification of
Table 3 panel A without tract trends, and panel B adds the tract trends described above in the
context of Table 3’s panel B. In both panels, there is no statistically detectable trend in criminal
activity along the treatment dimension. In fact, while we would be most concerned with a pre-trend
that showed crime already falling in high-RCI areas, the plots show that, if anything, crime rose
slightly in the years immediately preceding rent deregulation, i.e., 1992-1994, in higher-RCI blocks
relative to lower-RCI blocks, although this trend is not statistically significant. It is reassuring that
tracts with higher exposure to gentrification caused by the end of rent control do not seem to have
been on differential paths before the end of rent control.
The time path of the coefficients in Figure 5 suggest a swift change in criminal activity following
the end of rent control, with crime falling significantly from 1994 baseline levels in high vs. low
RCI blocks. While the 1995 coefficient is statistically indistinguishable from zero, the 1996–1999
coefficients are consistent with an appreciable drop in total crimes in the years following rent control,
a time when resident turnover and residential investment were particularly high in formerly rent14

To visualize the relative invariance of R2 to choice of weighting parameter λ, Appendix Figure A2 plots the sum
of squared errors from estimating equation (3) for a fine grid of values of the parameter λ for specifications with and
without tract trends. The SSE envelope is relatively flat, meaning that a wide range of weighting parameters λ fit
the data nearly equally well.

10

controlled housing units (Autor et al., 2014). The estimates plotted in both panels are consistent
with criminal activity undergoing a permanent relative decrease attributable to gentrification. The
estimates with trends in panel B show a slight but incomplete and imprecise convergence back
to 1994 crime levels. Taken together, the specifications that allow for tract trends, including the
event study plots, provide strong evidence for a causal relationship between the gentrification that
followed rent deregulation in Cambridge and decreased in criminal activity from 1995–2005.
We learn from Table 3 and Figure 5 that, after the end of rent control, total crime fell further
in the Cambridge neighborhoods that were most exposed to rent control. Which categories of
crime were most affected by deregulation-induced gentrification? Table 4 addresses this question by
repeating our main specification in column 2 of Table 3, where the outcome corresponds to particular
crime categories. The results suggest that all crime categories experienced statistically significant
and economically meaningful declines in crime because of the end of rent control, with the largest
effects for public disturbances and drug and alcohol crime. A block with a one standard deviation
higher exposure to rent control experiences an 13% and 14% decrease in public disturbances and
drug- and alcohol-related crime, respectively. Violent crime, which is widely considered far costlier
than other categories of crime, also experienced a significant 12% drop that is attributable to the
end of rent control. Comparing these by-category point estimates with the total crimes estimates
in Table 3, the estimated effect on total crimes is closest in magnitude to the property-crimes
coefficient, driven by that category accounting for the largest share of total crimes (see Table 2). In
this sense, focusing on results on total crimes that pool categories together is conservative. Panel
B of Table 4 mirrors panel B of Table 3 by controlling for tract trends. As before, this reduces
the magnitude of the coefficients with the one standard deviation RCI effects ranging from 5–10%
reductions in crime. Still, all of the point estimates are still negative in the trends specification of
panel B, and only the drug and alcohol crime coefficient is statistically insignificant. After exploring
alternative estimation approaches (summarized below), we combine external estimates of crime’s
cost with our point estimates to quantify the these changes’ value to public safety, given disparate
costs to victims of these different types of crime.

5

Robustness to Alternative Specifications

One concern about our empirical approach relates to our choice to specify the dependent variable
as (normalized) counts. If secular reductions in crime happen proportionally, that is, the city-wide
trend reduces crime by a given percent instead of a given number of crimes, then specifying the
dependent variable in levels could indicate a spurious relationship between Rent Control Intensity
and reductions in crime. Specifically, if high-RCI areas also have high baseline crime levels and
crimes per area fall further in high-crime areas, then estimates of the RCI × Post coefficient could
be biased due to the correlation with initial crime levels.
As discussed above, we would ideally use the logarithm of crimes for our dependent variable, but
we are prohibited from doing so by the high frequency of zeroes in the data, especially at the block

11

by crime category by year level. Instead, we present several strategies to address this concern—in
addition to the trends specifications and event studies reported above—including Poisson regression,
nonlinear specifications of RCI that allow the effect to differ across the RCI distribution, and directly
controlling for initial crime levels. We also examine whether gentrification that is less clearly related
to the end of rent control (e.g., relative improvements in neighborhoods with close proximity to a
subway stop) seems to be a stronger predictor than RCI of decreased criminal activity.

5.1

Alternative Measures of Rent Control Intensity

Panel A of Table 5 allows for non-linearities in the causal effect of RCI by replacing the RCI × Post
term in equation (3) with interactions between Post and indicator variables for whether block g fell
into the second and third RCI terciles. Even-numbered columns report estimates that control for
linear tract trends, and odd columns report estimates that do not. Regardless of the λ parameter or
the trends specification used, the difference between total crime reductions within blocks at the first
(omitted category) and second RCI terciles is small and mostly statistically insignificant as well.
The strong RCI × Post results above are thus driven by blocks in highest third level of exposure to
post-deregulation gentrification, as seen in the third RCI tercile × Post results. As before, trends
somewhat attenuate the estimated magnitudes, but even allowing for trends and regardless of λ,
blocks in the third RCI tercile had larger declines in criminal activity than blocks with RCI values
outside the top third. This is consistent with two possible dynamics: either RCI and crime have a
non-linear relationship, with the RCI-crime gradient steepening in RCI; or alternatively, high-RCI
areas—which are also more likely to also be high-crime areas—experienced large declines in crime
in the 1990s independent of the causal effect of rent deregulation. This latter possibility motivates
specifications that directly incorporate initial crime levels, which we discuss below.
We also use fixed-effects Poisson regression, since it is natural for count-data settings (Hausman,
Hall and Griliches, 1984). We model the count of total crimes Ngt in block g and year t as
Ngt ∼ Poisson(N̄gt ),
where the conditional mean of the count of total reported crimes in block g in year t is given by
N̄gt and specified as
log N̄gt = αg + δt + β0 RCIλg + β1 RCIλg × Postt .
The Poisson specification allows for the effects of gentrification to be proportional to the initial
crime level. The coefficient β1 , for example, tells how the log conditional expectation of crime count
changes in response to a one unit increase in the given Rent Control Intensity measure. This calculation is particularly useful if the true effect of post-decontrol gentrification is in percentage points,
not normalized crime counts. The Poisson specification accounts for this, whereas a specification in
levels could potentially have initial crime as an important omitted variable.
The estimates of β1 in panel B of Table 5 are all negative but admittedly less precise than our
linear-estimator results in Table 3. The -0.285 coefficient in column 3 means that for a one standard
12

deviation increase in exposure to rent control, crime fell by 6% in the post period. In the fixedeffects Poisson model, including linear tract trends reduces estimated magnitudes by enough that
the point estimates in the even-numbered columns are statistically insignificant. The fixed-effects
Poisson regression accounts for the possible misspecification of trends by allowing the effect to be
additive in logs instead of in levels. However, the sensitivity to trends shown in Table 6 motivates
further investigation into the influence of initial crime levels.

5.2

Robustness to Initial Crime Levels

To measure the importance of initial crime levels in our normalized crime counts specifications, we
next report specifications that control for Initial Crime directly:
ygt = αg + δt + β0 Initial Crimeg × Postt + β1 RCIλg × Postt + β2 Initial Crimeg RCIλg × Postt + εgt ,
(4)
where ygt is the number of crimes per block group normalized by the geographic area of the block
group. The key addition relative to prior linear specifications is the variable Initial Crimeg , defined
as the number of crimes per 1,000 square meters in block g in 1992. Because 1992 crime rates are
used to calculate the regressors, 1992 is dropped from the estimation sample. We demean both
initial crime and RCI to be able to interpret the main effects directly as the effect of the indicated
variable given an average level of the other regressor of interest. We introduce a more flexible
function form of this interaction below.
Table 6 first contrasts the bivariate effects of RCI × Post and Initial Crime × Post (conditional
on block and year fixed effects) in columns 1 and 2 using RCI defined with λ = 12.15 Both RCI
and Initial Crime levels predict differential declines in criminal activity after the end of rent control
and explain a similar share of the spatial-temporal variation in crime counts. Column 3 shows that
when the correlation between the two is taken into account, as in equation (4), initial crime seems to
be a more accurate predictor of subsequent improvements in public safety. Accounting for the fact
that these factors may interact in contributing to declining crime, column 4 includes the interaction
term Initial Crime × RCI × Post. This inclusion reveals that, while initial crime and RCI are both
statistically and economically significant negative predictors of lower crime after rent deregulation,
their interaction is especially important in explaining falling crime rates.
Table 7 repeats the specification of column 4 of Table 6 for each of our four crime categories. In
each column, the interaction term Initial Crime × RCI × Post is strongly negative and significant,
while the main effect of RCI × Post is weaker than in Table 6, although still negative. The effect of a
standard deviation change in RCI on reported crimes in each category, conditional on initial crime,
is of the same order of magnitude as the results of Table 4 that do not condition on initial crime,
with the exception of Drug and Alcohol crime, which appears to have a more significant reduction
related to rent control when accounting for preexisting crime trends.
15

Note that column 1 of Table 6 differs from the estimate in column 3 of Table 3’s panel A only in that we have
to drop data from 1992 in the Table 6 specifications.

13

This evidence suggests the effects of rent decontrol-induced gentrification were strongest in
neighborhoods that had higher initial crime levels.

5.3

Flexible Specifications of Initial Crime

The specifications in panel A of Table 5 suggest that the relationship between RCI, initial crime
levels, and subsequent declines in criminal activity may be nonlinear. We probe this further by
estimating the relationship nonparametrically with a flexible third-order polynomial function of
interactions between RCI and initial crime by estimating
ygt = αg + δt +

3 X
3
X

βk` (RCIg )k (Initial Crimeg )` × Postt + εgt ,

k=0 `=0

where the coefficients βk` estimate the functional relationship between RCI and initial crime in
the post period, after controlling for time-invariant heterogeneity across neighborhoods αg and
Cambridge-wide time shocks δt . After estimating this equation, we examine the relationship visually
c gt against initial rent-control exposure and
by plotting the predicted post-period change in crime ∆y
crime levels in Figure 6, where we define the predicted post-period change in crime as
c gt =
∆y

3 X
3
X

β̂k` (RCIg )k (Initial Crimeg )` .

k=0 `=0

Post-rent-deregulation crime in Cambridge strongly declines from initial crime levels, but only
for areas with high exposure to gentrification due to previously heavy rent control. This pattern
can be seen by considering the initial crime axis of Figure 6. The relationship between initial crime
and future changes in crime is flat for all but the highest levels of RCI. The RCI axis also shows
that higher rent-control exposure values correlate with deeper declines in reported crime, but this
relationship is only detectable for initial crime levels above 3. Figure 6 shows that taken alone,
neither high RCI nor high initial crime was sufficient to produce meaningful declines in criminal
activity: gentrification improved safety predominantly in the areas with the highest initial crime
rates.

5.4

Other Neighborhood Trends

Our second identifying assumption is that the RCI×Post variable is conditionally unrelated to other
dimensions along which gentrification may have been occurring. It’s possible that gentrification is
in part spurred by improved public safety, which would complicate the interpretation of our result
linking gentrification to declines in local crime. Put simply, neighborhoods with high exposure to
rent control may also be gentrifying for reasons unrelated to rent decontrol.
To address this concern, we examine several candidate neighborhood characteristics that plausibly correlate with Rent Control Intensity in order to see a) whether these characteristics play a
stronger role than Rent Control Intensity in predicting declines in crime and b) whether control14

ling for these characteristics attenuates the end of rent control’s estimate effect on criminal activity.
Specifically, we consider a block’s proximity (defined as negative distance in kilometers) to the nearest subway station, proximity to the nearest public housing project, and its census tract’s initial
poverty rate (measured by the 1990 Decennial Census) as three factors that may each simultaneously correlate with secular gentrification trends, decreased local criminal activity, and Rent Control
Intensity.
Table 8 reports results on each of these factors as omitted variables in accounting for the effects
of rent control exposure. Column 1 repeats the specification of column 1 of Table 6 for reference,
showing the statistical significance of RCI × Post as a predictor of lower reported crimes per area.
Columns 2, 6, and 10 show difference-in-difference estimates where the treatment variable is each of
the three candidate omitted variables. Columns 3, 7, and 11 test whether the estimated RCI × Post
effect is robust to controlling for each of these factors interacted with Post. Columns 4, 8, and 12
check for meaningful interactions between RCI × Post and each omitted variable to see if a similar
relationship exists between these factors and rent-control intensity as was demonstrated above in the
case of initial crime levels. Finally, columns 5, 9, and 13 additionally include initial crime interacted
with Post and each neighborhood factor to examine whether the initial crime relationship itself is
driven by these factors.
Of the three factors, only proximity to a subway, defined as the negative distance from the block
centroid to the nearest subway stop, predicts post-1995 improvements in public safety (column 2).
Although the standard errors are large, initial poverty rate and proximity to public housing do
not appear correlated with late-1990s improvements in Cambridge public safety. Since heat maps
of criminal activity in Cambridge appear strongest around neighborhoods closest to subway stops,
this variable could capture proportional decreases in crime resulting in larger decreases in levels
in these areas. In contrast, proximity to public housing enters with the wrong sign to be able to
account for the RCI × Post effect in column 1. In columns 3, 7, and 11, we include each factor
along with RCI × Post; the RCI × Post coefficient declines only slightly relative to column 1 and
in an statistically insignificant manner. The coefficient on proximity to the nearest subway stop,
however, is small and insignificant in column 3, suggesting that its importance in column 2 is driven
by the positive correlation between RCI and subway access. The RCI × Post coefficients continue
to be statistically significant even after controlling for an interaction between RCI × Post and each
factor, shown in columns 4, 8, and 12. Finally, controlling for interactions with initial crime levels,
the main RCI × Post variable continues to be important in explaining crime declines in all but the
case of public housing, although in this case, RCI still has a large effect—the post-period interaction
between initial crime and rent control intensity is largest in column 9. At the same time, each of
these factors does interact strongly with initial crime, thereby suggesting proximity to a subway
station, proximity to public housing, and initial poverty rate all play a role in understanding crossneighborhood heterogeneity in 1990s crime trends. Overall, this analysis weighs against the idea
that rent control exposure largely proxies for other aspects of neighborhood quality that changed
discontinuously with the 1995 reform.

15

6

The Economic Value of Reduced Crime

How valuable was the improved public safety that accompanied the post-rent-control gentrification
of Cambridge in the late 1990s? In this section, we estimate how many fewer crimes occurred in
Cambridge because rent control ended and then use criminology estimates of the welfare losses
associated with criminal activity to provide a sense of public safety’s importance. It is worth noting
that we cannot use the hedonic approach in Autor et al. (2014) to value the improvements in public
safety because the end of rent control affected property values in many different ways—inducing
capital improvements and residential gentrification, and of course, permitting higher rents. By using
cost-of-crime estimates from external sources, we decompose the fraction of rent deregulation’s total
effect, as measured by the aggregate change in property values, that is attributable to changes in
public safety.

6.1

Crimes Averted by Rent Decontrol

In Table 9, we estimate the total number of crimes averted in the post period due to the removal
of rent control. In panel A, we use estimates from our preferred specification in equation (3) (with
linear tract trends as in panel B of Table 4). In panel B, we employ our most stringent empirical
specification in equation (4), which controls for initial crime levels interacted with RCI.16 We
model the counterfactual level of total crimes per area that would have happened without the 1995
deregulation of Cambridge’s rental market by turning off the RCI × Post term (and Initial Crime ×
RCI × Post term where applicable).17 The average annual number of averted crimes from 1995–2005
is then given by
\ =
∆Crimes

X

β̂1 RCIg Areag + β̂2 RCIg Areag Initial Crimeg ,

g

where we sum the annual estimates over each year of the post period and each adjusted block. We
also multiply the coefficient estimates by the area of each adjusted block to convert our estimates
from estimated effects on crimes per 1,000 square meters to estimates of the total number of crimes
averted. Because both the treatment effects and the costs of crime vary significantly across crime
categories, we estimate β1 and β2 separately for each type of crime as in Table 7.
Column 1 of Table 9 reports the annual number of averted crimes for each category for both
specifications. For each crime category, the specification controlling for initial crimes provides more
conservative estimates of the effect of decontrol-induced gentrification. Although this approach may
be overfitting—if part of the reason high initial crime areas had the fastest decline in crime was their
heavy exposure to rent control—we take these estimates to be a lower bound on rent decontrol’s total
effect on Cambridge public safety. Focusing on our more conservative specification, we estimate that
16

To ensure comparability of estimates in panels A and B, we estimate this specification for years 1993–2005, as
the specification in panel B requires using initial conditions measures from 1992 and drops that year.
17
Note that we leave the Initial Crime × Post term as a way of allowing for proportional reductions in criminal
activity that would have happened anyway.

16

rent decontrol and the resulting gentrification led to almost 1,200 fewer crimes to being reported in
Cambridge each year. The panel A estimated total number of averted crimes using tract trends has
a smaller standard error than the estimates controlling for interactions with initial crime levels in
panel B, although even the panel B estimate is statistically significant. Much of this reduction came
from averted public disturbances and property crimes, by far the two most frequent types of crime
in Cambridge. Our estimates also show meaningful decreases in other crime categories, including
violent crimes, a particularly costly category of crime, as discussed below.

6.2

Valuing Crime Reductions

An extensive literature in both criminology and economics quantifies the relative significance of
various crime types using a variety of methods to value avoiding exposure to crime. Prominent
approaches include contingent valuation methods (e.g., Cohen, Rust, Steen and Tidd, 2004); hedonic
regressions of property values on local crime rates; accounting measures including tangible and
intangible quality-of-life costs (Miller et al., 1996); and inference based on the size of jury awards
(e.g., Cohen, 1988).
We use crime cost estimates from Cohen and Piquero (2009), which is an updated version
of a frequently-cited Department of Justice report by Miller et al. (1996) and offers two cost of
crime estimates. First, an accounting approach considers components of crime’s direct costs to the
victim and the criminal justice system, as well as the offender’s lost wages while incarcerated. An
alternative willingness-to-pay (WTP) approach tries to incorporate several important intangibles
such as the externality crime imposes on those not directly victimized, e.g., the fear, stress, and
costly avoidance behavior undertaken by potential victims.
Appendix Table A2 shows how we adapted the Cohen and Piquero (2009) estimates for our
purposes. For each cost category, we take the weighted average of the Cohen and Piquero (2009)
cost estimates across all crime types in each of our five main crime categories (e.g., the examples
of each category listed in Section 3.1), weighted by the relative frequency of each crime category
subcomponent in our Cambridge microdata. There is significant crime cost variation across categories, with victimization costs ranging from $1,291 (in 2008 dollars) for public disturbance to over
$47,000 for a typical violent crime. Taking the frequency-weighted average of cost across all crime
categories, the typical crime incident has a direct cost of $9,711 and a WTP cost of $23,170.
To quantify the value of the criminal activity reductions that we estimate are attributable to
neighborhood change resulting from the end of rent control in Cambridge, we multiply the number
of averted crimes in column 1 of Table 9 by various cost estimates from Table 9. Importantly for
understanding the economic value of these crime reductions, we estimate that around 77 fewer violent
crimes—which are particularly costly for both victims and communities—would have occurred each
year. Despite the relatively small number of averted violent crimes, their severity makes them the
most consequential category of public safety improvement, so that the reduction in violent crimes
alone raises the welfare of potential victims by $4 million annually, a fact shown in column 2.
Total Direct Cost, shown in column 5, sums the Victimization Costs, Criminal Justice System
17

Costs, and Offender Productivity Costs. Column 5 in panel B shows that the end of rent control
eliminated $9.8 million in annual economic costs due to crime in Cambridge. Assuming this flow is
permanent, which is consistent with the event studies in Figure 5 that show little sign of reversion,
we capitalize this annual flow at a 5% discount rate. This amounts to a $196 million increase in
Cambridge’s aggregate value, and this increase should be reflected in the aggregate property value
of Cambridge residential real estate. Using the Autor et al. (2014) estimate that by 2005 total
property values had increased by approximately $2 billion because of the end of rent control, we
find that approximately 10% of this increase in aggregate value was due to improved public safety.
As discussed above, the Cohen and Piquero (2009) total direct cost of crime estimates do not
capture the social cost of crime, such as the burden of fear and avoidance caused by crime proximity.
Using Willingness-to-Pay (WTP) to avoid crime captures this effect and provides a likely upper
bound on the economic value created in Cambridge via the crime reductions shown in Table 9. By
applying these avoidance WTP cost estimates and capitalizing the annual flows into stocks at a 5%
discount rate, we estimate the improved public safety engendered by the late-1990s gentrification
in Cambridge spurred by the end of rent control in 1995 has a present-discounted value of $444
million, shown in panel B column 8. When we divide these estimates by rent deregulation’s total
effect on Cambridge property values estimated in Autor, Palmer, and Pathak (2014), we estimate
that improved public safety is responsible for 22% of overall property-value appreciation.
Table 10 presents a direct way to compare rent decontrol’s effects on property values versus the
direct costs of crime. We report estimates of the effect of rent decontrol on property values and the
costs of crime from difference-in-difference models fit at the block-year level with year and block
fixed effects. Property values are the sum of assessed values from the 1994 and 2002 Cambridge
Assessor’s file, used in Autor et al. (2014). The total direct cost of crime is the cost of all crimes
in the block-year valued using the Cohen and Piquero (2009) cost estimates. Since the value of
crime averted is annual, we convert crime effect into a stock using a 5% discount rate. About 15%
of the property price increase in Cambridge due to rent decontrol can be attributed to the value of
averted crime. Moreover, the WTP to avoid crime represents 34% of the property price increase in
Cambridge due to rent control.
The estimates reported in Panel A monetize the four crime categories – property crime, public
disturbance, drugs and alcohol, and violent crime – directly. Cohen and Piquero (2009) also report
a finer categorization of crimes consisting of 14 categories (in their Table 5) that we can use to
calculate the costs of crime. Furthermore, since violent crimes have the highest total direct cost
and are relatively infrequent, we separately report estimates for only non violent crimes. Panel B
of Table 10 shows that our estimate of the total costs associated with non-violent crimes is similar
using either the coarse or fine categories. They represent about 5-6% of the total value of price
appreciation due to rent decontrol. The estimate for violent crime, on the other hand, is much more
sensitive to the categorization method. Using the coarse categorization, the cost of violent crimes
is 10% of the total value of price appreciation. Under the fine categorization, it is noisily estimated.
The monetized value of crime reductions should be less than the total value of price appreciation

18

due to rent decontrol, since Cambridge properties experienced investment upgrades and an influx
of new residents. Autor et al. (2014) conclude that additional investment activity could in the best
case scenario explain 12 percent of the appreciation of Cambridge residential properties. This leaves
the remaining 88 percent accounted for by other benefits of rent decontrol. Given this upper bound,
the results in Table 9 and 10 indicate that the cost of crime estimates in Cohen and Piquero (2009)
are not beyond what would be expected given the overall aggregate price change.

7

Conclusion

We use the abrupt and arguably unanticipated end of rent control in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
combined with rich geocoded incident-level crime data and plausibly-exogenous block-level variation
in exposure to gentrification, to identify how the late-1990s neighborhood changes in Cambridge
affected criminal activity. In the years immediately following the elimination of Cambridge’s rent
regulation by a November 1994 state ballot initiative, Cambridge neighborhoods changed. This
gentrification process lowered crime in Cambridge by an estimated 16%. Property crimes account
for the largest decrease in the number of reported criminal incidents, while violent crimes account
for the bulk of the value in averted crimes. Since the value of price appreciation due to rent decontrol
provides an upper bound on how much Cambridge resident’s value improvements in public safety,
our paper establishes that the estimates of the cost of crime in Cohen and Piquero (2009) are within
the bounds imposed by the aggregate price appreciation due to rent decontrol, even netting out the
possible direct benefits of additional investments in Cambridge properties.
How economically significant is a crime decrease of this magnitude? Applying cost-of-crime
estimates from the criminology literature, we estimate this improvement in public safety created
between $10–22 million a year (in 2008 dollars) of benefit to the city. For context, Cambridge
residential property values appreciated by a total of $7.8 billion from 1994–2005, $2 billion of
which is directly attributable to the end of rent control (see Autor, Palmer, and Pathak, 2014).
By calculating the present discounted value of a $10 or $22 million annual flow, we estimate that
between 10–22% of the increased aggregate value due to rent deregulation was a direct result of
decreased crime. Improvements in public safety are therefore an economically significant part of the
gentrification process and are of comparable economic magnitude to the value of additional property
investments.

19

References
Aliprantis, Dionissi and Daniel Hartley, “Blowing it up and knocking it down: The local and
city-wide effects of demolishing high concentration public housing on crime,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 2015, 88, 67–81.
Andersson, Tommy and Lars-Gunnar Svensson, “Non-Manipulable House Allocation With
Rent Control,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (2), 507–539.
Autor, David H, Christopher J Palmer, and Parag A Pathak, “Housing Market Spillovers:
Evidence for the End of Rent Control in Cambridge, Massachusetts,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2014, 122 (3), 661–717.
Bajari, Patrick and C. Lanier Benkard, “Demand Estimation with Heterogenous Consumers
and Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach,” Journal of Political Economy,
2005, 113(6), 1239–1276.
Bartik, Timothy J., “The Estimation of Demand Parameters in Hedonic Price Models,” Journal
of Political Economy, 1987, 95(1), 81–88.
Bishop, Kelly C. and Alvin D. Murphy, “Estimating the Willingness to Pay to Avoid Violent
Crime: A Dynamic Approach,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2011,
101(3), 625–629.
Black, Sandra, “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114(2), 577–599.
Bowes, David R and Keith R Ihlanfeldt, “Identifying the Impacts of Rail Transit Stations on
Residential Property Values,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2001, 50 (1), 1–25.
Carpenter, Christopher and Carlos Dobkin, “The minimum legal drinking age and public
health,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
Housing Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113(2), 376–424.
City of New York Police Department, “New York City Crime Map Statistical and Technical
Notes,” May 2015.
Cohen, Mark A., “Some New Evidence on the Seriousness of Crime,” Criminology, 1988, 26(2),
343–353.
Cohen, Mark A and Alex R Piquero, “New Evidence on the Monetary Value of Saving a High
Risk Youth,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 2009, 25 (1), 25–49.

20

, Roland T. Rust, Sara Steen, and Simon T. Tidd, “Willingness-to-Pay for Crime Control
Programs,” Criminology, 2004, 42(1), 89–110.
Conley, Timothy G, “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of Econometrics, 1999, 92 (1), 1–45.
Covington, Jeanette and Ralph B Taylor, “Gentrification and Crime: Robbery and Larceny
Changes in Appreciating Baltimore Neighborhoods during the 1970s,” Urban Affairs Review,
1989, 25 (1), 142–172.
Cullen, Julie Berry and Steven D Levitt, “Crime, urban flight, and the consequences for cities,”
Review of economics and statistics, 1999, 81 (2), 159–169.
Dahl, Gordon and Stefano DellaVigna, “Does movie violence increase violent crime?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124(2), 677–734.
Deming, David J., “Better schools, less crime?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, pp. 2063–
2115.
Diamond, Rebecca, Tim McQuade, and Franklin Qian, “The Effects of Rent Control Expansion on Tenants, Landlords, and Inequality: Evidence from San Francisco,” July 2017. Working
Paper.
Ellen, Ingrid Gould, Johanna Lacoe, and Claudia Ayanna Sharygin, “Do Foreclosures
Cause Crime?,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2013, 74, 59–70.
, Keren Horn, and David Reed, “Has Falling Crime Invited Gentrification?,” March 2017.
US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-17-27. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2930242.
Epple, Dennis, “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and Supply Functions
for Differentiated Products,” Journal of Political Economy, 1987, 95(1), 59–80.
Farrell, Graham, Nick Tilley, Andromachi Tseloni, and Jen Mailley, “The crime drop and
the security hypothesis,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 2011, 48 (2), 147–175.
Fetter, Daniel K, “The Home Front: Rent control and the rapid wartime increase in home ownership,” The Journal of Economic History, 2016, 76 (4), 1001–1043.
Gibbons, Steve, “The Costs of Urban Property Crime,” Economic Journal, 2004, 113, F441–462.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Daniel Hartley, and Erik Hurst, “Endogenous gentrification and housing
price dynamics,” Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 100, 45–60.
Hausman, Jerry A., Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches, “Econometric Models for Count
Data with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship,” Econometrica, 1984, 52(4), 909–
938.
21

Heckman, James J. and D. Masterov, “The Productivity Argument for Investing in Young
Children,” 2007. NBER Working Paper 13016.
Hilber, Christian A. L., “The Economic Implications of House Price Capitalization: A Synthesis,”
Real Estate Economics, 2017, 45 (2), 301–339.
Ihlanfeldt, Keith and Tom Mayock, “Panel data estimates of the effects of different types of
crime on housing prices,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2010, 40 (2), 161–172.
Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, and Reed Walker, “Every Breath you Take - Every Dollar
You’ll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2017, pp. 848–902.
Kling, Jeffrey R, Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F Katz, “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for
Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2005, 120 (1), 87–130.
Lee, Yan Y, “Gentrification and Crime: Identification Using the 1994 Northridge Earthquake in
Los Angeles,” Journal of Urban Affairs, 2010, 32 (5), 549–577.
Linden, Leigh and Jonah Rockoff, “Estimates of the Impacts of Crime Risk on Property Values
from Megan’s Laws,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98(3), 1103–1127.
Lochner, Lars and Enrico Moretti, “The effect of education on crime: Evidence from prison
inmates, arrests, and self-reports,” American Economic Review, 2004, 94(1), 155–189.
McDonald, Scott C, “Does gentrification affect crime rates,” Crime & Justice, 1986, 8, 163–201.
Miller, Ted R, Mark A Cohen, and Brian Wiersema, “Victim costs and consequences: A
new look,” Research Report, US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, National
Institute of Justice 1996.
Papachristos, Andrew V, Chris M Smith, Mary L Scherer, and Melissa A Fugiero,
“More Coffee, Less Crime? The Relationship between Gentrification and Neighborhood Crime
Rates in Chicago, 1991 to 2005,” City & Community, 2011, 10 (3), 215–240.
Pope, Devin G. and Jaren C. Pope, “Crime and property values: Evidence from the 1990s
crime drop,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2012, 42(1-2), 177–188.
Pope, Jaren, “Fear of Crime and Housing Prices: Household Reactions to Sex Offender Registries,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 64(3), 601–614.
Sampson, Robert J, Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls, “Neighborhoods and
Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy,” Science, 1997, 277 (5328), 918–924.
Sims, David P., “Out of Control: What can we learn from the end of Massachusetts rent control?,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 2007, 61(1), 129–151.
22

, “Rent Control Rationing and Community Composition: Evidence from Massachusetts,” The
B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2011, 11(1).
Sullivan, Daniel M., “The True Cost of Air Pollution: Evidence from the Housing Market,” March
2017. Working Paper.
Taylor, Ralph B and Jeanette Covington, “Neighborhood Changes in Ecology and Violence,”
Criminology, 1988, 26 (4), 553–590.
Thaler, Richard, “A Note on the Value of Crime Control: Evidence from the Property Market,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 1978, 5(1), 137–145.
Vigdor, Jacob L, “Locations, outcomes, and selective migration,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (4), 751–755.
Weisburd, David L, Elizabeth R Groff, and Sue-Ming Yang, The Criminology of Place:
Street Segments and Our Understanding of the Crime Problem, Oxford University Press, 2012.
Wilsem, Johan Van, Karin Wittebrood, and Nan Dirk De Graaf, “Socioeconomic Dynamics
of Neighborhoods and the Risk of Crime Victimization: A Multilevel Study of Improving,
Declining, and Stable Areas in the Netherlands,” Social Problems, 2006, 53 (2), 226–247.
Wilson, James Q and George L Kelling, “Broken Windows,” The Atlantic Monthly, March
1982, pp. 29–38.
Wilson, William Julius, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public
Policy, University of Chicago Press, 1987.

23

Figure 1: Heat Map of Cambridge Adjusted Blocks
A. By Rent Control Intensity
RCI Quintiles
0.000
0.001 - 0.220
0.221 - 0.423
0.424 - 0.643
0.644 - 1.000

B. By Average Crimes, 1992-2005
Crime Quintiles
0.000 - 0.096
0.097 - 0.242
0.243 - 0.434
0.435 - 0.754
0.755 - 17.138

24

−.6

−.4

−.2

0

.2

Figure 2: Trends in Cambridge Crime by Category, 1992-2005

1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Total Crime

Property Crime

Drug & Alcohol

Violent Crimes

Public Disturbance

Notes: Graph plots log counts of crimes in our Cambridge data by category for each year before
geocoding. The vertical line at 1994 indicates the last year of rent control regulations.

25

.75
0

.25

.5

Density

1

1.25

1.5

Figure 3: Distribution of Simulated Coefficients

−1

−.75

−.5

−.25

0

.25

.5

.75

1

1.25

1.5

1.75

2

Difference−in−differences Coefficient

Notes: Graph plots the kernel density distribution of coefficients from regressions of log total crime
on city x post treatment interactions for each city as reported in UCR. The sample includes 147
cities with populations of 75K-150K in at least one year from 1985 to 2012. Cambridge is at 8.84
percentile of log total crime variable. Bandwidth for kernel is 0.05.

26

Figure 4: Adjusted Block Group Boundaries Examples
A. Census Blocks
B. Adjusted Blocks

Notes: The figures plot geographies of Harvard Square, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Crime events
are marked with purple circles. Figure ASources:
is overlaid
with USGS,
Census
1990
Block
and
Esri, HERE, DeLorme,
Intermap,
increment
P Corp., Boundaries,
NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI,
EsriFigure
China
(Hong Kong),
EsriUSGS, Intermap
Sources:
Esri, HERE,
DeLorme,
(Thailand), TomTom, MapmyIndia, ¨Ï OpenStreetMap contributors, and the GIS User Community
(Thailand), TomTom, MapmyIndia, ¨Ï OpenStreetM
B is overlaid with adjusted Census blocks in which boundaries are moved away from the street center
lines. Blue and red squares show instances where adjusted block boundaries ensure the crime events
that happen nearby are assigned to the same geographical unit. The adjusted blocks can also be
seen as blockfaces, street segment bounded by the two closest cross-streets as in Ellen et al. (2013),
merged to mimic the size of the Census blocks.

27

−.8

−.8

−.6

−.6

−.4

−.4

−.2

−.2

0

0

.2

.2

Figure 5: Event Study of Effect of RCI on Total Crimes per 1,000m2
A. Without Linear Census Tract Trend Controls
I. Without linear tract trend

19921994 1994

1992

1996
1996

1998
1998

2000
2000

2002

20022004

2004

1992

−.8

−.8

−.6

−.6

−.4

−.4

−.2

−.2

0

0

.2

.2

B. With Linear Census Tract Trend Controls
II. With linear tract trend

1994

1992

1994

1996
1996

1998
1998

Coefficient

2000

2000

2002

20022004

2004

95% CI

Notes: Figure plots event study coefficients for the effect of Rent Control Intensity (RCI) on total
crime per area, 1992–2005. RCI measures the intensity with which a block was exposed to rent
controlled properties prior to 1995. The figures plot coefficients on RCI x Year variables from eventstudy regressions in which the dependent variable is total crime per 1,000m2 . The specification
includes year and block fixed effects, and panel B also includes linear Census tract trends. The year
1994 is the omitted RCI x Year category. Robust standard errors are clustered by block level. The
vertical line 1994 indicates the year preceding rent decontrol.

28

Predicted Change in Total Crime per Area

Figure 6: Predicted Effect of Rent Control Intensity and Initial Crime on Total Crime per 1,000m2

50
0
-50
-100
-150
0

0
1

0.2
2

0.4

3

0.6

4
0.8

5

Initial Crime

6

RCI

1

Notes: Predicted effect of RCI (λ = 12) and initial crime on total crime per area. RCI measures
the intensity of an adjusted block’s exposure to rent-controlled properties prior to 1995. The figure
plots, for each level of RCI and IC, the sum of predicted values of interaction variables that are
combinations of RCI, (RCI)2 , (RCI)3 , Initial Crime, (Initial Crime)2 , (Initial Crime)3 , all of which
are interacted with post treatment indicator dummy. The dependent variable is total crime per
1,000m2 . The specification includes year and block fixed effects.

29

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics on Demographics
1990
2000
Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)

RCI x Post
(4)

Population

3193

3379

185
(356)

-203
(299)

Share White

.765

.694

-.070 *
(.039)

-.004
(.053)

Share Black

.138

.121

-.017
(.030)

-.026
(.028)

Share Other Races

.097

.185

.088 ***
(.017)

.030
(.043)

Share Juveniles

.062

.055

-.008
(.015)

-.048 ***
(.019)

Share Income < $30K

.420

.304

-.116 ***
(.026)

-.069
(.045)

Share $30K ≤ Income < $60K

.303

.263

-.041 ***
(.014)

-.016
(.045)

Share $60K > Income

.210

.390

.179 ***
(.028)

.058
(.056)

Share Less than College

.450

.335

-.115 **
(.050)

.089
(.056)

Share College Graduates

.264

.296

.032 **
(.015)

-.061
(.058)

Share Post College Graduates

.286

.369

.082 **
(.038)

-.029
(.052)

Share Services Occupation

.418

.580

.162 ***
(.038)

-.130
(.122)

Share Blue Collar Occupation

.128

.10

-.028
(.019)

.036
(.042)

Share White Collar Occupation

.454

1.488

1.034 ***
(.064)

.021
(.177)

Share Attending College

.201

.192

-.009
(.044)

.070 ***
(.024)

Housing Units

1399

1491

92
(122)

-182
(131)

Average Number of People in a
Housing Unit

.936

.955

.019 **
(.008)

-.020
(.037)

N

30

30

60

60

Notes: Table reports summary statistics of demographic variables at the tract-level from the 1990
and 2000 Decennial Census long forms. Column 3 reports the difference in means, and column 4
reports the coefficient on Rent Control Intensity x Post in a regression with tract and year fixed
effects. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10

30

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics on Crime and Rent Control Intensity
Mean
Median
Std. Dev. Minimum Maximum

Property Crime
Public Disturbance
Drug & Alcohol
Violent Crime
Total Crime

0.354
0.127
0.015
0.051
0.535

A. Crimes per Area by Category
0.178
0.767
0.000
0.020
0.271
0.000
0.000
0.063
0.000
0.000
0.135
0.000
0.266
1.065
0.000

22.523
4.612
1.241
2.963
27.672

λ=3
λ = 12
λ = 21
λ = 30
λ→∞

0.439
0.404
0.396
0.392
0.296

B. Rent Control Intensity by λ
0.467
0.110
0.149
0.426
0.191
0.012
0.405
0.218
0.000
0.397
0.233
0.000
0.218
0.308
0.000

0.604
0.980
1.000
1.000
1.000

Notes: Panel A reports summary statistics of crime counts by crime category per 1,000 square
meters at the adjusted block by year level. Panel B reports summary statistics of Rent Control
Intensity at the adjusted block level across values of the exponential decay weight λ. N = 11,424
for Panel A, and N = 816 for Panel B.

31

Table 3: Effect of Rent Control Intensity on Total Crimes
Dependent Variable: Total Crimes per 1,000m2
Exponential Weight
λ=3
λ=12
λ=21
λ=30
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

λ=∞
(5)

A. Specifications Without Tract Trends
-.315 *** -.287 *** -.278 *** -.267 ***
(.095)
(.094)
(.097)
(.103)

RCI x Post

-.561
(.170)

R-squared

.852

.852

.852

.852

.853

-11.48%

-11.25%

-11.67%

-12.11%

-15.40%

Effect on crime of 1 s.d. RCI

***

B. Specifications with Linear Tract Trends
*** -.203 *** -.194 *** -.195 *** -.215 **
(.062)
(.061)
(.065)
(.088)

RCI x Post

-.405
(.116)

R-squared

.854

.854

.854

.854

.854

-8.29%

-7.25%

-7.92%

-8.47%

-12.39%

Effect on crime of 1 s.d. RCI

Notes: N = 11,424. All specifications include year fixed effects and fixed effects for 816 adjusted Census blocks.
Specifications in Panel B include linear trends for 30 Census tracts. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the
block level. Mean of the dependent variable is 0.557, and the standard deviation is 1.051.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

32

Table 4: Effect of Rent Control Intensity on Crime Categories
Dependent Variable: Reported Crimes per 1,000m2
Crime Category
Property
Public
Drug &
Crime
Disturbance
Alcohol
(1)
(2)
(3)

RCI x Post
Effect of 1 s.d. ∆RCI
RCI x Post
Effect of 1 s.d. ∆RCI
Mean of Dependent Variable
SD of Dependent Variable

Violent
Crime
(4)

A. Specifications Without Tract Trends
-.194 ***
-.118 ***
-.014 **
-.038 **
(.070)
(.029)
(.006)
(.015)
-9.37%

-13.25%

-14.17%

-12.02%

B. Specifications With Linear Tract Trends
-.107 **
-.090 ***
-.006
-.026 **
(.050)
(.024)
(.008)
(.012)
-5.17%

-10.13%

-6.33%

-8.33%

.396
.886

.170
.324

.018
.079

.060
.164

Notes: N = 11,424, λ = 12. All specifications include year fixed effects and fixed effects for 816 adjusted
blocks. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the block level. The mean of RCI term is 0.392, and
the standard deviation of RCI term is 0.218.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

33

Table 5: Effect of Rent Control Intensity: Alternative Functional Forms
Exponential Weight
λ=3
λ = 12

(1)
Second RCI Tercile x Post -.016
(.028)
Third RCI Tercile x Post

RCI x Post

(2)
-.007
(.028)

(3)

A. Total Crimes by RCI Terciles
-.012
.019
(.027)
(.032)

-.171 *** -.141 ***
(.048)
(.038)
-.379
(.306)

-.241
(.333)

NO

YES

Linear Tract Trends

(4)

-.149 *** -.110 ***
(.049)
(.040)
B. FE Poisson Model
-.285 *
-.250
(.173)
(.179)
NO

YES

λ= ∞

(5)
-.055 *
(.031)

(6)
-.047 *
(.027)

-.167 *** -.135 ***
(.052)
(.045)
-.147 *
(.089)
NO

-.123
(.086)
YES

Notes: N = 11,424. Dependent variable for Panel A is Total Crime per Area and for Panel B is Total Crime counts. All
specifications include year fixed effects and fixed effects for 816 adjusted blocks. Standard errors in parentheses
clustered at the block level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

34

Table 6: Effect of Initial Crime Level on Crime
Dependent Variable: Total Crime per 1,000m2
(1)
(2)
(3)

RCI x Post

-.339 ***
(.102)

Initial Crime x Post

.040
(.073)

-.215 *
(.116)

-.277 *** -.279 *** -.141 **
(.055)
(.056)
(.056)

RCI x Initial Crime x Post
R-squared

(4)

-.784 ***
(.267)
.852

.865

.865

.866

Notes: N = 10,608. RCI is defined with λ = 12. All specifications include year fixed
effects and fixed effects for 816 adjusted Census blocks. Standard error is clustered at the
adjusted block level. RCI, and Initial Crime variables are demeaned.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

35

Table 7: Effect of RCI and Initial Crime on Crime Categories
Dependent Variable: Reported Crimes per 1,000m2
Crime Category
Property
Public
Drug &
Crime
Disturbance
Alcohol
(1)
(2)
(3)

Violent
Crime
(4)

RCI x Post

-.123
(.083)

-.093 ***
(.030)

-.023 *
(.013)

-.019
(.022)

Initial Crime x Post

-.121 *
(.067)

-.235 ***
(.063)

-.160
(.119)

-.131
(.107)

RCI x Initial Crime x Post

-.892 ***
(.303)

-.698 ***
(.160)

-1.734 **
(.843)

-.557 *
(.333)

Effect of 1 s.d. ∆RCI
Mean of Dependent Variable
SD of Dependent Variable

-5.80%

-9.98%

-23.21%

-6.07%

.406
.912

.179
.338

.019
.084

.060
.150

Notes: N = 10,608, λ = 12. All specifications include year fixed effects and fixed effects for 816 adjusted
blocks. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the block level. The mean of RCI term is 0.392, and
the standard deviation of RCI term is 0.218.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

36

37

(5)

.852

.866

.852

.852

.126
(.110)

(6)

(8)

(9)

.852

.142
(.113)

.852

.983 *
(.560)

.170
(.126)

.866

-.743 ***
(.274)

-.147 **
(.058)

.637 **
(.254)

.057
(.065)

-.352 *** -.215 *** -.118
(.110)
(.074)
(.126)

(7)

Proximity to Public Housing

.851

-.014
(.680)

(10)

(12)

(13)

.852

.431
(.697)

.852

3.456
(2.692)

.307
(.651)

.866

-.771 ***
(.257)

-.147 ***
(.055)

4.741 **
(2.340)

1.209 **
(.566)

-.353 *** -.354 *** -.250 **
(.105)
(.105)
(.115)

(11)

Initial Poverty Rate

N = 10,608. λ = 12 for the RCI term. All variables are demeaned. Initial Poverty measures tract level poverty rate in 1990. All specifications include year fixed effects and
fixed effects for 816 adjusted Census blocks. Standard error is clustered at the adjusted block level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

.852

R-squared

.369 *
(.193)

.097 *
(.053)

-.818 ***
(.270)

-.479
(.347)

-.137
(.095)

Initial Crime
x X variable x Post
.852

(4)

-.260 *** -.169 ** -.340 **
(.080)
(.075)
(.144)

(3)

-.125 ** -.068
(.054)
(.050)

(2)

-.140 **
(.057)

-.339 ***
(.102)

(1)

Initial Crime x Post

RCI x X variable
x Post

X variable x Post

RCI x Post

X variable

Proximity to Subway Stop

Table 8: Effect of Alternative Control Variables on Crime Dependent Variable: Total Crime per 1,000m2

38

501
494
116
77
1,188
(547)

Property Crime
Public Disturbance
Drugs & Alcohol
Violent Crime
Total

647
990
0
3,632
5,269
(5,476)

884
1,154
7,932
9,970
(3,685)

8,414
5,135
40
25,199
38,788
(12,826)
6,159
4,405
121
11,538
22,223
(18,519)

B. Initial Crime Interactions Specification
983
406
2,036
40,727
1,213
271
2,474
49,471
60
0
60
1,207
1,059
523
5,215
104,291
3,315
1,200
9,785
195,696
(2,003)
(896)
(8,237)
(164,731)

123,183
88,110
2,414
230,758
444,464
(370,372)

168,286
102,702
802
503,971
775,762
(256,524)

Notes: Table reports estimates of the annual reduction in reported crimes attributable to rent decontrol from 1995-2005 in thousands of 2008 dollars using
the specification with λ = 12. Panel A looks at the effect of RCI only based on estimating equation (3) including linear tract trends, and Panel B accounts
for initial crime interactions as in equation (4). Estimates of the economic cost per crime come from Cohen and Piquero (2009) and are in 2008 dollars.
Estimates for the economic cost to victims of Drug & Alcohol crime are unavailable. The present discount value of averted crimes assumes a discount
rate of 5%. Standard errors in parentheses underneath Total figures clustered at the block level.

685
575
39
168
1,466
(399)

Property Crime
Public Disturbance
Drugs & Alcohol
Violent Crime
Total

A. Linear Tract Trends Specification
1,343
555
2,782
55,639
1,413
316
2,883
57,665
20
20
401
2,314
1,143
11,388
227,770
5,090
2,014
17,074
341,474
(1,431)
(630)
(5,653)
(113,065)

Table 9: Annual Value of Averted Crimes Attributable to Rent Decontrol (in Thousands of 2008 Dollars)
Victimization
Criminal
Offender
Total Direct Total Direct
WTP Cost
Crime Category
Averted
WTP Cost
Cost
Justice Cost Productivity
Cost
Cost PDV
PDV
($1,000s)
($1,000s)
($1,000s)
($1,000s)
($1,000s)
($1,000s)
($1,000s)
Crimes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Table 10: Effect of RCI on Property and Crime Values
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

A. Effects on Property Values and Total Cost of Crime

RCI x Post
Crime Share of
Appreciation
R-squared

Total Property Residential
Total Direct WTP to Avoid
Value
Property
Cost of Crime
Crime
522.841 *** 437.103 **
-4.069 *** -8.970 ***
(184.036)
(179.796)
(1.444)
(3.270)
n/a

n/a

16%

34%

.881

.881

.871

.881

B. Cost of Crime Robustness to Violent Crime Treatment

RCI x Post

Total Cost of
Nonviolent Crimes
-1.372 *** -1.648 ***
(.455)
(.463)

Crime Share of
5%
Appreciation
Categorization Method Coarse
R-squared
.884

Total Cost of
Violent Crimes
-2.697 **
2.645
(1.259)
(3.886)

6%

10%

-10%

Fine
.857

Coarse
.797

Fine
.567

N = 1,632. Table reports regressions of block by year property values and total cost of crime
on Rent Control Intensity interacted with an indicator for 2002, year fixed effects (1994 and
2002) and 816 adjusted Census block fixed effects. Crime Share of Appreciation row
capitalizes the annual cost of crime estimates into stocks assuming a 5% discount rate and
calculates the share of the effect of the end of rent control on property values (panel A
column 1) attributable to reductions in crime. Panel B investigates the total cost of
nonviolent crimes (columns 1 and 2) and violent crimes (columns 3 and 4) in the total cost
of crime measures using coarse (columns 1 and 3) and fine (columns 2 and 4) methods of
categorizing crimes. Coarse categories and costs (also used in Panel A columns 3 and 4) are
given in Appendix Table A2. Fine categories and costs are given in Table 5 of Cohen and
Piquero (2009). Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the block level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

Data Appendix
Appendix Figure A3 shows that Cambridge had between 500–1,000 violent crimes annually and
3,000–6,000 property crimes annually from 1992–2005; total crimes in both categories declined
steadily and mostly leveled off by 1999. Each year, the FBI publishes Uniform Crime Reports that
use common definitions of violent and property crimes to disseminate local jurisdiction-provided
estimates of total annual crimes. Importantly, aggregate annual crime counts derived from our
microdata match up well with the city-wide counts CPD provided to the FBI contemporaneously.
In the later years—starting with the commencement of digital crime-logging in 1997—the difference
between totals reported by CPD to the FBI, our raw data, and our geocoded data are negligible.
The ungeocoded data in the early years also track the aggregates trends well. The data quality in
the early years is such that we lose many more observations from the geocoding process before the
1997 adoption of electronic record keeping than after.18
Appendix Figure A1 shows the relative importance of each of our crime categories. Total crime
in Cambridge (blue line) has mostly ranged between 6,000–8,000 annual crimes, the majority of
which are property crimes and public disturbances (around 2,000 crimes per year). Violent crimes,
while much more harmful to victims and neighborhoods, are relatively rare, and reported drug and
alcohol crimes are the least common of the five categories.

18

Note that to form our sample of crime incidents, we ignore a large number of crimes without an obvious
geographical component including motor-vehicle violations, hit and runs, violations of warrants or summonses, and
restraining-order violations.

40

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

Figure A1: Trends in Crime by Category, 1992-2005

1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Total Crime

Property Crime

Drug & Alcohol

Violent Crimes

Public Disturbance

Notes: Graph plots counts of crimes in Cambridge by category for each year in our data before
geocoding. The vertical line at 1994 indicates the last year of rent control regulations.

41

1890

Sum of Squared Errors
1900
1910

1920

Figure A2: Sum of Squared Errors by λ

0

10

20
30
40
Exponential Decay Weight λ
Without Tract Trends

50

60

With Tract Trends

Notes: Figure plots the minimized sum of squared errors (SSE) from estimating equation (3) for
a given value λ of the exponential decay weighting parameter in the definition of Rent Control
Intensity in equation (2). The solid red and dashed blue lines plot minimum SSE for specifications
without and with linear tract trends, respectively.

42

7000
0

0

1000

250

2000

500

3000

750

4000

1000

5000

1250

6000

1500

Figure A3: Aggregate Crime Counts by Data Source, 1992-2005
A. Violent Crimes
B. Property Crimes

1992

1994

1996

1998

FBI Reports

2000

2002

2004

2006

1992

CPD Microdata:

1994

1996

geocoded

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

ungeocoded

Notes: Panels A and B plot the total number of violent and property crimes, respectively, in
Cambridge for each year of our data. Lines with blue circles are statistics from the FBI Uniform
Crime Reports reported contemporaneously by the Cambridge Police Department. Lines with green
diamonds are the total counts from our microdata prior to geocoding. Red-triangle lines report
annual crime counts for only those crimes we were able to successfully geolocate.

43

Table A1: Spatially Correlated Standard Errors Dependent Variable: Total Crime per 1000m2
λ=12
Exponential Weight
(1)

RCI x Post
Clustered SE

-0.315 ***
(0.095)

Spatial SE (0.5 mile )

(0.067) ***

Spatial SE (1 mile )

(0.065) ***

Spatial SE (3 miles )

(0.043) ***

Linear Tract Trends

NO

N = 11,424. All specifications include year fixed
effects and fixed effects for 816 adjusted Census
blocks.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

44

Table A2: Weighted Cost per Crime
Offender
Victimization
Criminal
Productivity Total Direct
Crime Category
Cost
Justice Cost
Cost
Cost
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Property Crime
$1,291
$1,962
$811
$4,064
Public Disturbance
$2,006
$2,457
$549
$5,012
Drugs & Alcohol
$520
$520
Violent Crime
$47,218
$13,772
$6,804
$67,794
Weighted Average
$5,400
$3,061
$1,250
$9,711

WTP Cost
(5)
$12,291
$8,926
$1,040
$150,003
$23,170

Notes: Table reports the weighted costs per crime in 2008 dollars. Cost estimates for the most common
offenses from Cohen and Piquero (2009) are weighted their relative within-category frequency in
Cambridge.

45

