                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED DISEASE RISK AND ACCESS COSTS ON INFANT
                            IMMUNIZATION

                                      Jessamyn Schaller
                                        Lisa Schulkind
                                   Teny Maghakian Shapiro

                                     Working Paper 23923
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23923


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




We would like to thank seminar participants at UNC Greensboro, UNC Chapel Hill Public
Policy, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Lafayette College and conference participants at the
Western Economic Association, the Southern Economic Association, the Association for Public
Policy Analysis and Management and the South Carolina Applied Micro Day for their helpful
comments and suggestions. We also acknowledge financial support from a UNC Charlotte
Faculty Research Grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jessamyn Schaller, Lisa Schulkind, and Teny Maghakian Shapiro. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Perceived Disease Risk and Access Costs on Infant Immunization
Jessamyn Schaller, Lisa Schulkind, and Teny Maghakian Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 23923
October 2017
JEL No. I0,I12,J13

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the determinants of parental decisions about infant immunization. Using the
exact timing of vaccination relative to birth, we estimate the effects of local pertussis outbreaks
occurring in-utero and during the first two months of life on the likelihood of on-time initial
immunization for pertussis and other immunizations. We find that parents respond to changes in
perceived disease risk: pertussis outbreaks within a state increase the rate of on-time receipt of the
pertussis vaccine at two months of age. This response is concentrated among low-socioeconomic
status (SES) subgroups. In addition, we find that pertussis outbreaks increase the likelihood of
immunization against other vaccine-preventable diseases. These spillover effects are almost as
large the direct effects and are present only for vaccines that are typically given during the same
visit as the pertussis vaccine, which suggests that healthcare access costs play an important role in
parents' vaccination decisions.

Jessamyn Schaller                                                 Teny Maghakian Shapiro
Department of Economics                                           Department of Economics
University of Arizona                                             Leavey School of Business
McClelland Hall 401PP                                             Santa Clara University
Tucson, AZ 85721                                                  500 El Camino Real
and NBER                                                          Santa Clara, CA 95053
jschaller@email.arizona.edu                                       tshapiro@scu.edu

Lisa Schulkind
Department of Economics
Belk College of Business
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd
Charlotte, NC 28223
lschulki@uncc.edu
1. Introduction
   The United States experienced a dramatic decline in the incidence of vaccine-preventable dis-
eases over the 20th century. This phenomenon, which resulted in substantial reductions in infant
and child morbidity and mortality, is attributable in large part to the success of a large scale public
health campaign to promote universal immunization (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
1999). Though overall rates of vaccine coverage in the U.S. have been high in recent decades, dis-
parities in immunization coverage have persisted across socioeconomic and racial groups. In par-
ticular, children who are poor, black, and from low-income neighborhoods, and those with younger,
less-educated, and unmarried mothers are more likely to fall behind the recommended schedule for
childhood vaccines (Feemster, Spain, Eberhart, Pati and Watson, 2009; Luman, Barker, Shaw, Mc-
Cauley, Buehler and Pickering, 2005). Meanwhile, concerns about perceived vaccine safety have
led increasing numbers of parents to refuse or deliberately delay vaccination for their children.
This uptick in active vaccination refusal is more pronounced among children who are white and
have married, more-educated parents (Smith, Chu and Barker, 2004; Omer, Salmon, Orenstein, de-
Hart and Halsey, 2009), and is clustered geographically, causing immunization rates to fall below
herd-immunity levels in some areas and contributing to recent disease outbreaks (Feikin, Lezotte,
Hamman, Salmon, Chen and Hoffman, 2000; Omer, Enger, Moulton, Halsey, Stokley and Salmon,
2008).
   In this paper, we examine the determinants of parental decisions about infant immunization,
with an emphasis on the roles of perceived disease risk and healthcare access costs. We focus on
the timing of a child’s first immunization doses for two reasons. First, the period encompassing
pregnancy and early infancy is a time when many parents form opinions about vaccination and
establish healthcare patterns for their children. Since most of the vaccines given to infants are
part of a sequence, obtaining the first set of immunizations on time might help establish a routine
with a care provider and make it more likely that subsequent vaccines will be received on time as
well. Second, vaccine delay is an important contributor to disparities in vaccination rates along

                                                  2
socioeconomic and demographic dimensions. Many children, particularly those in disadvantaged
families, will ultimately end up fully vaccinated by the time they start school but will experience
substantial delays in their vaccination schedules during infancy and early childhood. As infants
and toddlers have the highest likelihood of contracting vaccine-preventable diseases and of experi-
encing serious complications from them, vaccine delay has potentially-serious health implications
(Feemster et al., 2009; Luman et al., 2005).
   We begin by examining whether information about disease risk affects the on-time initiation of
infant immunization. As rates of vaccine-preventable diseases in the US fell over the 20th century,
in some cases to near-zero, reductions in the perceived risk of illness among the population likely
contributed to a decline in immunization rates. With the recent resurgence of some of these ill-
nesses, the benefit from vaccinating has again increased, particularly for infants, who are the most
vulnerable in an outbreak. If the public’s awareness of this change has lagged the actual change,
then information dissemination is a potential avenue by which policy might influence vaccination
rates. In order to explore whether information about disease risk affects infant immunization, we
construct outbreak indicators using weekly state-level counts of pertussis cases from the Center for
Disease Control (CDC) and link them to child-level data from the National Immunization Survey.
Using exact date of birth and the timing of each vaccine dose relative to birth date, we estimate
the effects of pertussis outbreaks on the likelihood that the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and
pertussis (DTaP) vaccine is received within 75 days of life.
   We find that pertussis outbreaks occurring in utero and between birth and two months of age
increase the probability that the first pertussis immunization occurs on-time (within 75 days of
birth). Splitting our sample along demographic and socioeconomic dimensions, we find that the
increase in on-time vaccination is concentrated among minority children, children in low-income
households, children with less-educated mothers, and children of unmarried mothers—groups most
likely to be underimmunized for reasons related to limited healthcare access and other economic
factors. We find no significant effects of outbreaks on the likelihood of on-time initiation of in-


                                                   3
fant immunization among children in non-poor families, white children, or children with college-
educated mothers.
   In the second part of our study, we explore whether pertussis outbreaks play a role in determin-
ing whether infants receive vaccines for other diseases on time. Estimating the “spillover” effects
of pertussis outbreaks allows us to gain insight into the relative importance of different factors in
influencing parental decisions about vaccination. First, we examine whether a pertussis outbreak
increases on time receipt of other vaccines that are recommended to be given at the same time as
the first DTaP dose (polio and Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib)). We find that when a pertussis
outbreak induces parents to vaccinate against pertussis, they also choose to obtain other vaccines
offered at the same visit at nearly the same rate. As neither the perceived health benefits nor the
expected health costs of other immunizations are likely to be affected by a pertussis outbreak, these
effects may be attributable either to changes in attitudes about vaccination resulting from the out-
break or to changes in the time cost or other healthcare access costs that result from seeking out
the pertussis vaccine. Next, we estimate the effect of pertussis outbreaks in utero on the likelihood
that a child receives immunizations that are typically recommended to be received at separate vis-
its from the initial DTaP dose—immunizations for hepatitis-B (recommended at birth), varicella,
and measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) (recommended at 12-15 months). We find that pertussis
outbreaks occurring in utero or in the first two months do not result in an increase in receipt of
these other vaccinations, and for some groups even decrease the likelihood that these vaccines are
received during the recommended time window.
   Our study complements contemporaneous work focusing on immunization of older children by
Oster (2016) and Carpenter and Lawler (2017). Oster studies the effects of pertussis outbreaks on
immunization rates of school-aged children using county-level data from twelve US states, and also
finds that outbreaks increase immunization coverage. In contrast with our findings, Oster does not
find spillover effects of pertussis outbreaks to immunization for other illnesses among school-aged
children, which suggests either differences in the mechanisms driving the results between infancy


                                                 4
and later childhood, or differences in the relevant at-risk (under-vaccinated) populations between
the two samples. Meanwhile, Carpenter and Lawler (2017) study the effects of state laws re-
quiring a tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (TDaP) booster shot prior to middle school enrollment
on immunization rates of middle school students, and find strong evidence of cross-vaccination
spillovers. In particular, they find that TDaP mandates increased adolescent vaccination rates
for meningococcal disease and human papillomavirus—vaccines that are also recommended for
adolescents—with larger effects in low-SES subgroups. They do not discuss healthcare access as
a possible reason for these spillover patterns, but their findings are consistent with our results for
infants.
   The results from this paper have several important implications for health policy. First, we
show that disease outbreaks affect the on-time initiation of infant immunization. This implies that
dissemination of information about disease risk has the potential to increase rates of immunization
coverage among very young infants—the population with the highest risk of serious complications
from illness. Second, the spillover effects of pertussis outbreaks on vaccination for other illnesses
imply that policies that help disadvantaged families to overcome the costs associated with obtaining
access to vaccines, including barriers to information, scheduling challenges, and transportation
costs, are likely to be effective in reducing the risk of vaccine delay among low-SES families.
Finally, we find evidence of substitution across sets of vaccines that are received at different visits
among some disadvantaged subgroups. That is, for poor children, black children and children with
single mothers, the increase in the likelihood of obtaining the first set of vaccines on time at two
months is accompanied by a reduction in the likelihood of obtaining a separate set of vaccines
typically offered between 12-15 months. This suggests an important role for educating families
about the importance of obtaining all of the recommended vaccines and doses and further illustrates
the importance of reducing barriers to regular and consistent healthcare.




                                                  5
2. Background
2.1. Cross-Sectional Correlates of Underimmunization

   Because increasing immunization coverage has been a central goal of United States health
policy for several decades, there exists a substantial literature, most of which is in the fields of
public health and epidemiology, exploring patterns in U.S. immunization rates in the cross-section
and over time. Rather than summarize the entirety of the existing body of research on this topic,
we focus in this section on two overarching narratives that are relevant to our analysis.
   First, many researchers have documented cross-sectional patterns in vaccination coverage that
mirror patterns of socioeconomic inequality. In particular, black and Hispanic children, children
from low-income families, and children with younger, less-educated, and unmarried mothers, are
less likely to adhere to the vaccine schedule recommended by the Center for Disease Control
(CDC) than the general population (Chu, Barker and Smith, 2004; Feemster et al., 2009; Guttmann,
Manuel, Dick, To, Lam and Stukel, 2006; Luman, McCauley, Shefer and Chu, 2003; Smith et al.,
2004). Discrepancies in vaccine coverage by socioeconomic status are especially pronounced
when vaccine delay is taken into account, with substantial fractions of children in disadvantaged
groups spending many months of their early childhood underimmunized. (Luman et al., 2005).
   Lack of access to quality healthcare may be a significant barrier to on-time immunization of
disadvantaged children, who are less likely in general to maintain a regular schedule of well-
child visits and to utilize preventative care (Ronsaville and Hakim, 2000). Research has found
that children with lower spatial accessibility to pediatricians are less likely to keep up with the
CDC-recommended vaccine schedule (Fu, Cowan, McLaren, Engstrom and Teach, 2009; LeBaron,
Massoudi, Stevenson and Lyons, 2001), as are children with low continuity in their healthcare
provision (Luman et al., 2005). Under-immunization is also correlated with the receipt of care
from a public health clinic or a less-experienced pediatric-care provider (Feemster et al., 2009;
Guttmann et al., 2006). Convenience may also be an important factor, particularly among single-
parent or two-earner families. A focus group study highlights a number of barriers to immunization

                                                 6
facing disadvantaged families, including scheduling challenges and transportation costs (Lannon,
Brack, Stuart, Caplow, McNeill, Bordley and Margolis, 1995). In this paper, we label all of the
costs associated with finding and visiting a quality healthcare provider, including non-monetary
costs as “healthcare access” costs.
   A second broad narrative in the literature on immunization relates to the recent increase in the
share of children whose parents decline vaccines due to concerns about perceived vaccine safety
(Omer et al., 2009). Researchers have typically identified this group by focusing on children who
have received no vaccines at all (e.g. Smith et al. 2004) or children who have received non-medical
exemptions from mandatory school vaccination laws (e.g. Salmon, Moulton, Omer, Patricia de-
Hart, Stokley and Halsey 2005), though some parents choose to delay vaccines due to safety con-
cerns rather than skipping them entirely. Correlational studies have found that unvaccinated and
exempt children are more likely to be white, to come from higher-income families, and to have
more-educated parents.
   For policymakers, parents who opt out of vaccines due to concerns about health risks are a
source of particular concern. While this group makes up a small share of the overall population,
they are believed to contribute significantly to the spread of vaccine-preventable disease because
they tend to be clustered geographically (Omer et al., 2008). For example, clustering of unvacci-
nated individuals is likely to have contributed to outbreaks of measles and pertussis in Colorado
from 1987-1998 (Feikin et al., 2000) and a resurgence of pertussis in California in 2010 (Atwell,
Van Otterloo, Zipprich, Winter, Harriman, Salmon, Halsey and Omer, 2013). Furthermore, inter-
ventions designed to educate parents about vaccine risks do not seem to have impacts on immu-
nization behavior (Nyhan, Reifler, Richey and Freed, 2014; Sadaf, Richards, Glanz, Salmon and
Omer, 2013).
   In this paper, we exploit the differences in the demographic and socioeconomic composition of
the two groups of children described above, along with detailed information on child and family
characteristics available in the NIS data, to gain insight into potential policy avenues for increas-


                                                 7
ing vaccine coverage. In particular, we stratify the NIS sample by race/ethnicity, family income,
maternal education, and parents’ marital status to see whether the responsiveness of immunization
timing to disease outbreaks is different for children who are most likely to delay or decline vac-
cines for economic reasons than for children who are more likely to delay or decline vaccines for
reasons related to vaccine safety.


2.2. Conceptual Framework

       Our interpretation of our empirical results is based on a simple conceptual framework, similar
to that outlined by Oster (2016), in which parents make vaccine decisions by weighing perceived
vaccine costs against perceived vaccine benefits. In this framework, the perceived benefit from
vaccination for a particular disease depends on the perceived excess probability of contracting the
disease in the absence of a vaccine. This perceived probability may in fact be greater than or
less than the true value. However, we assume that a local disease outbreak (the external shock in
our analysis) causes the perceived risk of illness to increase. For this assumption to hold, local
disease outbreaks must be adequately publicized within a state, perhaps through the local news
or by schools and medical providers. Oster (2016) provides supporting evidence on this front
by documenting increases in both internet searches and local news articles related to pertussis
following an outbreak.1
       We make an important distinction between the expected health costs of vaccinating and health-
care access costs associated with vaccination. The expected health costs of vaccination include
injection pain and a small risk of complications from the vaccine. For some families, they may
also include other concerns about vaccine safety. Access costs include the costs of obtaining in-
formation about vaccine recommendations, locating a provider, and scheduling an appointment,
as well as copayments or fees, transportation costs, and time costs. For the substantial fraction of

   1
    We also confirm that internet search activity increases during outbreaks defined in our data. The results of this
analysis are available upon request.


                                                         8
families who already visit pediatric providers on a regular basis, the marginal costs of vaccination
are likely to be minimal, as many of the access costs have already been incurred. However, the re-
search findings summarized in the previous section suggest that these kinds of costs are significant
barriers to immunization among disadvantaged families and thus may be important determinants
of on-time vaccination for marginal children.
   As Oster (2016) points out, this kind of cost-benefit framework can be consistent with the
choice not to vaccinate. When the expected benefit of vaccinating (perceived disease risk) is very
low, even small costs can outweigh it. What we expect, however, is that increases in perceived
disease risk associated with local pertussis outbreaks should increase the share of children who
receive the pertussis vaccine on time. If we are willing to assume that the utility cost of illness is
comparable across groups (admittedly a strong assumption), the relative magnitudes of this direct
response can provide insight into the size of the costs. In particular, the groups who have the largest
response will be those with the lowest expected health and access cost barriers to immunization or
those who update their beliefs about the benefits of vaccination the most.
   Estimating spillover effects can provide insight into the mechanisms driving changes in vac-
cination behavior in response to disease outbreaks by helping us to distinguish the role of time
costs and other healthcare access costs from the perceived health costs and benefits of vaccination.
In particular, a pertussis outbreak should not change either the expected benefits or the perceived
health costs of vaccination for other illnesses such as measles or polio. It may, however, encour-
age families to visit a vaccine provider in order to protect their children against pertussis. Once
families have already incurred the access costs associated with a visit to a provider, the marginal
costs of other immunizations that are offered at the same visit are lowered substantially. Therefore,
any observed effects of pertussis outbreaks on take-up of other vaccines offered at the same time
are likely to be due only to changes in healthcare access costs. Importantly, we should not expect
this mechanism to increase take-up of vaccines that are offered at separate visits from the affected
DTaP doses, as the monetary and time costs of additional visits are unaffected.


                                                  9
2.3. Related Studies

   While a large body of research is dedicated to exploring the cross-sectional correlates of im-
munization, a smaller set of studies has used policy changes, direct interventions, and natural
experiments to identify causal determinants of immunization. Among those that focus on child-
hood vaccines, the majority of these studies estimate the effects of mandatory school vaccination
laws on immunization coverage among school-aged children (for example, Abrevaya and Mulli-
gan 2011; Luca 2016). Notably, in estimating the effects of mandatory school vaccination laws
on immunization of adolescent children, Carpenter and Lawler (2017) find substantial spillover ef-
fects from mandates for Tdap booster shots to immunization for meningococcal disease and human
papillomavirus that are concentrated among low-SES households.
   The work most closely related to our analysis is that of Oster (2016), who estimates the causal
effects of county-level pertussis outbreaks on county-level immunization at kindergarten entry
using data from 12 U.S. states. She finds effects that are substantial (a large outbreak decreases
the share of kindergarteners who are not vaccinated for pertussis in the following year by about
20 percent). Oster (2016) shows increases in both local news coverage of pertussis and internet
searches related to pertussis in the months following a local outbreak, which support the notions
that information about outbreaks is disseminated widely and that individuals increase information-
seeking behavior in response to an outbreak.
   Other researchers have used natural experiments to study the role of financial costs in determin-
ing vaccine uptake. Joyce and Racine (2005) study the expansion of the State Children’s Health
Insurance Coverage Program during the 1990s and find that the proportion of poor and near-poor
children who were up-to-date on their immunizations increased relative to the fraction of nonpoor
children as a result of expanded public insurance coverage. Chang (2016) examines state mandates
that private insurance plans cover recommended childhood vaccines. Exploiting variation across
states and over time in the introduction of such mandates, she finds that reductions in the cost of
vaccination increased the immunization rates for three vaccines—polio, measles-mumps-rubella,

                                                10
and diptheria-tetanus-pertussis.
       Our study makes several important contributions to the literature on the determinants of immu-
nization. First, by focusing on the precise timing of vaccination in infancy, we are able to identify
the effects of changes in perceived disease risk on immunization during the period in which par-
ents are likely to be making the first immunization decisions for their children. Importantly, this
is also the period during which the potential health costs of delayed immunization are the highest.
Second, because we use individual-level data, we are able to explore differences in the response
of immunization to changes in perceived disease risk along the same socioeconomic and demo-
graphic dimensions that are known to be correlated with vaccine coverage. Third, in studying the
spillover effects of pertussis outbreaks on the timing of receipt of other vaccines, we are able to
separately identify the role of vaccine access costs from the other potential mechanisms - changes
in the perceived benefits or safety risks of immunization.



3. Data
       In order to measure the effect of disease outbreaks on immunization behavior, we combine
two datasets – one that contains individual level information on immunizations and another that
contains information on the number of pertussis cases in each state and week.2


3.1. Outbreak Data

       The outbreak data come from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)’s Morbid-
ity and Mortality Weekly Reports (MMWR). Each week, the MMWR reports provide provisional
counts of selected notifiable diseases for each state. The reports also include revised counts for the

   2
     We have also collected disease count data for measles, mumps and varicella (Chicken Pox), but pertussis is the
only one that is available throughout the entire time period. Infrequently reported diseases (<1000 cases reported in
the previous year) are not reported by state, so our state level measure is not available for all diseases in all years. For
this reason, and because there is significantly more variation in exposure to pertussis outbreaks, we chose to focus on
pertussis.



                                                            11
prior year. Using those weekly reports, we compiled a database that covers the years 1996-2014
and includes both the provisional counts of pertussis cases for each state and week and the revised
counts.
       In order to examine whether or not parents respond to local outbreaks of a vaccine-preventable
disease, we first need to define what an “outbreak” is. Our primary measure of an outbreak is
an indicator for whether the four week moving average of weekly pertussis cases is above the
95th or 99th percentile of disease counts within a state over time, where percentile thresholds are
calculated using non-zero weekly counts. Our choice to focus on 95th or 99th percentile outbreaks
is informed by an analysis of internet search data from Google Trends. In particular, we find that
in weeks where the count is above either the 95th or the 99th percentile, search activity for the
term “whooping cough” significantly increases within a state. Although we also find increases
in search activity with lower thresholds, the increases are largest at these higher thresholds, and
the results are robust to alternative specifications.3 We use a moving average to smooth out any
lumpiness in reporting. Inspection of the data suggests that states may occasionally skip reporting
in a week, and effectively report multiple weeks at once. Using the four week average helps us
avoid accidentally counting those weeks as being above the threshold.
       Figure 1 gives an example of an outbreak based on this definition. The top left panel displays
the 4 week moving average of the number of cases, by week, in Idaho, and the horizontal line gives
Idaho’s 99th percentile threshold for pertussis cases (27.75). During 1997, Idaho had a number of
weeks above its 99th percentile. At the same time, we can see that in three nearby states, there
weren’t any weeks above the threshold. Figure 2 shows the same four states in 2007. During that
year only Colorado experienced an outbreak. Table 1 gives the 95th and 99th percentile thresholds
for each state.
       It is important to note that in many years, cumulative counts are provided in the published
MMWR reports, rather than counts for the current week. For consistency, we always use the

   3
       Results and additional details are available upon request.

                                                            12
cumulative counts. Subtracting the previous week’s count from the current week sometimes results
in a negative number of cases. This happens for at least two reasons. First, the reported numbers
are preliminary counts, and the number of cases in previous weeks is often revised over time. If
the number of cases in a previous week is revised down, it will decrease the cumulative number
of cases reported in the current week, but there is no way of looking back to see which week was
revised until the following year. We do not make any data corrections in cases where the count is
greater than -3. We prefer to use the numbers that were most likely to have been reported in the
news, rather than using the numbers that are released a year later. Second, in a small number of
cases, there is an obvious data entry mistake.4 Usually this shows up as a cumulative case count of
zero in the middle of a year, followed by a return to normal in a subsequent week, or an unusually
large increase followed or proceeded by a similarly sized decrease. For weeks where this results in
a count that is less then -3, we apply the following smoothing procedure: we take the cumulative
case count from three weeks after the questionable week, subtract the cumulative count from three
weeks before and divide by 7. In nearly all cases, this captures both the week with what looks like
a data entry mistake, as well as the subsequent correction. The result is that we have an accurate
average number of cases over the 7 week period, but do not capture any variation in cases within
that period.5


3.2. Immunization Data

       The immunization data come from the National Immunization Survey (NIS). The NIS is spon-
sored by the CDC, and it is used to generate official estimates of vaccine coverage at the state and
national level. The study collects information on randomly selected households with children be-

   4
    Less than 0.5% of cases fall into this category.
   5
    Additionally, there are 7 cases where a seemingly obvious data entry was made, but our smoothing process is not
enough to fix it. In 4 cases, the mistake was similar to the one described above, but the corresponding week was more
than 3 weeks away. In these cases, we fixed the data by hand. In 3 cases, there was no obvious correction week. In
those cases, we used the revised number from the following year’s report. More details are available upon request.



                                                         13
tween the ages of 19 months and 35 months via a household telephone survey and a mail survey of
vaccination providers. The data are available from 1995 through 2012 and include information on
household demographics, as well as the types of vaccinations received and the child’s age in days
at vaccine receipt.6 We use the restricted use version of the NIS, which includes each child’s state
of residence and exact date of birth. This allows us to create a variable that indicates whether or
not a pertussis outbreak occurred in a child’s state while they were in utero or during their first two
months of life. Our primary outcome of interest is an indicator for whether or not an individual
received their first DTaP immunization on time. The recommended age is two months (61 days),
and we allow for a two week grace period to account for appointment scheduling conflicts, for a
total of 75 days. We also examine whether an increase in on-time receipt of the DTaP vaccination
spills over to other two-month immunizations, and consider a variety of other immunization out-
comes, including whether a child received a hepatitis-B vaccine at birth, whether a child received
vaccines for MMR and varicella by 15 months, and DTaP coverage by 19 months of age.
       Table 2 displays the summary statistics for the immunization and demographic variables in
the NIS. Approximately 77 percent of children receive their first DTaP immunization by 75 days.
The percentage of children receiving their other 2-month immunizations on time is similar (Hib,
Polio). There is a long right tail in the distribution, however, with an average age of first DTaP
of 77 days, but a median of 64 and a maximum of 1210.7 The percentage of children receiving
later immunizations on time is lower than for the 2-month immunizations. We see that 55% of
children receive their varicella vaccination by 15 months (470 days) and 70% of children receive
their first measles containing vaccine by 15 months. Approximately 68% of children have received
the recommended four doses of DTaP by 19 months and, on average, they have received 3.6 doses
by that time.



   6
    Data for 2004 is not available in the restricted use version of the NIS dataset.
   7
    In the 1995, 1996, 1997 and 1998 surveys, Age in Days is recoded as -1 if it is recorded as anything less than
zero. This is true for less than 0.2% individuals.

                                                       14
4. Estimation Strategy
       We use a fixed effects model to estimate the effect of disease outbreaks on the propensity for
children to be immunized at different points in time. The model includes month of birth and
state fixed effects so that our identification relies on variation in the timing of outbreaks across and
within states. In other words, we estimate whether birth cohorts that experience a very high number
of pertussis cases relative to other birth cohorts in the same state, are more likely to be immunized
on time, controlling for aggregate (nationwide) variation in immunization across birth-cohorts.
       Our preferred estimation specification is:


                     DTP75isw = α + β Outbreaksw + ω Xisw + γs + γm + isw                                            (1)


where DTP75isw is an indicator for whether or not individual i, living in state s, and born in week
w received their first DTaP immunization by the time they are 75 days old.8 Outbreaksw is a
variable that indicates exposure to a disease outbreak during the one-year period spanning the ten
months prior to birth and the two months after birth, for a child born in week w and in state s.
Throughout the paper, we show results for both 95th percentile and 99th percentile outbreaks,
where the outbreak cutoffs are defined relative to own-state pertussis counts.9 Xisw is a vector
of individual child characteristics that includes birth order, child gender, child race and ethnicity,
maternal education, and family poverty status, and γs and γm are fixed effects for state and month-
by-year of birth. Standard errors are clustered by state and the regressions are weighted using NIS
survey weights. β is the regression coefficient of interest, as it represents the effect of an outbreak
in utero or early infancy on the probability of on-time immunization at two months of age.

   8
     The recommended age for this particular immunization is two months, or 61 days. We use 75 days to allow for
typical appointment scheduling conflicts.
   9
     One concern with using a single cutoff to define outbreaks is that the estimated treatment effects will be attenuated
by the inclusion of smaller outbreaks in the control group. However, we have estimated results including multiple
percentile cutoffs together (50-74, 75-89, 90-94, 95-98, and 99) and found that the 95th and 99th percentile results
were not very different. This suggests that the treatment effects we are estimating are particular to major (95th and
99th percentile) outbreaks. These results are presented in Appendix Table A3.

                                                           15
   We begin by testing sensitivity of the regression estimates for the full NIS sample to the inclu-
sion of demographic controls, state fixed effects, and time fixed effects. In the remaining tables, we
estimate our preferred specification (as described above) separately for a set of subgroups defined
by poverty status, child race and ethnicity, and mother’s education and marital status. In others,
we replace the key left-hand-side variable (DTP75) with alternative immunization outcomes, in-
cluding indicators for other 75 day immunizations, indicators for receiving a hepatitis B vaccine
at birth, indicators for receiving varicella and MMR vaccines by 15 months of age, and DTaP
coverage by 19 months of age.



5. Results
5.1. Effect of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP by 75 Days

   Our first question is whether information about disease risk directly affects the timing of infant
vaccination for the disease in question. In Table 3, we show the estimated effects of experiencing a
pertussis outbreak during the past 12 months on the likelihood that an infant receives his or her first
DTaP vaccine dose by 75 days of age and test the sensitivity of this result to our choice of model
and outbreak variable. As discussed in Section 2.2, we expect that an outbreak should increase the
perceived benefits of vaccinating by increasing the perceived risk of illness. The estimates in Table
3 show that this is indeed the case: a pertussis outbreak increases the likelihood that a child receives
his or her first DTaP dose on time by 0.9 to 1.3 percentage points. When scaled by the share of
children who do not get this vaccine on time in the full sample (21.2 percent of children), these
values imply that an outbreak reduces the fraction of children who delay or miss their first DTaP
immunization by 4.4 to 6.1 percent. While the magnitude and precision of the coefficients change
a bit with the addition of demographic controls and state and time fixed effects, the coefficients are
generally similar across columns and across the two panels, which present the results separately
for a 95th percentile outbreak cutoff and a 99th percentile outbreak cutoff.
   Next, in Table 4, we explore whether the results for the full NIS sample mask heterogeneity

                                                  16
along demographic and socioeconomic dimensions. In particular, we investigate whether sub-
groups in which children are most likely to delay or miss immunization due to cost or limited
access to quality healthcare (low-SES groups) respond differently from subgroups in which chil-
dren are more likely to delay or miss vaccines due to parental concerns about vaccine safety (more
often families with white, college-educated parents). To do this, we split the sample by poverty
status, child race and ethnicity, mother’s education, and mother’s marital status.
       Before examining the regression results, we first verify that the summary statistics for on-time
receipt of the first DTaP dose match the patterns that have been established in the literature. The
row titled “Y Mean” near the bottom of Table 4 provides the weighted mean for the subgroup listed
at the top of the column. For example, the means at the bottom of the second and third columns
tell us that 82.2% of children above the poverty line receive their first DTaP immunization by
the time they are 75 days old, while only 71.4% of children below the poverty line do. Across
the remaining columns, the discrepancy in on-time immunization rates between high- and low-
SES families is apparent for each set of subgroups: Black and Hispanic children, children of
less-educated mothers, and children of unmarried mothers all have lower rates of immunization.
These patterns, which are consistent with those documented in the existing literature, highlight an
important point—while change in vaccination behavior among white, college-educated families
might be contributing to the recent decline in immunization rates, low-SES children still make up
a large portion of the under-immunized child population.10
       The regression results in Table 4 show that the response to disease outbreaks is larger among
the subgroups that have the lowest baseline rates of on-time immunization and are most likely to
be underimmunized for reasons related to healthcare access costs—the low-SES subgroups. In
this table, each column presents the results of estimating Equation 1 separately for the group listed

  10
    Coefficients on the demographic control variables from the regressions in Table 3 are presented in Appendix Table
A1. These coefficients, which represent regression-adjusted correlations between socioeconomic and demographic
characteristics and on-time DTaP receipt, are consistent with the raw differences in means, with one exception: when
simultaneously controlling for race and ethnicity, poverty status, mother’s education and marital status, as well as child
gender and birth order, Hispanic children actually have higher immunization rates than white children.

                                                           17
at the top of the column (including all control variables except for the stratifying variable). The
number displayed in italics below each coefficient’s standard error is the coefficient expressed a
percentage of the portion of that group that is not vaccinated on time (one minus the mean listed at
the bottom of the table). We find that children in families below the poverty line (22 percent of the
NIS sample) are 3 to 3.4 percentage points more likely to obtain their first dose of DTaP on time if
they experience a pertussis outbreak, which is equivalent to a 10.5 to 11.9 percent reduction in the
size of non-vaccinating population at that age. We find effects of similar magnitude among black
and Hispanic children, with estimates ranging from 9 to 12 percent of the relevant non-vaccinating
population in each subgroup. The largest treatment effect is seen for the group of children whose
mothers have less than a high school education—a 14.4 percent effect. Finally, there is evidence
that children of single mothers are more likely to get vaccinated on time after an outbreak than
children of married mothers, though differences by marital status are not as large.
   The results in Table 4 show that the overall effects presented in Table 3 are masking substantial
heterogeneity in the response to outbreaks across socioeconomic status. The estimates suggest that
educational attainment may be a particularly important source of disparities across groups, since
the coefficients for the group of children whose mothers have not graduated from high school
are larger than for any of the other subgroups. Notably, in the results shown in Table 4, we find
no evidence of any effects of pertussis outbreaks on the likelihood of obtaining the first pertussis
vaccine on time among the non-poor, white, and college-educated groups. In fact, the coefficients
for these groups, though not significant, are slightly negative in Panel B, suggesting a possible
role for reverse causality in that association. In particular, for birth cohorts in which mothers in
more-advantaged groups are less likely to vaccinate, the risk of experiencing an extreme outbreak
is slightly higher. This raises a concern about our identification strategy: if differences across
birth-week cohorts in the likelihood of experiencing a pertussis outbreak are associated with other
unobservable changes (in attitudes about vaccination, for example) that are related to the likelihood
of on-time vaccination, our results will be biased. Since the bias is most likely to be negative, this


                                                 18
is unlikely to explain the significant positive coefficients we find in Table 4. Nonetheless, we
conduct a falsification test in which we include outbreaks that occur in months 3-6, after the two-
month immunizations. Results, presented in Appendix Table A2, show no significant association
between received the first DTaP dose on time and subsequent outbreaks.


5.2. Spillover Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks

   Next, we turn our attention to the spillover effects of pertussis outbreaks onto immunization for
other illnesses. As discussed in Section 2.2, the extent of spillover effects can help to distinguish
the roles of factors such as the costs of obtaining information, financial costs, transportation costs,
and time costs (grouped together here and labeled as “access costs”) in the decision whether to
obtain a particular vaccine from the effects of a change in the perceived risk of illness. The idea
is that an outbreak of pertussis should not affect either the risk of contracting other diseases or the
perceived health and safety risks of vaccines for other diseases. Instead, as we have documented in
the previous two sections, an outbreak of pertussis increases the likelihood that low-SES families
seek out and obtain the DTaP vaccine for their infants. In this way, pertussis outbreaks might
generate new interactions with medical providers that otherwise wouldn’t have occurred, reducing
the access costs associated with obtaining vaccines that are offered at the same time as the DTaP
vaccine. If this is the case, we should expect to see spillover effects (1) only for the subgroups
that had significant direct effects, (2) specifically for subgroups with lower frequency of routine
wellness care, and (3) only for vaccines that can be given at the same time as the first DTaP dose.
   To determine which factors affect parents’ decisions to immunize their infant, we first estimate
the effects of experiencing a pertussis outbreak in the previous year on the likelihood that children
receive vaccinations for polio and Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)—two immunizations that
are also recommended at two months of age—by 75 days. In Table 5, we present spillover effects
for 99th percentile outbreaks (results for 95th percentile outbreaks, presented in Appendix Table
A4 are similar). We find that a pertussis outbreak results in significant increases in the likelihood

                                                  19
that infants are immunized on-time for polio and hib, with effects concentrated among the same
low-SES groups that had the largest direct effects. The results are only slightly smaller in magni-
tude than the direct effects shown in Table 4. For example, among poor children, the coefficient
represents a 10.9 percent reduction in the non-vaccination rate for polio and a 9.3 percent reduc-
tion in the non-vaccination rate for hib. For infants whose mothers have less than a high school
degree, the effects for polio and hib are both equivalent to 12.5 percent of the non-vaccination rate
for that group. These findings suggest that once children in low-SES groups are visiting a vaccine
provider to obtain a pertussis shot, they are also likely to obtain other shots that are offered at the
same visit. This suggests that either health access costs are an important barrier to immunization,
or that experiencing a local outbreak of any disease might change parents’ attitudes toward immu-
nization more generally, or cause medical providers to take a stronger pro-immunization stance in
the periods following disease outbreaks.11
       In order to distinguish between the possible mechanisms driving the spillover effects in Table
5, we turn our attention to vaccines that are typically received separately from the first DTaP
dose: the first dose of hepatitis-B, which is recommended in the hospital at birth, and the first
doses of MMR and varicella, both of which are recommended at 12-15 months. Receipt of the
first Hepatitis-B dose at birth is the cleanest test of the potential alternative mechanisms described
above, since the CDC recommendation about when this dose should be given is unambiguous and
it is recommended within the same general timeframe as our key outcome variables (early infancy).
With MMR and varicella, the potential mechanisms are more complicated and interpretation is a
bit more challenging. For these two vaccines, the CDC recommendation about when they should
be received is ambiguous—the first dose is recommended between 12 months and 15 months.

  11
     It is also important to note that in recent years, more options for combination vaccines have become available.
It could be that we observe spillover effects simply because the DTaP immunization is given in the same injection
as the others. If this is the case, it might change how we think about the “decision” to get additional vaccinations at
the same visit. Before 2009, there was a combination available that bundled the polio vaccination with DTaP, but no
combination that included both DTaP and hib. We check whether there are any differences in spillovers to polio vs.
hib pre-2009, before hib was available as a combination. We find no difference, suggesting that the observed spillovers
are not being driven by combination shots. These results are available upon request.

                                                         20
They are typically given at 12 months, when there is no DTaP dose given. However, if a child does
not obtain them at 12 months, they can be given 15 months, which is when the 4th DTaP dose is
typically given. Here, our outcome variables are indicators for receiving each shot by 15 months
of age, or by the end of the CDC recommendation window. The expected effects of a pertussis
outbreak that occurs in utero or in the first two months of life on these later immunizations will
incorporate changes in vaccination attitudes overall that result from the outbreak, changes in the
likelihood of attending the twelve and fifteen month visits, and changes in the likelihood of getting
the immunizations at each visit.
   Estimates of the spillover effects from pertussis outbreaks to the hepatitis-B, MMR, and vari-
cella vaccines are presented in Table 6. In Panel A, which shows the effects on hepatitis-B, the
outbreak indicator only covers the six month period prior to birth, as the outcome in question oc-
curs at the time of birth. In Panels B and C, which show the effects on 15 month immunizations,
we control for later outbreaks as well, including an indicator for outbreaks occurring between 3
and 15 months of life. Across all three panels, we find no evidence that early-life pertussis out-
breaks generate the same positive spillover effects that we saw in the previous table for vaccines
that are recommended to be received separately from DTaP doses. In fact, we find the opposite:
pertussis outbreaks seem to generate substitution across immunizations. For hepatitis-B, the point
estimates for the poor, black, less-than-high school, and unmarried subgroups are equivalent to 5 to
7 percent reductions in the likelihood of receiving the first immunization dose at the time of birth,
though only one of these estimates is statistically significant. We find evidence of even stronger
substitution for some groups with the fifteen month vaccines. In particular, children of unmarried
and black mothers are substantially less likely to obtain both MMR and varicella on time if they
experienced a pertussis outbreak in utero or in early life.
   Taken together, our results suggest that low-SES groups are constrained with respect to their
health care utilization, and that this constraint is affecting infant immunization coverage in these
groups. Among poor, less-educated, minority, and unmarried groups, a pertussis outbreak in-


                                                 21
creases the likelihood of getting the first set of vaccines on time—not just pertussis, but all vac-
cines that are recommended at two months of age. However, for some families, these increases
are accompanied by a reduction in the likelihood that later vaccines are received on-time. Though
we can only speculate about the reasons for this, the fact that the substitution effects are particu-
larly strong for the children of unmarried mothers and for the children of black mothers, who are
substantially more likely to be unmarried and also more likely to work than mothers in any of the
other groups, suggests that it may be driven by families experiencing time constraints.


5.3. Long-run Immunization Effects

   Finally, we explore whether on-time initiation of pertussis immunization has an effect on the
number of pertussis doses that are received and whether children are ultimately up-to-date on their
pertussis sequence. Table 7 shows the effect of a pertussis outbreak during the 12 month periods
beginning 6 months before birth and at 6 months old on immunizations received by 19 months
(we shift the timing of the outbreak shocks by a few months in order to better cover all outbreaks
experienced in infancy). The results in Panel A show that an outbreak during either of those time
periods increases the number of DTaP vaccinations received by 19 months, though only slightly.
By that time, the full 4 dose sequence should be completed. The mean doses for each subgroups
range between 3.4 and 3.7, and all but one of the coefficients translates to less than 1 percent of
the relevant subgroup mean. Interestingly, the increases in the total number of vaccine doses is
seen not only in the low-SES subgroups but also in the more advantaged groups. Along with the
positive cross-vaccine spillovers seen for pertussis outbreaks occurring between 3 and 15 months
of age in Table 6, these results suggest that non-poor, white, and college-educated families do
respond somewhat to outbreaks, but do so by adjusting the timing of later vaccine doses rather
than by accelerating the timing of the first dose.
   Panel B displays the results for an indicator for whether a child has received all four recom-
mended DTaP immunizations by 19 months of age. Here, we see that while a pertussis outbreak

                                                 22
during the period six months before to six months after birth has a positive, and often statistically
significant, effect on being up-to-date, a later outbreak does not. This suggests that an earlier out-
break, which causes an on-time initiation of the sequence also encourages parents to make sure
their children are fully up to date by 19 months. However once parents delay, they are unable to
complete the sequence on time, even if a later outbreak encourages them to initiate the sequence
earlier than they would have in the absence of an outbreak.



6. Conclusions
   Improving early childhood vaccination rates is an important policy goal to ensure the health of
American children. A growing number of children are under-vaccinated, either for economic or
personal reasons. The goal of this study has been to understand how changes in perceived disease
risk and access costs alter parents’ decisions to initiate vaccination for their infants. By assessing
the effects of pertussis outbreaks during pregnancy and early infancy on the procurement of vac-
cines that protect agains pertussis, as well as those that protect against different diseases, we are
able to separately identify the roles of perceived disease risk and access costs in the decision to vac-
cinate. For children whose mothers have not graduated from high school, we find that a pertussis
outbreak while a child is in utero increases the likelihood of obtaining the first pertussis vacci-
nation on-time by more than four percentage points—the equivalent of a 14.4 percent reduction
in the non-vaccinated population. Similarly, responses are largest for children below the poverty
line, black and hispanic children and those whose mothers are unmarried. Since low-income, less-
educated, and minority families are very responsive to changes in their perceived disease risk,
these populations might be effectively targeted with policy efforts that improve information about
the benefits of vaccination.
   We also find that when parents respond to a pertussis outbreak by getting their child immunized
against pertussis, they often bundle that immunization with others that can be given at the same
time. However, for some groups, this increase in immunization is accompanied by a decrease in

                                                  23
the likelihood of getting other immunizations that are typically recommended to be received at
separate visits from the first DTaP dose. These patterns reveal the significant role that access costs
play in influencing parental decisions about immunization, particularly for the populations who are
likely to be time- and resource-constrained. They are perhaps not surprising, as full immunization
requires frequent visits to the doctor. In fact, perfect compliance with the CDC’s recommended
vaccination schedule for infants and toddlers requires as many as six separate interactions with
medical providers—at birth, two months, four months, six months, 12 months, and 15 months.
These visits can involve monetary costs, time costs, and transportation costs. Policies that help
eliminate these costs such as community-based health centers or free neighborhood vaccination
clinics can help facilitate vaccine initiation and follow-up for this population. The literature on
improving attendance at prenatal visits may provide insight about how to facilitate well-child visits
for the same population.




                                                 24
Abrevaya, J. and Mulligan, K. (2011), ‘Effectiveness of state-level vaccination mandates: evidence
  from the varicella vaccine’, Journal of health economics 30(5), 966–976.

Atwell, J. E., Van Otterloo, J., Zipprich, J., Winter, K., Harriman, K., Salmon, D. A., Halsey, N. A.
  and Omer, S. B. (2013), ‘Nonmedical vaccine exemptions and pertussis in california, 2010’,
  Pediatrics 132(4), 624–630.

Carpenter, C. S. and Lawler, E. C. (2017), ‘Direct and spillover effects of middle school vaccination
  requirements’, NBER WP 23107 .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (1999), ‘Achievements in public health, 1990-1999:
  Control of infectious diseases’, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 48(29), 621–629.

Chang, L. V. (2016), ‘The effect of state insurance mandates on infant immunization rates’, Health
  economics 25(3), 372–386.

Chu, S. Y., Barker, L. E. and Smith, P. J. (2004), ‘Racial/ethnic disparities in preschool immuniza-
  tions: United states, 1996-2001’, American Journal of Public Health 94(6), 973–977.

Feemster, K. A., Spain, C. V., Eberhart, M., Pati, S. and Watson, B. (2009), ‘Identifying infants at
  increased risk for late initiation of immunizations: maternal and provider characteristics’, Public
  Health Reports 124, 42–53.

Feikin, D. R., Lezotte, D. C., Hamman, R. F., Salmon, D. A., Chen, R. T. and Hoffman,
  R. E. (2000), ‘Individual and community risks of measles and pertussis associated with per-
  sonal exemptions to immunization’, JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association
  284(24), 3145–3150.

Fu, L. Y., Cowan, N., McLaren, R., Engstrom, R. and Teach, S. J. (2009), ‘Spatial accessibility to
  providers and vaccination compliance among children with medicaid’, Pediatrics 124(6).



                                                 25
Guttmann, A., Manuel, D., Dick, P. T., To, T., Lam, K. and Stukel, T. A. (2006), ‘Volume matters:
  physician practice characteristics and immunization coverage among young children insured
  through a universal health plan’, Pediatrics 117(3), 595–602.

Joyce, T. and Racine, A. (2005), ‘Chip shots: association between the state children’s health insur-
  ance programs and immunization rates’, Pediatrics 115(5), e526–e534.

Lannon, C., Brack, V., Stuart, J., Caplow, M., McNeill, A., Bordley, W. C. and Margolis, P. (1995),
  ‘What mothers say about why poor children fall behind on immunizations: a summary of focus
  groups in north carolina’, Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine 149(10), 1070–1075.

LeBaron, C. W., Massoudi, M., Stevenson, J. and Lyons, B. (2001), ‘Vaccination coverage and
  physician distribution in the united states, 1997’, Pediatrics 107(3), e31–e31.

Luca, D. L. (2016), ‘The effects of mandatory vaccination laws on childhood health and educa-
  tional attainment’, Working Paper .

Luman, E. T., Barker, L. E., Shaw, K. M., McCauley, M. M., Buehler, J. W. and Pickering, L. K.
  (2005), ‘Timeliness of childhood vaccinations in the united states’, JAMA: The Journal of the
  American Medical Association 293(10), 1204–1211.

Luman, E. T., McCauley, M. M., Shefer, A. and Chu, S. Y. (2003), ‘Maternal characteristics asso-
  ciated with vaccination of young children’, Pediatrics 111(Supplement 1), 1215–1218.

Nyhan, B., Reifler, J., Richey, S. and Freed, G. L. (2014), ‘Effective messages in vaccine promo-
  tion: a randomized trial’, Pediatrics 133(4), e835–e842.

Omer, S. B., Enger, K. S., Moulton, L. H., Halsey, N. A., Stokley, S. and Salmon, D. A.
  (2008), ‘Geographic clustering of nonmedical exemptions to school immunization requirements
  and associations with geographic clustering of pertussis’, American Journal of Epidemiology
  168(12), 1389–1396.

                                                26
Omer, S. B., Salmon, D. A., Orenstein, W. A., deHart, P. and Halsey, N. (2009), ‘Vaccine re-
  fusal, mandatory immunization, and the risk of vaccine-peventable diseases’, The New England
  Journal of Medicine 360(19).

Oster, E. (2016), Does disease cause vaccination? disease outbreaks and vaccination response,
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ronsaville, D. S. and Hakim, R. B. (2000), ‘Well child care in the united states: racial differences
  in compliance with guidelines.’, American Journal of Public Health 90(9), 1436.

Sadaf, A., Richards, J. L., Glanz, J., Salmon, D. A. and Omer, S. B. (2013), ‘A systematic re-
  view of interventions for reducing parental vaccine refusal and vaccine hesitancy’, Vaccine
  31(40), 4293–4304.

Salmon, D. A., Moulton, L. H., Omer, S. B., Patricia deHart, M., Stokley, S. and Halsey, N. A.
  (2005), ‘Factors associated with refusal of childhood vaccines among parents of school-aged
  children: a case-control study’, Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine 159(5), 470–476.

Smith, P. J., Chu, S. Y. and Barker, L. E. (2004), ‘Children who have received no vaccines: who
  are they and where do they live?’, Pediatrics 114(1), 187–195.




                                                27
                                   Figure 1: Pertussis Cases in 1997


                              Idaho                                                   Montana



20 40 60 80 100




                                                          20 40 60 80 100
Pertussis Revised




                                                          Pertussis Revised
                                                                   0
         0




              1997w1 1997w13 1997w26   1997w40   1998w1                 1997w1 1997w13 1997w26   1997w40   1998w1
                               Week                                                      Week


                            Wyoming                                                   Colorado
20 40 60 80 100




                                                          20 40 60 80 100
Pertussis Revised




                                                          Pertussis Revised
         0




                                                                   0
              1997w1 1997w13 1997w26   1997w40   1998w1                 1997w1 1997w13 1997w26   1997w40   1998w1
                               Week                                                      Week


          Notes: This displays the 4 week moving average of the number of pertussis
          cases per week in a sample of four states. The horizontal line gives the 99th
          percentile for the 4 week moving average of weekly cases in each state. Data
          come from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Morbidity and
          Mortality Weekly Reports.




                                                     28
                                    Figure 2: Pertussis Cases in 2004


                               Idaho                                                   Montana
20 40 60 80 100




                                                          20 40 60 80 100
Pertussis Revised




                                                          Pertussis Revised
         0




                                                                   0

              2004w1   2004w14 2004w27 2004w40   2005w1                 2004w1   2004w14 2004w27 2004w40   2005w1
                                Week                                                      Week


                             Wyoming                                                   Colorado
20 40 60 80 100




                                                          20 40 60 80 100
Pertussis Revised




                                                          Pertussis Revised
         0




                                                                   0




              2004w1   2004w14 2004w27 2004w40   2005w1                 2004w1   2004w14 2004w27 2004w40   2005w1
                                Week                                                      Week


          Notes: This displays the 4 week moving average of the number of pertussis
          cases per week in a sample of four states. The horizontal line gives the 99th
          percentile for the 4 week moving average of weekly cases in each state. Data
          come from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Morbidity and
          Mortality Weekly Reports.




                                                     29
            Table 1: Outbreak Thresholds

          95th    99th                 95th       99th

AL       5.75       11         MT      10.5     19.75
AK       7.25       11         NE      7.25     15.25
AZ       23.5       56         NV         3      4.75
AR       11.5    22.75         NH      6.25      9.25
CA         70    116.5         NJ       8.5      11.5
CO       29.5     51.5         NM       7.5     12.25
CT          4       10         NY        41      56.5
DE       1.75     2.75         NC      8.75     19.25
DC       0.75     1.25         ND     12.25        79
FL      10.25    14.75         OH     34.25     58.25
GA          6     10.5         OK      5.25     10.75
HI        3.5        5         OR        15     21.25
ID       10.5    27.75         PA      21.5     34.25
IL      28.75     55.5         RI       3.5      9.25
IN      13.25    21.75         SC       9.5      15.5
IA      19.75     34.5         SD         6      15.5
KS       12.5       22         TN         6         8
KY       7.75    11.75         TX      66.5     101.5
LA        3.5      6.5         UT     17.25        33
ME       4.75        8         VT      8.75        15
MD          6     9.75         VA       9.5     23.25
MA      47.75     80.5         WA     24.75     40.75
MI       24.5       44         WV       3.5       7.5
MN       29.5       70         WI     31.25    176.75
MS        3.5     11.5         WY      3.25        10
MO       25.5       35
Notes: This table gives each state’s 95th and 99th per-
centile for weekly pertussis cases. Data come from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Reports.




                          30
                              Table 2: Summary Statistics

Variable                              Observations       Mean         SD     Min        Max

2-Month Immunizations

    DTaP by 75 days                         310874       0.773      0.419       0         1

    Hib by 75 days                          310874       0.760      0.427       0         1

    Polio by 75 days                        310874       0.758      0.428       0         1

    First DTaP, Age in Days                 306221      77.300    61.600       -1   1210
    First Hib, Age in Days                  305653      79.600    68.200       -1   1235

    First Polio, Age in Days                304276      77.200    58.100       -1   1246

Other Immunizations

    Varicella by 470 Days                   310874       0.551      0.497       0         1

    MCV by 470 Days                         310874       0.701      0.458       0         1
    UTD on DTaP by 19 months                310874       0.676      0.468       0         1

    # DTaP by 19 months                     310874       3.560      0.795       0         4

Demographic Variables

    Black                                   310874       0.152      0.359       0         1

    White                                   310874       0.582      0.493       0         1

    Hispanic                                310874       0.266      0.442       0         1
    Poor                                    284424       0.287      0.452       0         1

    HS Degree                               310874       0.527      0.499       0         1

    College Degree                          310874       0.287      0.452       0         1

    First Born                              275408       0.419      0.493       0         1

    Male                                    310874       0.513      0.500       0         1
Notes: This table gives summary statistics for the National Immunization Survey
(NIS). Means are weighted using survey weights. In the 1995, 1996, 1997 and 1998
surveys, “Age in Days” is recoded as -1 if it is recorded as anything less than zero.
This is true for less than 0.2% individuals.




                                           31
        Table 3: Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP Immunization by 75 Days

                                      (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)

95th Percentile Cutoff
   Pertussis Outbreak               0.009*      0.011**      0.010**       0.009*      0.011*
    (12 Months)                     (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.004)       (0.005)     (0.005)


99th Percentile Cutoff
   Pertussis Outbreak                0.009      0.013**       0.012*        0.009       0.010
    (12 Months)                     (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.007)


Individual Controls                   No            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
State Fixed Effects                   No            No          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects                    No            No          No           Yes          No
Month-Year Fixed Effects              No            No          No           No           Yes

Y Mean                              0.785        0.788         0.788        0.788       0.788
Observations                       175617       165843        165843       165843      165843

Notes: The key explanatory variable is an indicator for having experienced an outbreak of
pertussis in the state of birth during the period starting 10 months prior to birth and ending 2
months after birth. This variable is equal to one if the family experienced a four week period
in which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of
all four-week case totals for that state during the sample period. Individual control variables
include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education
and marital status. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10,
** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS sampling weights.




                                               32
                                        Table 4: Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP Immunization by 75 Days, Subgroups

                                 Full          Poverty Status            Race and Ethnicity                 Mother’s Education                Marital Status
                               Sample       Not Poor     Poor       White       Black     Hispanic     LTHS       HS Grad     College    Not Married     Married

     95th Percentile Cutoff
         Pertussis Outbreak    0.011*         0.002     0.030**      0.002    0.033**     0.021**     0.042**      0.005       0.001         0.018        0.008
           (12 Months)         (0.005)       (0.004)    (0.012)     (0.006)   (0.015)     (0.010)     (0.020)     (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.011)      (0.005)
                               0.0519        0.0112     0.1049      0.0106    0.1236       0.0905     0.1438      0.0219      0.0074        0.0657       0.0437

     99th Percentile Cutoff
         Pertussis Outbreak     0.010        -0.003    0.034***     -0.003    0.028**     0.028**      0.042*      0.008       -0.004       0.022*        0.006
           (12 Months)         (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.011)    (0.006)    (0.013)     (0.013)      (0.023)    (0.007)     (0.006)       (0.012)      (0.006)




33
                               0.0472       -0.0169     0.1189     -0.0160    0.1049      0.1207       0.1438     0.0351      -0.0294       0.0803       0.0328

     Y Mean                     0.788        0.822       0.714       0.812     0.733       0.768       0.708       0.772       0.864        0.726         0.817
     Observations              165843       129802       36041      111214     19847       34782       18477       74165       73201        40644        125199

     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. The numbers in italics represent the
     treatment effects as a fraction of the unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variable is an indicator for having experienced an outbreak of
     pertussis in the state of birth during the period starting 10 months prior to birth and ending 2 months after birth. This indicator is equal to one if the
     family experienced a four week period in which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week
     case totals for that state during the sample period. Individual control variables include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status,
     and mother’s education and marital status. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01.
     Observations are weighted using NIS sampling weights.
                      Table 5: Spillover Effects on Other Immunizations Received at the Same Visit as the First DTaP Dose, 99th Percentile

                                     Full        Poverty Status             Race and Ethnicity                Mother’s Education               Marital Status
                                   Sample     Not Poor      Poor       White      Black     Hispanic     LTHS      HS Grad     College    Not Married     Married

     Panel A: Polio by 75 Days
        Pertussis Outbreak          0.008      -0.004     0.032***      -0.004    0.023*     0.025*       0.037      0.007      -0.005        0.019         0.005
           -10m to 2m              (0.006)    (0.004)      (0.011)     (0.006)    (0.012)    (0.015)     (0.023)    (0.006)    (0.006)       (0.013)       (0.005)
                                   0.0346     -0.0198      0.1088      -0.0188    0.0836     0.1029      0.1246     0.0288     -0.0292       0.0671        0.0242

         Y Mean                     0.769      0.798        0.706       0.787     0.725       0.757      0.703       0.757      0.829         0.717         0.793
         Observations              165843     129802        36041      111214     19847       34782      18477       74165      73201         40644        125199

     Panel B: Hib by 75 Days




34
        Pertussis Outbreak         0.011*      0.002       0.028**      -0.001     0.019    0.031***     0.038*     0.011*      -0.004       0.021*         0.008
           -10m to 2m              (0.006)    (0.005)      (0.011)     (0.006)    (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.021)    (0.006)    (0.006)       (0.011)       (0.005)
                                   0.0489     0.0105       0.0927      -0.0050    0.0674     0.1255      0.1250     0.0456     -0.0268       0.0729        0.0408

         Y Mean                     0.775      0.810        0.698       0.801     0.718       0.753      0.696       0.759      0.851         0.712         0.804
         Observations              165843     129802        36041      111214     19847       34782      18477       74165      73201         40644        125199
     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. The numbers in italics represent the
     treatment effects as a fraction of the unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for having experienced an outbreak of
     pertussis in the state of birth during the relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in
     which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample
     period. Individual control variables include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS
     sampling weights.
                        Table 6: Spillover Effects on Immunizations Received at Separate Visits From the First DTaP Dose, 99th Percentile

                                 Full            Poverty Status                 Race and Ethnicity                  Mother’s Education                 Marital Status
                                Sample        Not Poor         Poor        White       Black      Hispanic     LTHS      HS Grad      College     Not Married    Married

     Panel A: Hepatitis B at Birth
        Pertussis Outbreak      -0.004         0.008          -0.028*      -0.004       -0.023      -0.003     -0.024      0.005       -0.003        -0.019        0.002
           -6m to 0m            (0.009)       (0.013)         (0.015)     (0.011)      (0.024)     (0.014)    (0.015)     (0.013)     (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.011)
                               -0.0092        0.0175          -0.0720     -0.0089      -0.0575     -0.0071    -0.0593     0.0118      -0.0063       -0.0485       0.0044

         Y Mean                  0.564         0.543          0.611        0.550       0.600       0.575       0.595       0.577       0.525         0.608        0.544
         Observations           181708        142243          39465       121471       22335       37902       20356       81982       79370         44926       136782

     Panel B: Measles Containing Vaccine by 15 Months
        Pertussis Outbreak     -0.008       -0.002           -0.022**      -0.001     -0.042**      -0.011     -0.006      -0.013      -0.001      -0.032***       0.001
           -10m to 2m         (0.006)      (0.006)            (0.009)     (0.007)      (0.020)     (0.010)    (0.012)     (0.009)     (0.005)        (0.010)      (0.007)
                              -0.0315      -0.0080            -0.0837     -0.0037      -0.1505     -0.0524    -0.0232     -0.0492     -0.0043       -0.1176       0.0041

         Pertussis Outbreak    0.012**        0.013*           0.010     0.020***       0.005       0.002      0.030*      0.009       0.008         0.025*        0.004
          3m to 15m            (0.006)        (0.007)         (0.009)     (0.007)      (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.017)    (0.008)     (0.009)        (0.013)      (0.004)
                               0.0472         0.0520          0.0380      0.0743       0.0179      0.0095      0.1158     0.0341      0.0342         0.0919       0.0163




35
         Y Mean                  0.746         0.750          0.737        0.731       0.721       0.790       0.741       0.736       0.766         0.728        0.755
         Observations           153909        120842          33067       103424       18413       32072       17107       68678       68124         37430       116479

     Panel C: Varicella by 15 Months
        Pertussis Outbreak      -0.007         -0.004          -0.011      0.001      -0.050**      -0.009     -0.001      -0.007      -0.009       -0.027**       0.002
           -10m to 2m          (0.006)        (0.005)         (0.011)     (0.007)      (0.021)     (0.015)    (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.008)        (0.011)      (0.005)
                               -0.0259        -0.0154         -0.0377     0.0036       -0.1736     -0.0369    -0.0034     -0.0247     -0.0383        -0.0931      0.0077

         Pertussis Outbreak    0.015**        0.015*          0.018*      0.023**       0.013       0.001       0.031      0.008     0.017***         0.019       0.012*
          3m to 15m            (0.006)        (0.008)         (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.021)    (0.007)     (0.006)        (0.013)      (0.006)
                               0.0556         0.0577          0.0616       0.0824      0.0451      0.0041      0.1058     0.0283      0.0723         0.0655       0.0460

         Y Mean                  0.730         0.740          0.708        0.721       0.712       0.756       0.707       0.717       0.765         0.710        0.739
         Observations           153909        120842          33067       103424       18413       32072       17107       68678       68124         37430       116479
     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. The numbers in italics represent the
     treatment effects as a fraction of the unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for having experienced an outbreak of
     pertussis in the state of birth during the relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in
     which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample
     period. Individual control variables include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS
     sampling weights.
                              Table 7: Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP Immunization Coverage by 19 Months, 99th Percentile

                                   Full         Poverty Status             Race and Ethnicity                  Mother’s Education                 Marital Status
                                 Sample      Not Poor      Poor       White       Black     Hispanic     LTHS       HS Grad      College     Not Married      Married

     Panel A: Number of DTaP Vaccinations
        Pertussis Outbreak   0.016*     0.023***           0.002     0.022**      -0.030      0.020      -0.004     0.022*       0.021**         0.025         0.013
           -6m to 6m         (0.009)     (0.008)          (0.021)    (0.010)     (0.030)     (0.014)    (0.024)     (0.012)      (0.010)        (0.019)       (0.009)
                             0.0045      0.0063           0.0006     0.0061      -0.0086     0.0056     -0.0012     0.0062       0.0057         0.0072        0.0036

         Pertussis Outbreak     0.017***     0.014***     0.030**      0.009      0.013      0.020*      0.036*     -0.000      0.031***         0.010        0.019**
          6m to 18m              (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.014)     (0.009)    (0.021)     (0.011)     (0.020)    (0.010)      (0.009)        (0.018)       (0.009)
                                 0.0047       0.0039      0.0086      0.0025     0.0037      0.0056      0.0104     0.0000       0.0084         0.0029         0.0052

         Y Mean                   3.581        3.623       3.486       3.607      3.490      3.574       3.474       3.553        3.692         3.494          3.620
         Observations            155752       122610       33142      104583      18821      32348       17278       69699        68775         37794         117958

     Panel B: Up to Date on DTaP Vaccinations




36
        Pertussis Outbreak 0.015*** 0.013**                0.018       0.010      0.010     0.023**      0.023*     0.013*       0.013**         0.016       0.014***
           -6m to 6m          (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.014)     (0.006)    (0.014)    (0.009)      (0.013)    (0.007)      (0.005)        (0.011)       (0.005)
                              0.0490      0.0461          0.0496      0.0350     0.0272      0.0730      0.0632     0.0394       0.0558         0.0440        0.0500

         Pertussis Outbreak       0.005        0.003       0.011      -0.005      0.015       0.012       0.006      0.001        0.007          0.001         0.006
          6m to 18m              (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.011)     (0.009)     (0.011)    (0.006)      (0.007)        (0.012)       (0.007)
                                 0.0163       0.0106      0.0303     -0.0175     0.0408      0.0381      0.0165     0.0030       0.0300         0.0027        0.0214

         Y Mean                   0.694        0.718       0.637       0.714      0.632      0.685       0.636       0.670        0.767         0.636          0.720
         Observations            155752       122610       33142      104583      18821      32348       17278       69699        68775         37794         117958
     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. In Panel A, the numbers in italicas
     represent the treatment effects as a percent of the mean. In Panel B, the numbers in italics represent the treatment effects as a fraction of the
     unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for having experienced an outbreak of pertussis in the state of birth during the
     relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in which the total number of pertussis cases
     in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample period. Individual control variables include
     dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
     at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS sampling weights.
Appendix A. Additional Tables




                                37
Table A1: Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP Immunization by 75 Days, Additional Coefficients

                                  95th                                 99th
    Pertussis Outbreak          0.011*                                0.010
      (12 Months)               (0.005)                              (0.007)

    Black                     -0.028***                            -0.028***
                                (0.007)                              (0.007)

    Hispanic                   0.020***                             0.020***
                                (0.005)                              (0.005)

    Poor                      -0.049***                            -0.049***
                                (0.007)                              (0.007)

    First Born                 0.051***                             0.051***
                                (0.003)                              (0.003)

    Male                         -0.002                               -0.002
                                (0.002)                              (0.002)

    Married                    0.041***                             0.041***
                                (0.006)                              (0.006)

    HS Grad                    0.041***                             0.041***
                                (0.008)                              (0.008)

    College                    0.104***                             0.104***
                                (0.009)                              (0.009)

    Mean                         0.788                                0.788
    Unweighted N                165843                               165843

    Notes: The key explanatory variable is an indicator for having experienced an outbreak of
    pertussis in the state of birth during the period starting 10 months prior to birth and ending 2
    months after birth. This variable is equal to one if the family experienced a four week period
    in which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of
    all four-week case totals for that state during the sample period. Individual control variables
    include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education
    and marital status. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10,
    ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS sampling weights.




                                                  38
                                  Table A2: Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP Immunization by 75 Days, Falsification Test

                                          Full       Poverty Status            Race and Ethnicity                Mother’s Education               Marital Status
                                        Sample     Not Poor     Poor      White      Black     Hispanic     LTHS      HS Grad     College    Not Married     Married

     Panel A: 95th Percentile Cutoff
        Pertussis Outbreak               0.001      -0.003      0.006     -0.002      0.014      -0.005      0.011      0.001      -0.005        0.006        -0.002
           (3m to 6m)                   (0.005)    (0.006)     (0.009)   (0.006)     (0.012)    (0.008)     (0.016)    (0.006)    (0.005)       (0.009)      (0.005)
                                        0.0047     -0.0166     0.0208    -0.0105     0.0517     -0.0215     0.0374     0.0044     -0.0357       0.0218       -0.0108

     Panel B: 99th Percentile Cutoff
        Pertussis Outbreak               0.006      0.002       0.011      0.010     -0.015      0.007       0.010      0.011      -0.002        0.009        0.005
           (3m to 6m)                   (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.010)    (0.007)   (0.026)     (0.015)     (0.016)    (0.013)    (0.006)       (0.017)      (0.006)




39
                                        0.0280     0.0110      0.0382     0.0526    -0.0554     0.0300      0.0340     0.0480     -0.0143       0.0327       0.0269

     Mean                                0.786      0.819      0.712       0.810     0.729       0.767      0.706      0.771       0.860        0.725         0.814
     Unweighted N                       195503     152952      42551      130267     24746       40490      22121      89390       83992        48895        146608

     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. The numbers in italics represent the
     treatment effects as a fraction of the unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for having experienced an outbreak of
     pertussis in the state of birth during the relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in
     which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample
     period. Individual control variables include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS
     sampling weights.
                            Table A3: Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP Immunization by 75 Days, Multiple Percentiles Together

                                       Full         Poverty Status              Race and Ethnicity                  Mother’s Education                    Marital Status
                                     Sample     Not Poor       Poor        White      Black      Hispanic      LTHS       HS Grad      College     Not Married       Married

     Pert Cout 50-74 Percentile
         -6m to 0m                    -0.001      -0.002       0.002       -0.004     0.015       -0.000       -0.006       0.003       -0.002        -0.002          -0.001
                                     (0.006)     (0.005)      (0.016)     (0.005)    (0.016)     (0.012)      (0.022)      (0.008)     (0.006)       (0.019)         (0.005)

         0m to 2m                     0.001      -0.002        0.009      -0.001     -0.007       0.009        0.007       -0.001       0.000         0.001           0.001
                                     (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.015)     (0.004)    (0.013)     (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.007)     (0.006)       (0.012)         (0.004)
     Pert Cout 75-89 Percentile
         -6m to 0m                    0.004       0.000        0.011       0.006      0.017      -0.013       -0.010      0.019**      -0.011         0.007           0.002
                                     (0.007)     (0.005)      (0.019)     (0.005)    (0.018)     (0.017)      (0.026)     (0.008)      (0.007)       (0.017)         (0.006)

         0m to 2m                     0.008       0.002        0.023       0.004      0.002       0.020        0.010        0.014      -0.002         0.004          0.009*
                                     (0.006)     (0.005)      (0.017)     (0.004)    (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.012)      (0.009)     (0.006)       (0.013)         (0.005)
     Pert Cout 90-94 Percentile
         -6m to 0m                    0.004       0.011       -0.011       0.007      0.022      -0.017       -0.005        0.013      -0.003         0.023          -0.007
                                     (0.009)     (0.007)      (0.020)     (0.010)    (0.018)     (0.019)      (0.024)      (0.013)     (0.008)       (0.016)         (0.008)

         0m to 2m                    0.009*       0.010        0.010       0.002      -0.020     0.028**       0.019        0.008       0.007         0.012           0.006




40
                                     (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.013)     (0.007)    (0.023)     (0.012)      (0.018)      (0.013)     (0.008)       (0.018)         (0.008)
     Pert Cout 95-98 Percentile
         -6m to 0m                   0.011**      0.005       0.026*       0.004     0.044*       0.012        0.015       0.020*      -0.004        0.022*           0.006
                                     (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.014)     (0.007)    (0.022)     (0.010)      (0.019)      (0.010)     (0.008)       (0.013)         (0.005)

         0m to 2m                     0.005       0.005        0.007      0.010*     -0.007       0.002        0.007        0.005       0.007         0.000           0.009
                                     (0.008)     (0.007)      (0.019)     (0.005)    (0.024)     (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.010)     (0.008)       (0.014)         (0.008)
     Pert Cout 99-100 Percentile
         -6m to 0m                    0.009       0.002        0.022       0.007      0.011       0.013        0.026        0.013      -0.003         0.016           0.007
                                     (0.009)     (0.008)      (0.016)     (0.008)    (0.021)     (0.023)      (0.024)      (0.013)     (0.007)       (0.016)         (0.010)

         0m to 2m                    0.023**      0.000      0.064***     -0.013     0.058**     0.058**     0.076***     0.033**     -0.022**       0.060**          0.005
                                     (0.011)     (0.013)      (0.019)     (0.017)    (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.027)     (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.027)         (0.014)

     Mean                             0.788       0.821        0.713       0.812      0.733       0.767        0.707       0.772        0.862         0.725           0.816
     Unweighted N                    177736      139156        38580      118843      21745       37148        19873       80015        77848         43871          133865
     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. The numbers in italics represent the treatment effects
     as a fraction of the unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for the percentile category of the highest 4 week pertussis count in the state
     of birth during the relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in which the total number of pertussis
     cases in the state exceeded falls in the percentile range listed of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample period. Individual control variables include
     dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state
     level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS sampling weights.
                     Table A4: Spillover Effects on Other Immunizations Received at the Same Visit as the First DTaP Dose, 95th Percentile

                                     Full       Poverty Status             Race and Ethnicity                Mother’s Education               Marital Status
                                   Sample     Not Poor      Poor      White      Black     Hispanic     LTHS      HS Grad     College    Not Married     Married

     Panel A: Polio by 75 Days
        Pertussis Outbreak         0.009*      0.000      0.029**     0.001     0.029**     0.021*      0.039*      0.006      -0.001        0.016        0.007
           -10m to 2m              (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.011)    (0.005)    (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.020)    (0.005)    (0.005)       (0.011)      (0.005)
                                   0.0390     0.0000      0.0986     0.0047     0.1055      0.0864      0.1313     0.0247     -0.0058       0.0565       0.0338

         Y Mean                     0.769      0.798       0.706      0.787      0.725       0.757      0.703      0.757       0.829        0.717         0.793
         Observations              165843     129802       36041     111214      19847       34782      18477      74165       73201        40644        125199

     Panel B: Hib by 75 Days




41
        Pertussis Outbreak         0.010*      0.003      0.026**     0.004      0.024      0.020*      0.037*      0.006       0.002       0.017*        0.008
           -10m to 2m              (0.006)    (0.004)     (0.012)    (0.006)    (0.016)     (0.011)     (0.022)    (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.010)      (0.006)
                                   0.0444     0.0158      0.0861     0.0201     0.0851      0.0810      0.1217     0.0249      0.0134       0.0590       0.0408

         Y Mean                     0.775      0.810       0.698      0.801      0.718       0.753      0.696      0.759       0.851        0.712         0.804
         Observations              165843     129802       36041     111214      19847       34782      18477      74165       73201        40644        125199
     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. The numbers in italics represent the
     treatment effects as a fraction of the unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for having experienced an outbreak of
     pertussis in the state of birth during the relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in
     which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample
     period. Individual control variables include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS
     sampling weights.
         Table A5: Spillover Effects on Immunizations Received at Separate Visits From the First DTaP Dose, 99th Percentile, Above the 95th Percentile

                                 Full            Poverty Status                    Race and Ethnicity                Mother’s Education                Marital Status
                               Sample        Not Poor           Poor       White        Black     Hispanic      LTHS       HS Grad     College    Not Married    Married

     Panel A: Measles Containing Vaccine
        Pertussis Outbreak -0.002              0.004          -0.020*      -0.006       -0.017      0.006       -0.011      -0.000      0.000        -0.007        0.000
           -6m to 0m         (0.009)          (0.010)         (0.012)     (0.009)      (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.009)
                             -0.0046          0.0088          -0.0514     -0.0133      -0.0425     0.0141      -0.0272     0.0000      0.0000       -0.0179       0.0000

         Y Mean                 0.564          0.543           0.611        0.550      0.600        0.575       0.595       0.577      0.525         0.608        0.544
         Observations          181708         142243           39465       121471      22335        37902       20356       81982      79370         44926       136782

     Panel B: Measles Containing Vaccine by 15 Months
        Pertussis Outbreak -0.005            0.003           -0.021***      0.005     -0.025**    -0.021***     -0.018      -0.005      0.002      -0.019***       0.000
           -10m to 2m         (0.004)      (0.004)             (0.007)     (0.005)     (0.012)     (0.008)     (0.012)     (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.007)      (0.004)
                             -0.0197        0.0120            -0.0798      0.0186      -0.0896     -0.1000     -0.0695     -0.0189     0.0085       -0.0699       0.0000

         Pertussis Outbreak     0.002          0.003           0.001        0.008       -0.001      -0.008     0.024**      -0.005      0.004        0.011        -0.003
          3m to 15m            (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.009)      (0.005)     (0.014)     (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.009)      (0.004)
                               0.0079         0.0120          0.0038       0.0297      -0.0036     -0.0381     0.0927      -0.0189     0.0171       0.0404       -0.0122




42
         Y Mean                 0.746          0.750           0.737        0.731      0.721        0.790       0.741       0.736      0.766         0.728        0.755
         Observations          153909         120842           33067       103424      18413        32072       17107       68678      68124         37430       116479

     Panel C: Varicella by 15 Months
        Pertussis Outbreak      0.001          0.005           -0.008       0.006       -0.023      -0.006      -0.003      0.002       0.002        -0.008        0.004
           -10m to 2m          (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.008)      (0.005)     (0.014)     (0.008)     (0.011)     (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.005)
                               0.0037         0.0192          -0.0274      0.0215      -0.0799     -0.0246     -0.0102     0.0071      0.0085       -0.0276       0.0153

         Pertussis Outbreak     0.005         0.009*           -0.004       0.013       0.014       -0.014       0.010      -0.001     0.011*        0.005         0.004
          3m to 15m            (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.009)      (0.008)     (0.015)     (0.012)      (0.011)    (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.009)       (0.006)
                               0.0185         0.0346          -0.0137      0.0466      0.0486      -0.0574      0.0341     -0.0035     0.0468       0.0172        0.0153

         Y Mean                 0.730          0.740           0.708        0.721      0.712        0.756       0.707       0.717      0.765         0.710        0.739
         Observations          153909         120842           33067       103424      18413        32072       17107       68678      68124         37430       116479
     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. The numbers in italics represent the
     treatment effects as a fraction of the unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for having experienced an outbreak of
     pertussis in the state of birth during the relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in
     which the total number of pertussis cases in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample
     period. Individual control variables include dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status.
     Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS
     sampling weights.
                              Table A6: Effects of Pertussis Outbreaks on DTaP Immunization Coverage by 19 Months, 95th Percentile

                                  Full        Poverty Status             Race and Ethnicity                 Mother’s Education                Marital Status
                                Sample     Not Poor      Poor       White       Black     Hispanic      LTHS      HS Grad     College     Not Married     Married

     Panel A: Number of DTaP Vaccinations
        Pertussis Outbreak   0.008      0.007            0.008      0.010       -0.014      0.012       0.001       0.016       0.001        0.005         0.009
           -6m to 6m        (0.008)    (0.008)          (0.016)    (0.010)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.023)     (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.019)       (0.008)
                            0.0022     0.0019           0.0023     0.0028      -0.0040     0.0034      0.0003      0.0045      0.0003       0.0014        0.0025

         Pertussis Outbreak      0.002     0.016**       -0.030     0.009     -0.049**      0.001       0.003       -0.007     0.016*        -0.011        0.005
          6m to 18m             (0.009)    (0.007)      (0.025)    (0.010)     (0.021)     (0.014)     (0.026)     (0.012)     (0.008)      (0.017)       (0.008)
                                0.0006      0.0044      -0.0086    0.0025      -0.0140     0.0003      0.0009      -0.0020     0.0043       -0.0031       0.0014

         Y Mean                  3.581       3.623      3.486       3.607      3.490        3.574       3.474      3.553       3.692         3.494         3.620
         Observations           155752      122610      33142      104583      18821        32348       17278      69699       68775         37794        117958

     Panel B: Up to Date on DTaP Vaccinations




43
        Pertussis Outbreak    0.005      0.002           0.012      0.004       -0.003      0.008       0.006       0.010      -0.003        0.003         0.006
           -6m to 6m         (0.006)    (0.007)         (0.010)    (0.006)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.007)    (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.006)
                              0.0163    0.0071          0.0331     0.0140      -0.0082     0.0254      0.0165      0.0303     -0.0129       0.0082        0.0214

         Pertussis Outbreak      -0.003      0.004       -0.018     -0.003    -0.026**      0.003       -0.012      -0.003      0.002        -0.015        0.001
          6m to 18m             (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.012)    (0.007)     (0.011)     (0.008)     (0.012)     (0.007)     (0.004)      (0.010)       (0.005)
                                -0.0098     0.0142      -0.0496    -0.0105     -0.0707     0.0095      -0.0330     -0.0091     0.0086       -0.0412       0.0036

         Y Mean                  0.694       0.718      0.637       0.714      0.632        0.685       0.636      0.670       0.767         0.636         0.720
         Observations           155752      122610      33142      104583      18821        32348       17278      69699       68775         37794        117958
     Notes: All specifications include individual controls, state fixed effects, and month-year of birth fixed effects. n Panel A, the numbers in italicas
     represent the treatment effects as a percent of the mean. In Panel B, the numbers in italics represent the treatment effects as a fraction of the
     unvaccinated population. The key explanatory variables are indicators for having experienced an outbreak of pertussis in the state of birth during the
     relevant reference period. These indicators are equal to one if the family experienced a four week period in which the total number of pertussis cases
     in the state exceeded the 95th or 99th percentile of all four-week case totals for that state during the sample period. Individual control variables include
     dummies for child gender, race/ethnicity, and poverty status, and mother’s education and marital status. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
     at the state level. * p < .10, ** p < .05, and *** p < .01. Observations are weighted using NIS sampling weights.
