                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FOOD VS. FUEL? IMPACTS OF PETROLEUM SHIPMENTS ON AGRICULTURAL
                                 PRICES.

                                       James B. Bushnell
                                      Jonathan E. Hughes
                                         Aaron Smith

                                      Working Paper 23924
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23924


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




The authors are grateful for research support from the Sloan Foundation. The authors thank Ken
Boyers, Karen Clay and seminar participants at the National Bureau of Economic Research
conference on Transporting Hydrocarbons for helpful comments. The statements, findings,
conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed herein are not necessarily those of
Genscape. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by James B. Bushnell, Jonathan E. Hughes, and Aaron Smith. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Food vs. Fuel? Impacts of Petroleum Shipments on Agricultural Prices.
James B. Bushnell, Jonathan E. Hughes, and Aaron Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 23924
October 2017
JEL No. H22,Q02,Q35

                                           ABSTRACT

Grain shippers and political figures in North Dakota and nearby states have voiced concern that
the dramatic increases in shipments of crude oil by rail have caused service delays and higher
costs. We investigate the potential impact of crude shipments on grain markets accounting for
harvest effects and other potential sources of rail congestion. Increased crude oil shipments are
associated with substantially larger spreads between wheat prices at regional elevators and in
Minneapolis, the market hub. The effect on corn and soybean spreads are an order of magnitude
smaller. Increased oil traffic is associated with small increases in rail rates but large increases in
rail car auction prices. We document increases in wheat carry (storage) costs and decreases in
shipment quantities. Surprisingly, little of the spread increase is due to lower prices paid to
farmers, suggesting consumers rather than producers paid the cost of increased rail congestion.


James B. Bushnell                                 Aaron Smith
Department of Economics                           Dept.of Agricultural and Resource Economics
One Shields Ave.                                  One Shields Ave.
University of California, Davis                   University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616                                   Davis, CA 95616
and NBER                                          adsmith@ucdavis.edu
jbbushnell@ucdavis.edu

Jonathan E. Hughes
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
0256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309
jonathan.e.hughes@colorado.edu
1      Introduction

One consequence of the technological revolution in the extraction of fossil fuels has been a
dramatic increase in transportation of crude oil by rail. Annual oil shipments from North
Dakota increased from about 26,000 cars in 2010 to over 340,000 cars in 2014, which was 50%
of all rail shipments. This trend is largely due to hydraulic fracturing and the opening of new
regions to large-scale oil and gas production. The oil boom, and its associated impacts on
railroads may have caused substantial rail network congestion and declining service quality
in 2013 and 2014. Reports at the time claimed farmers and grain shippers bore the brunt
of this congestion with long shipping delays, increased storage costs and spoilage (Koba,
2014; Nixon, 2014). This suggests a fundamental trade-off of “food vs. fuel” in traditionally
agricultural state like North Dakota faced with the prospect of rapidly expanding energy
development.

    However, as with other aspects of the food vs fuel debate, the question of winners and
losers is a complex one. The spillover effects of increased demand for rail access likely
increased the costs of shipping other commodities from the upper great plains. However,
the incidence of any cost shock will depend upon the market conditions and elasticities of
the affected products. In this paper, for example, we present evidence that oil shipments
did indeed impact markets for some grains, but counter to the narrative at the time, the
incidence of those impacts was borne mostly by consumers, rather than farmers.

    In this paper, we exploit detailed data on grain prices for elevators in North Dakota,
South Dakota, Minnesota and Montana, and information on shipments of oil by rail in North
Dakota.1 We show increased oil shipments are associated with increases in spreads between
elevator prices for corn, soybeans and wheat and prices at major grain trading hubs. These
effects are particularly large for hard red spring wheat from North Dakota and Minnesota.
These two states produce about two-thirds of the hard red spring wheat produced annually
in the United States, but less than 15% of the corn and soybeans. The estimated relationship
   1
     There is a large empirical literature investigating how the difference between local cash prices for agricul-
tural commodities and prices at major exchanges or export terminals respond to changes in transportation
costs (Sorenson, 1984; Wilson and Dahl, 2011) and other supply and demand factors (Tilley and Campbell,
1988).


                                                        2
between wheat spreads and oil shipments remains strong when we account for other factors
that contributed to rail congestion during this period, including severe cold temperatures,
large harvests and increased demand for rail transportation.

       Next, we explore several potential mechanisms and effects of increase oil by rail shipments
on grain transportation markets. Using shipment level data from the Surface Transportation
Board Confidential Waybill Sample, we show that increased oil shipments are associated with
relatively small increases in rates paid for grain shipments but significant decreases in the
quantity of grain shipped from North Dakota and nearby states. The fact tariff rates are
relatively sticky could be the result of statutes requiring railroads give shippers twenty days
notice prior to any rate increase. Sticky prices may also reflect menu costs or the desire
to avoid regulatory scrutiny stemming from firms charging substantially different prices for
similarly costly shipments.2

       Most grain shipments are made using rail cars owned by the railroad at prices published in
tariffs. Under rules of common carriage, any shipper meeting the criteria established by the
tariff may ship at the posted price. Shippers submit requests for service, including timelines
for delivery of empty rail cars. Railroads typically fulfill these requests on a first-come first-
served basis. However, during times of high demand or railroad congestion, there may be
significant service delays.3 During congested periods, some railroads allocate scarce capacity
using railcar auctions.4 A successful bid in a railcar auction guarantees that a rail car will
be delivered for loading during a specified time window. We find that the prices paid in rail
car markets increased dramatically in 2013-2014, are highly correlated with wheat spread
changes, and rise to levels that could account for the entire increase in spread during the
period.

       We also show wheat storage costs, captured by “carry” calculated from the difference
   2
     The twenty day notification period is specified as part of rules governing common carriers, U.S. Code,
Title 49, Chapter 111, Subchapter I.
   3
     For instance, during the spring of 2014 BNSF had as many as 15,000 past due orders for rail cars (BNSF
Railway Company, 2014).
   4
     The term railcar auction is something of a misnomer since grain shipments made under the public tariffs
use railroad owned cars and are priced accordingly. The auction is for a specified and guaranteed car delivery
date and not a fee for the car itself. Auction winners must still pay the tariff price in addition to the railcar
auction price.


                                                       3
between forward and spot elevator prices, increase with increasing oil shipments, although
by an order of magnitude less than the spread increase.5 Further, shippers in western North
Dakota and Montana are more likely to ship wheat to West Coast destinations when oil
shipments increase. Anecdotally, service disruptions during this period seemed to be par-
ticularly severe in the Minneapolis and Chicago rail terminals. The increase in westward
shipments suggests wheat was rerouted to reduce delays. Overall, these results suggest ship-
pers responded to the increase in oil shipments in a number of ways including participating
in rail car auctions, increasing storage and shipping crops to alternate destinations.

       Finally, we investigate the incidence of the congestion shock on farmers/elevator operators
and grain consumers. Pass through of cost shocks has been an area of general interest to
economists. The in- teractions of cost shocks and product prices can be quite complex
and are largely dependent upon characteristics of the demand function (Weyl and Fabinger
(2013)). Empirically, measures of pass through of currency exchange rates have been used
to diagnose market frictions (Goldberg and Hellerstein (2008)) and assess the incidence of
energy taxes (Marion and Muehlegger (2011)) and subsidies (Knittel, Meiselman, and Stock
(2015)).

       In this paper, we use time series techniques to forecast counterfactual elevator and market
hub grain prices from 2013 through 2015. We show nearly all of the wheat spread increase
comes from an increase in the wheat market hub price with no decrease in elevator prices
paid to farmers. This contradicts accounts in the popular press of large impacts of oil by rail
shipments on farmers and is consistent with the moderate increase in the carry at country
elevators. Further, this result echoes the literature on biofuel policies and commodity prices
that studies the extent to which transportation energy policies can spillover to food markets
(De Gorter and Just, 2010; Roberts and Schlenker, 2013; Wright, 2014; Carter, Rausser, and
Smith, 2017). Our results suggest policies related to new oil and natural gas production may
have implications for food prices.
   5
    The difference between commodity spot and forward prices at a given location is commonly termed the
“carrying cost” or simply “carry.” It is well known that carry provides information about the marginal
cost of storage in addition to market expectations and risk premia. For instance, see Brennan (1958) and
Working (1949). To the extent these other factors are orthogonal to changes in oil shipments conditional on
our control variables, our analysis identifies the relationship between oil shipments and carrying costs.


                                                    4
2         Industry background

This research investigates the interaction of three overlapping industries: rail freight, oil
production, and cash-crop agriculture. Each industry has developed somewhat distinctive
commercial arrangements and data reporting conventions. In this section we briefly describe
these conventions in order to provide context for the empirical analysis that follows.



2.1         Railroad service, pricing and congestion

The rail transportation industry in North America is dominated by seven large “Class I”
railroads, which account for 94% of revenue (Association of American Railroads, 2017). The
market is geographically segmented with Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) and Union
Pacific operating in the western United States and Norfolk Southern and CSX Transporta-
tion operating in the east. Two Canadian firms, Canadian Pacific (CP) and the Canadian
National Railway operate primarily in the northern United States. Kansas City Southern
serves mainly the south central U.S. and Mexico.

        The Upper Great Plains of the U.S. are served by BNSF and CP, plus several smaller
regional short-line railroads. Railroads ship grain either as part of large shuttle trains, gen-
erally over 100 to 110 cars per shipment or as part of smaller multi-car shipments. Shuttle
trains offer dedicated service between one origin and one destination but require large eleva-
tors capable of loading 100 cars in several hours.6 Oil shipments also move in large hundred
car unit trains or smaller single or multicar shipments.

        The pricing of railroad freight shipments has been partially deregulated since 1980. A
system of public common carriage tariffs, subject to review by the Surface Transportation
Board and loosely based upon cost-of-service principles, is still required of all major shippers.7
However in many industries, shippers reach private, bilateral arrangements with rail carriers
with individually negotiated prices and performance conditions, including terms for timely
    6
        For instance, BNSF requires shuttle trains be loaded within fifteen hours.
    7
        For more details see Wilson and Wolak (2016).




                                                         5
delivery of empty cars and shipments. The vast majority of North Dakota oil moves under
private contract.

   In contrast, the majority of grain shipments, which originate from a large number of
smaller shippers following an intermittent schedule, fall under common carriage and pay rates
based upon the railroads’ public tariff. In principle, the public tariff prices are intended to be
“take it or leave it” rates available to any shipper. Further, shipments made under common
carriage are generally made on a first-come first-served basis, with no specific guarantees or
penalties relating to delivery time. In many cases, these distinctions are inconsequential, but
they can be important when system capacity becomes constrained.

   Railroad congestion can occur when demand exceeds equipment, crew or track capacity
constraints. Because rail is a network industry utilizing central terminals for routing and
interchanging shipments, congestion can lead to yard delays and regional effects. Further,
congestion can have direct spillovers to other railroads when interchange terminals become
congested or can have indirect spillovers when shippers divert traffic to other firms. Industry
metrics such as the number of cars on line, terminal dwell times, average train speeds, and
more recently prices for cars in primary and secondary railcar markets and the number of
ordered cars past-due, can be used as proxies for system performance and congestion (Vachal
and Bitzan, 2005).

   Pricing via common carriage tariff is somewhat rigid and poorly suited to periods of
congestion. The tariffs require a 20 day notification period before they can be adjusted and,
because they are available to all shippers on a first come first served basis, are poorly suited
to allocating resources to customers with varying delivery priorities. As a consequence, ma-
jor railroads also operate railcar auctions to mitigate congestion and to allocate scarce rail
capacity under common carriage. The auctions provide supplies of empty railcars that, im-
portantly, are offered with guaranteed delivery windows. For instance, in BNSF’s Certificate
of Transportation (COT) Program the railroad pays a penalty for car deliveries outside of
the guaranteed delivery window. Under these programs, shippers pay for a delivery priority,
in addition to the usual tariff. Below, we explore the effects of rail congestion on both grain
railcar auction prices and tariffs.


                                                6
2.2       Oil and grain production and transportation from the Upper
          Great Plains

Technological advances in drilling technology, namely horizontal drilling and hydraulic frac-
turing, have dramatically increased U.S. production from non-conventional (shale) oil re-
sources. The shale oil boom has increased oil production in regions without sufficient oil
pipeline infrastructure. As a result, producers have chosen to transport crude via truck and
rail tanker.8 The share of crude deliveries by truck is small owing to the relatively higher
cost of moving large shipments over long distances. Further, lack of sufficient refining ca-
pacity means states like North Dakota have shipped a large share of crude production out
of state. For instance in 2013, approximately 60% of North Dakota crude production was
moved by rail.9 Figure 1 plots monthly oil carloads shipped from North Dakota rail terminals
from 2012 through 2015. Shipments peak at approximately 25,000 cars per month, or about
500,000 barrels per day, during late 2013 and early 2014. Rail’s share has since declined due
to investments in pipeline and refining capacity, and lower oil production caused by the drop
in oil prices.

       North Dakota grain producers also rely on railroads to transport the majority of their
crop to market.10 In 2014, 90% of North Dakota wheat, 92% of soybeans and 78% of corn
moved by rail according to a survey of elevator operators (Vachal and Benson, 2015). North
Dakota is the largest producer of hard red spring wheat in the U.S., producing 250 to 300
million bushels per year, approximately half the nation’s harvest. Hard red spring wheat
is a high-quality wheat variety used to produce flour for breads and hard-baked goods; it
makes up about a quarter of all wheat produced in the United States.11 North Dakota also
   8
     The choice of rail may be a durable one even in the long run. Covert and Kellogg (2017) hypothesize
that the flexibility benefits of rail shipping can outweigh the cost advantages of pipelines.
   9
     Authors’ calculations based on 2013 North Dakota oil production data (North Dakota, 2013) and Gen-
scape (Genscape, 2016) rail loading data.
  10
     We use the term grain to include both coarse grains such as corn and wheat and oilseeds such as soybeans.
  11
     A further 40% of United States wheat production is hard winter wheat, which is produced in central
and southern great plains states such as Kansas. Most of the remaining production is soft winter wheat,
which is used for cakes and cookies. Winter wheat is planted in the fall and lays dormant over the winter
before sprouting in the spring and being harvested in the early summer. Spring wheat is planted in the
spring and harvested in the late summer to early fall. Hard winter wheat is somewhat substitutable for
hard spring wheat, although only to a limited extent because of its lower protein content. North Dakota


                                                      7
produces approximately 300 to 400 million bushels of corn and 150 to 200 million bushels of
soybeans per year, approximately 2% to 4% and 4% to 5% of U.S. production, respectively
(U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2017c).

   Combined, grains and crude oil represent over 89% of oil carloads originating in and
around North Dakota in 2014.12 The overall trends in rail shares are shown in Table 1. We
see oil share growing from approximately 8% of shipments in 2010 to over 50% by 2014.
Total shipments of grain (wheat, soybeans, corn and barley) remain relatively constant over
the period, increasingly slightly in 2014. The remaining carloads represent a diverse set of
other agricultural goods and manufactured items.

   Both the oil and grain industries in North Dakota are geographically isolated from major
downstream markets. With grains, farmers typically sell their crop to local elevators who
market grain to domestic producers or exporters. Major elevators typically offer a variety of
forward contracts in addition to daily cash prices for spot deliveries. In addition, corn, soy-
bean and wheat futures contracts are traded at several large commodity hubs. Historically,
the Minneapolis Grain Exchange (MGEX) has been the main U.S. market hub for hard red
spring wheat futures. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) is the main hub for corn
and soybean futures contracts. Because transportation costs vary with distance, grain grown
further west is more likely to be marketed to Pacific Coast export terminals and grain grown
further east in more likely marketed to eastern destinations, including Midwestern processing
plants and exporters in the Lousiana Gulf or the Great Lakes. For instance, from 2006-2010
over 83% of Montana wheat shipments went to West Coast destinations while more than 71%
of Minnesota wheat shipments went to eastern destinations (Prater and Sparger, 2014a,b).
also produces 40 to 60 million bushels of Durum wheat for pasta and a small quantity of hard winter wheat
((U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2017c).
   12
      Authors’ calculations using the Surface Transportation Board Public Waybill Sample. Since the Pub-
lic Waybill reports originations by BEA areas, we focus on shipments beginning in the Bismark, Fargo-
Moorhead, Grand Fork and Minot areas. These areas include some shipments originating in Minnesota,
Montana and South Dakota.




                                                   8
3       Data

We combine detailed data on elevator-level grain prices with market-level data from central
grain trading hubs. We obtained spot and forward prices for wheat, corn and soybean for
approximately 60 locations in North Dakota, South Dakota, Minnesota Iowa and Nebraska
from GeoGrain (2016). The data consist of daily observations of spot price at each elevator
as well as prices for any forward contracts offered on a given date. For wheat, we focus on
hard red spring wheat, which represents approximately 75% to 80% of North Dakota wheat
production (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2017c).

      Market level prices for the major midwestern grain hubs are from the Agricultural Mar-
keting Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (2017b). We use Minneapolis prices
for spring wheat and Chicago prices for corn and soybeans. These two cities are par de-
livery points for the main spring wheat futures contract (MGEX) and the main corn and
soybean futures contracts (CME). For wheat we observe daily high and low bid prices by
variety (protein content), transportation mode and delivery period. We average high and
low bids to approximate average daily price and use only “cash” deliveries made by rail to
Minneapolis. Our main results average over five traded wheat varieties.13

      For corn, we use the Chicago prices for US yellow #2. We use only 15-day delivery
contracts for rail-truck modes delivered to mills and processors. As with wheat, average
daily prices are estimated by averaging the high and low daily bids. Soybean prices are for
US #1 deliveries by truck-rail to “Terminals-Mills-Processors-Exporters.” As with corn we
use prices for 15-day delivery.

      We construct time series of locational price “spreads” by combining simultaneous prices
at various origin and destination pairs. Figure 2 plots the mean spread between local and
Minneapolis spring wheat spot prices for several months during 2013 and 2014. The shading
corresponds to the quintiles of spread, with darker colors indicating larger spreads.14 Two
features stand out. First, spreads tend to be higher in the interior of North and South
Dakota. Spreads are on average lower in Minnesota, eastern North and South Dakota. This
 13
      The varieties are defined by protein content, specifically, 12%, 13%, 14% and 15%.
 14
      We calculate quintiles based on the entire sample from 2012 through 2015.

                                                      9
is consistent with larger transportation costs associated with moving this grain to Eastern
markets or Minneapolis. Western elevators, in Montana and western North Dakota, also
have lower spreads. Since these elevators tend to ship west to export terminals in the Pacific
Northwest, we expect lower average spreads, due to lower transportation costs, for these
locations. Second, looking at spreads across months we see average spreads are low, mainly
in the first three quintiles, during the beginning of 2013. However, during the fall and winter
of 2013 and 2014, spreads increase dramatically. By January of 2014, mean spreads at all
elevators fall in the fifth quintile (black). The timing of this spread shock coincides with the
jump in North Dakota oil by rail shipments. However, numerous other factors could be at
play, including changes in demand for other goods shipped by rail, severe weather, seasonal
patterns, or shocks to grain production. We attempt to isolate the effect of oil shipments in
our empirical analysis below.

   For our measure of oil shipments we use daily car loading data from Genscape (2016).
Genscape collects data on the number of cars shipped from twelve terminals in North Dakota.
We sum daily shipments at the twelve terminals to monthly totals for the entire state.
Because we observe the latitude and longitude of each grain elevator and oil loading terminal
it is possible to locate each facility on a railroad network map and to infer the railroad serving
each elevator. However, railroad specific measures of oil carloads provided little benefit over
our base specification, likely due to the regional impact of congestion.

   These data are summarized in Table 2, which shows mean elevator prices, spreads and
oil carloads shipped by year. Several features are worth noting. Mean wheat prices fall
from $8.24 per bushel in 2012 to $5.06 per bushel in 2015. Elevator prices fall faster than
Minneapolis market prices over the period such that mean spreads increase from $1.49 per
bushel in 2012 to $2.59 in 2014 before decreasing to $1.95 in 2015. As with the statistics
from the Public Waybill Data (Table 1), we see oil carloads increase dramatically from 8.8
thousand carloads per month in 2012 to 23.5 thousand carloads per month in 2014.

   Our analysis below also exploits detailed shipment-level rail prices and quantities from
the Surface Transportation Board Confidential Waybill Sample from 2010 through 2014.
The data are a stratified sample, covering approximately 6% of shipments, for goods trans-


                                               10
ported by rail in the US. We observe rail revenues and shipment characteristics such as good
shipped, shipment size, distance, equipment type, car ownership, origin, destination, basic
routing information, originating and terminating railroad. In specifications below that use
rail revenue per bushel as the dependent variable, we divide rail revenue by the reported
tons shipped and assume 33 bushels per ton to construct a measure of average price. In
addition to our analysis of grain price and quantity effects, we also use the waybill data to
construct monthly total carloads shipped by BNSF and CP (excluding oil and grain) to use
as controls in the specifications described below.

       Finally, to allow for the possibility severe weather may curtail rail traffic, we collect daily
weather observations from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2017).
We use the weather station located at the airport of each state capital and average the daily
minimum temperatures to create a monthly temperature measure.



4        Empirical approach

While Figures 1 and 2 indicates growing price spreads between grain elevators in the upper
midwest and trading hubs, our empirical approach attempts to isolate the effects of increased
oil shipments on grain transportation costs from other factors contributing to rail congestion.
In particular, increased demand for grain transportation, extremely cold temperatures and
the post-recession economic recovery could have contributed to the decline in rail service
quality from 2012 through 2014.15 We estimate:

                                                   12
                                                   X
            Pthub   − Pit = βOilt + γP dieselt +         [P rodsy × δm ] + ξTst + ζXt + δi + εit         (1)
                                                   m=1


where Pthub is the market hub spot price and Pit is the spot price at elevator i and month t.
Oilt is the total number of oil carloads originating in North Dakota during month t.16
  15
     For instance, the 2013-2014 wheat harvest was historically large. Further, extreme cold winter tem-
peratures due to the 2013-2014 Polar Vortex limited the effectiveness of trains’ pneumatic brakes forcing
railroads to cut train lengths.
  16
     In some specifications we allow oil shipments to vary by railroad and therefore incorporate variation in
shipments across elevators based on the railroad serving each location. Oil shipment data are from Genscape


                                                     11
    We include diesel prices P dieselt to account for the potential impact of fuel price on
railroad costs. Controlling for diesel prices also helps account for any change in trucking
competitiveness from changes in price and the difference in fuel efficiency across truck and
rail modes. We model time invariant spatial heterogeneity, such as differences in crop quality
(e.g. protein content), as mean effects δi . Price spreads typically vary depending on the
amount of available inventory, which in turn varies annually based on the size of the harvest
and seasonally between one harvest and the next. We control for this factor using month
mean effects δm interacted with total production for each state in a given crop-year (P rodsy ).
To account for the effect of temperature on rail capacity we control for average monthly low
temperature (Tst ) in state s and time t. We also control for changes in total rail freight
demand Xt using the sum of monthly carloads, excluding oil and grain, for BNSF and CP.

    We explore potential mechanisms of oil-related congestion effects by investigating the
relationships between the number of oil carloads transported and rail prices and quanti-
ties. As before we account for potential confounding factors related to freight demand and
temperature. We estimate models of the form:

                                             12
                                             X
              Yct = βOilt + γP dieselt +          [P rodsy × δm ] + ξTst + ζXt + δc + εct              (2)
                                             m=1


where Yct is average rail revenue per bushel or total carloads shipped from county c in month
t. As before Oilt , is the total number oil cars shipped, P dieselt are diesel prices, Tst is
monthly low temperature and Xt is other rail freight.17 Similarly, we model harvest shocks
and seasonality using crop-year production and month-effects using the approach discussed
above. Unobserved heterogeneity across counties originating shipments is captured with
mean effects δc .

    Finally, increased transportation costs may result in increased storage. Anecdotes from
2013 through 2014 suggest high grain elevator utilization and increased ground and on farm
storage. To explore changes in storage cost we construct several measures of “carry” that
as described above.
  17
     To maintain consistency between our dependent and independent variables, we construct the oil carloads
variable using the Surface Transportation Board Confidential Waybill sample instead of the Genscape data
noted above.

                                                    12
compare spot prices with prices for future deliveries. Specifically, we estimate models of the
form:

                                                 12
                                                 X
            Pit+h − Pit = βOilt + γP dieselt +        [P rodsy × δm ] + ξTst + ζXt + δi + εit   (3)
                                                 m=1


where Pit+h is the forward price at elevator i with horizon h and Pit is the cash price at
elevator i and time t. Intuitively, carry captures the storage premium associated with delivery
at a future date relative to today. If storage costs are non-zero, carry will be positive. The
relationship between carry and oil shipments will be positive if storage costs are increasing
in quantity and more oil shipments lead to more storage. Carry may also capture factors
such as risk premia, which we assume are orthogonal to oil shipments, conditional on our
controls.



5       Results

We begin by discussing the results of our main spread regressions. Table 3 presents results
from several specifications where the dependent variable is the difference between the Min-
neapolis wheat spot price and the elevator price measured in dollars per bushel. Standard
errors clustered by elevator and month of sample (i.e. two-way) are shown in parentheses.
Model 1 is the most parsimonious specification with controls for diesel prices and distance, as
the crow flies, between each elevator and Minneapolis. The estimated relationship between
oil carloads shipped from North Dakota is large, 0.047, positive and statistically significant.
Specifically, an increase of 10,000 oil carloads per month is associated with an increase in
spread of approximately $.47 per bushel. The estimated effect is substantial, given oil by
rail shipments reached nearly 24,000 cars per month in 2014 and mean spreads grew by
approximately $1 per bushel between 2012 and 2014.

    Looking across the specifications, the estimated relationship between oil carloads and
spreads does not vary substantially when additional controls for elevator effects, seasonal
effects, harvest size or minimum temperature are added. When total rail traffic is included


                                                  13
as a control, model 6, the estimated relationship between oil carloads and spread decreases
somewhat to 0.035 but remains statistically significant.

   The other parameter estimates provide some support for interpreting the spread as a
measure of transportation costs. The estimated impact of other rail traffic, measured in
thousand carloads per month, is positive and small, though not statistically significant. The
estimated temperature coefficient suggests a decrease in average daily minimum temperature
of 10 degrees (Fahrenheit) increases mean spread between $.05 and $.11 per bushel. Sur-
prisingly the distance effect, in model 1, suggests spread decreases for elevators further from
Minneapolis. To the extent spread captures transportation cost, we would expect spreads to
be larger for more distant elevators. This result could be due to fact the most distant eleva-
tors, in Montana and western North Dakota, typically ship wheat west to export terminals
in the Pacific Northwest instead of east to Minneapolis.

   For the other major grains produced in the region, corn and soybeans, we find much
smaller effects. Tables 4 and 5 present spread models similar to those shown above for
wheat. Interestingly, while the estimated relationships between oil carloads and spreads are
positive and in general statistically significant, the point estimates are an order of magnitude
smaller than for wheat. An increase of 10,000 oil carloads per month is associated with spread
increases of $0.01 to $0.05 per bushel for corn and $0.02 to $0.07 per bushel for soybeans.

   The results may at first seem surprising since wheat, corn and soybeans travel on the
same rail network and utilize the same equipment. In many cases, shipments of these crops
originate from the same elevators. However, the markets for these three crops are quite differ-
ent. In particular, our sample includes the majority of hard red spring wheat production. In
contrast, corn and soybean production for the Upper Plains elevators in our sample represent
a modest share of total national corn and soybean production. Therefore, it is reasonable to
expect the residual demand for upper great plains wheat would be considerably less elastic
than for plains corn and soybeans, since there are many more substitute suppliers for the
latter crops. Therefore, we would expect larger overall price changes for wheat in response
to a given transportation cost shock, all else equal. We discuss this hypothesis further below.



                                              14
5.1    Mechanisms and effects

The wheat spread results presented in Table 3 suggests large shocks to grain transportation
costs associated with the increase in shipments of oil by rail in North Dakota. We turn our
attention to potential mechanisms and effects of the observed spread increases. We begin by
examining rail rates.

   Table 6 presents results from several variations of Equation 2. We focus on wheat ship-
ments from Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota and South Dakota. We use revenue per
bushel as the dependent variable to facilitate comparison with our spread results. Model 1
is the most parsimonious specification with diesel prices and mean effects for the county in
which each wheat shipment originates. Model 2 adds harvest size by month interactions.
Model 3 adds minimum temperature controls, model 4 accounts for other rail traffic and
model 5 explores heterogeneity by originating state.

   Across all models, our estimates imply a modest positive relationship between oil carloads
and rail rates. An increase of 10,000 oil carloads per month is associated with an increase in
rail rates of approximately $0.06 per bushel. Looking at heterogeneity across states, model
5 implies the effect for shipments originating in Minnesota is approximately twice as large as
for other states, approximately $.11. However, even this effect is substantially smaller than
the large spread increases, $.35 to $.49 per bushel, for the same increase in oil shipments.
This may be due in part to railroads’ reluctance or inability to adjust tariff prices to market
conditions in the short run. For instance, the federally mandated twenty day notification
period for rate increases, menu costs or pressure due to regulatory oversight. If tariffs are
sticky in the short-run this would not necessarily prevent price responses to market shocks
lasting months or years. However, it could lead to the creation of other mechanisms for
responding to short-run changes in market conditions, for instance railcar auction programs
discussed previously. We explore the potential role of rail car auctions below.

   We conduct a similar exercise looking at rail rates for corn and soybean shipments in
Tables 7 and 8. The estimated relationships between spreads and oil shipments across all
states, models 1 through 4, are essentially zero for both corn and soybeans. However, when
we estimate separate average effect by originating state, model 5, we estimate a small positive

                                              15
effect for shipments beginning in North Dakota. An increase of 10,000 carloads per month
is associated with an increase in rates of approximately $0.04 per bushel.18 The estimated
relationships are negative or zero for originations in other states. Overall, our results suggest
a small increase in grain rail rates associated with increases in oil shipments, particularly
in North Dakota and in the case of wheat shipments, Minnesota. In North Dakota, the
estimated effects for wheat, corn and soybeans are of similar magnitudes. However, the
wheat effects are an order of magnitude smaller than the estimated spread increases.

       Next, we explore whether there is a relationship between oil and grain shipment quanti-
ties. Table 9 presents results from an analysis of county-level wheat shipments in the STB
waybill data. Because the timing of the harvest varies from year to year due to weather
and other factors, demand for grain transportation depends on timing relative to harvest
and not the calendar year. To account for these shifting patterns, we use crop progress
reports to identify the week in which the percent of wheat acres harvested first exceeds 90
percent.19 When then define a series of 4-week intervals relative to this date for each crop
year. We model annual patterns in grain transportation demand as a series of mean effects
using indicator variables for each of these 4-week blocks. Otherwise, models 1 through 5
are analogous to those used in the rail rate regressions. To account for differences in scale
across counties, the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the total number of wheat
carloads shipped from each county in a given month.

       The estimated coefficients on oil carloads are negative and are statistically significant
in specifications that control for total rail traffic in each month. On average, a 10 percent
increase in oil carloads is associated with a 0.45 percent decrease in monthly wheat carloads
shipped by rail. Model 5 suggests an effect about twice as large for counties in Minnesota and
South Dakota, but little to no effect in Montana and North Dakota. There is also evidence
of similar quantity reductions in corn shipments, Table 10, and soybean shipments, Table
11. The effects, averaged across all states, are similar in magnitude to our estimates for
  18
     Interestingly, these estimates are comparable to the spread increases we estimate for North Dakota corn
and soybean shipments in Appendix Table 14
  19
     While 90 percent is an arbitrary baseline, we require some benchmark for consistent comparisons across
crop years. Crop progress reports were obtained from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (2017a). We use
average values across the major states producing each grain as determined by USDA.


                                                    16
wheat. Looking at heterogeneity across states, increased oil shipments are associated with
fewer corn shipments everywhere except South Dakota. For soybeans, elevators in Iowa and
North Dakota have fewer shipments when oil traffic increases, while our estimates suggest
shipments may increase in South Dakota.

      Given the relatively small change in rail rates but relatively large decrease increase in
spreads, an important mechanism may be rail car auctions. As discussed above, railroads
have established markets to allocate capacity in times of high demand or congestion. Because
cars purchased on these auctions have guaranteed delivery windows, prices capture shippers’
willingness to pay avoid congestion-related delays. Figure 3 plots rail car auction prices for
the BNSF and Union Pacific (UP) railroads. Prices shown are from the secondary market
where third parties buy and sell car contracts previously purchased from either BNSF’s or
UP’s car market.20 We divide car prices by 3,500, the approximate capacity in bushels of
a covered hopper car, to obtain a measure comparable to our grain price spreads. Prices
for shuttle and non-shuttle shipments are plotted separately alongside the mean spread,
calculated at the week level, across all wheat elevators in our sample.

      Looking first at BNSF auctions, we see car prices begin to increase during the middle
of 2013. Shuttle prices reach a peak of approximately $1.68 per bushel ($5,875 per car) in
early 2014, fall over the summer and reach a second peak of approximately $1.67 per bushel
during the fall of 2014. Mean spreads are positively correlated with car prices over the period
from 2013 through 2014. Moreover, a simple regression of spread on shuttle prices yields
a coefficient of 0.98. The striking similarity of the time series suggest BNSF’s car auction
markets could be an important mechanism of grain shippers’ response to increased oil traffic
(congestion, or market conditions) during this time period.

      Interestingly, we see similar behavior in the UP car market. Both markets are national
since cars bought at auction can be used to originate grain across each railroad’s network. We
note UP does not serve origins or destinations in North Dakota, or for that matter most of
the Upper Great Plains. Therefore, grain shippers on UP’s network are not directly affected
by any increase in North Dakota oil shipments. However, because grain cars are substitutable
 20
      Data from BNSF and UP primary auctions are very similar.


                                                  17
across grains and many shippers outside the region have access to both the BNSF and UP
networks, shocks to BNSF’s network may spillover to the UP network. Spillovers may also
occur due to congestion at major interchange terminals such as Chicago during this time
period. The UP car price data seem consistent with these types of spillovers.

      Anecdotes from 2013 and 2014 suggest elevator operators increased grain storage because
they were unable to ship out grain on congested railroads. We investigate changes in storage
costs by studying the carry (difference between spot and forward month prices) during this
period. We expect carry to increase if the marginal cost of storage is upward sloping and
increased oil shipments result in increased storage. Table 12 presents estimates of Equation
3 using 1-month, 3-month and 6-month horizons. We divide the calculated carry by the
horizon to obtain a estimate comparable across models. Further, we estimate models that
allow for heterogeneity across states. There is some evidence for a positive relationship
between oil shipments and carry. For 6-month carry, a increase of 10,000 oil carloads per
month is associated with an increase in carry of approximately $0.02 per bushel per month
for Minnesota elevators. The estimated relationship is about half as large in North and
South Dakota. To put these numbers in perspective, MGEX and CME cap storage costs in
grain contracts at $0.05 to $0.07 per bushel per month. In light of these reference points, our
estimates are nontrivial, but they are small relative to our estimated increase in wheat price
spreads. Analogous regressions for corn and soybeans suggest a small negative relationship
between increased oil car shipments and carry.21

      Another possibility is that some elevators shipped grain to alternate destinations in re-
sponse to oil related rail congestion. We explore in more detail the spatial variation in
shipping quantities in the Appendix. The analysis indicates heterogeneity in the impacts
by shipping location. In particular elevators closer to the West-Coast, particularly those
in Montana, substantially increased their west-bound shipments during our sample period.
By contrast, east-bound shipments from sources further east, displayed very little change
in east-bound shipments. These heterogenous effects support both the notion that railroad
congestion was present and yet the residual demand for east-bound shipping from major
 21
      Corn and soybean regression results available upon request.



                                                     18
source locations was inelastic relative to both other sources of wheat and to the demand for
shipping corn or soybeans..



5.2       Incidence

The previous sections present evidence that the spread between elevator and market hub
grain prices increased as oil transportation by rail increased, especially for wheat. By im-
plication, these results imply that the price of transporting these grains increased. Reports
during this period claimed farmers and grain shippers bore the brunt of this congestion with
long shipping delays, increased storage costs and spoilage (Koba, 2014; Nixon, 2014). If this
is true, then we expect the increase in transportation costs to cause a drop in the elevator
prices. On the other hand, if the incidence falls downstream, we expect to see a relative
increase in the market hub prices.

       To assign the incidence, we use the approach in Carter and Smith (2007). We fit a
cointegrated error correction model to the elevator and hub price time series. The model is


                             ∆Pit = βi (Phub,t−1 − Pi,t−1 − µ) + εit                                   (4)

                          ∆Phub,t = βhub (Phub,t−1 − Pi,t−1 − µ) + εhub,t                              (5)


We fit this model to weekly data from October 2009 through September 2013, which is the
period immediately before oil-by-rail affected grain prices. We use the estimated parameters
to project into the oil-by-rail period. For each grain, we use as the elevator price the simple
average over all elevators in North Dakota.22 The results we report here are robust to using
a longer estimation sample (2002-2013) and to including lagged price changes to soak up
any residual autocorrelation. We estimate the parameters using OLS regressions of the two
price changes on the lagged spread (Phub,t−1 − Pi,t−1 ) and a constant.

       The two prices in (4) and (5) are cointegrated if βhub − βi < 0, which implies that the
spread reverts to µ in the long run. For example, if the spread exceeds µ, then arbitrageurs
  22
    We also fit the model separately to each elevator in North Dakota. The results were similar on average,
and we did not observe statistically significant heterogeneity, so we do not report those results here.


                                                    19
will seek to buy grain at the elevator and ship it to the hub. This action will cause the
elevator price to increase (βi ≥ 0) and/or the hub price to decrease (βhub ≤ 0), thereby
pushing the prices back together. Thus, the relative magnitudes of βi and βhub reveal how
prices in the two markets adjust to shocks that disrupt the spatial equilibrium.

   Table 13 reports the coefficient estimates for each of the three grains. For wheat, a $1
increase in the spread one week portends a 15.9c decrease in the Minneapolis price and a 5.7c
increase in the North Dakota price the following week. Thus, Minneapolis prices respond
about 3 times as much to spread shocks as do North Dakota prices. North Dakota produces
half of the spring wheat grown in the US and Minneapolis has a large flour milling industry.
This result suggests that the residual demand in Minneapolis for North Dakota wheat is
quite inelastic. In response to high transportation costs, Minneapolis purchasers need to
offer a higher price to attract wheat from North Dakota.

   In contrast, the response parameters for corn and soybeans are imprecisely estimated and
not statistically significant. North Dakota produces 3% and 5% of US corn and soybeans,
respectively, so it is not able to materially affect prices in Chicago, which is the site of global
price discovery through the CME futures markets. For both commodities, the correlation
between the residuals of the two equations exceeds 0.96. This means that weekly prices in
the two locations move almost entirely in lock step, so there is not enough variation in weekly
spreads to use to identify differential responses the following week. We find the same result
if we estimate the models using daily data. These findings suggest that the North Dakota
elevators typically set prices as the Chicago price minus a mostly constant transportation
cost.

   A change in transportation costs entails a change in µ, which changes current and future
prices through the lag structure in the model. It can be shown that the long-run effect of a




                                                20
change in µ is23

                                          ∂Pit        βi
                                                =                                                     (6)
                                           ∂µ     βi − βhub
                                        ∂Phub,t      βhub
                                                =                                                     (7)
                                         ∂µ       βi − βhub

The results in the previous section imply that oil transportation by rail increased grain price
spreads beginning with the harvest in October 2013 and persisting for two years. Using (6)
and (7), we estimate the effects on the two prices as

                               βi                                         βhub
                   ∆Pi =             ∗ ∆µ        and        ∆Phub =              ∗ ∆µ                 (8)
                           βi − βhub                                   βi − βhub

For the change in the spread (∆µ), we use the difference between the mean spread in the
period Oct 2013 - Sep 2015 and the mean in the period Oct 2009 - Sep 2013. We obtain
84.45c for wheat, 15.65c for corn, and 27.07c for soybeans.

       Figure 4 shows estimated counterfactual prices in the absence of the oil-by-rail transporta-
tion shock as dotted lines. We estimate counterfactual prices by subtracting the estimated
changes in (8) from the observed prices. Thus, we are using estimates of the price dynam-
ics in 2009-2013 to predict the responses to a post-sample transportation cost shock. The
shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals estimated by applying the delta method to
(8).

       For wheat, we see that actual Minneapolis prices increased beginning in early October
2013, whereas North Dakota prices decreased in this period. The spring wheat harvest
occurs in September and October and spot prices usually decrease around this time as the
market absorbs an influx of new product. The estimates clearly show the incidence of the
transportation cost shock falling mostly on Minnesota. This is consistent with the conclusion
that flour millers in Minneapolis were prepared to pay a premium to avoid supply disruptions.
It is also consistent with the small effects of oil shipments on the wheat carry (Table 12). If
the incidence had been fallen on North Dakota elevators and farmers, then we would expect
  23
     To derive these expressions, write the model in vector autoregression form as Pt = −βµ + APt−1 + εt ,
where β = [βi , βhub ]0 . Then, invert to obtain the moving average representation: Pt = −(I + A + A2 +
...)βµ + εt + Aεt−1 + A2 εt−1 + .... It turns out that −(I + A + A2 + ...)β = β/(βi − βhub ).

                                                   21
to have seen a substantial increase in the price of storage.

    Consistent with the estimated coefficients in Table 13, we cannot parse the corn and soy-
bean price responses. The expansion in spreads was relatively small for these commodities,
and the 95% confidence bands include a wide range of possibilities.



6     Conclusions

The shale revolution has generated tremendous changes in not just the amount, but also the
geography of oil production. The rapid increase of gas and oil production in locations such
as the Dakotas has outpaced the expansion of traditional pipeline infrastructure and led to
a much greater reliance on rail transportation than in regions with an older and established
oil industry. While the reliance on railroads to transport shale oil may have been borne
of necessity, it could very well be a lasting relationship. The flexibility of rail infrastruc-
ture presents significant advantages relative to pipelines in the face of uncertainty in both
production and prices. Going forward, periodic or even chronic capacity rail transportation
constraints could be the norm in shale heavy regions.

    We have examined one of the most notable episodes of the shale transportation phe-
nomenon, the boom in oil-by-rail shipments out of the upper great plains since 2010. The
massive increase in oil shipments appears to have created at least periodic congestion in rail
networks, which has in turn impacted the spatial relationship of commodity prices, partic-
ularly for wheat. We find that the price spreads for wheat between production centers and
commercial hubs grew substantially during this period, and that oil shipments have had a
significant impact on regional wheat prices. These findings are consistent with news coverage
that highlighted the plight of farmers facing difficulties shipping their output to market.

    However, our results also highlight several more subtle aspects of the relationship between
grain and oil prices. First, price impacts for wheat were substantially larger than those for
corn or soybeans, grains that are shipped along the same routes using similar equipment.
Second, the incidence of this shock to transportation costs was borne largely by purchasers
of wheat at the Minneapolis commercial hub, rather than by farmers. Both of these findings

                                              22
are consistent with the observation that residual demand for Dakota wheat was considerably
less elastic than that for corn or soybeans, for which many alternative regional sources were
available.

   Last our paper demonstrates the deployment of an interesting mechanism for the ra-
tioning of potentially scarce rail freight capacity. We find that, while rail tariffs for grain
transportation are significantly impacted by oil shipments, the magnitude of these effects
are nowhere near as large as the resulting spreads in grain prices. We hypothesize that these
tariffs, which impose regulatory constraints on the timing of price adjustments and, because
they are available to all shippers, are ineffective for separating high priority grains and con-
sumers from lower priority ones played a decreasing role in shipping costs as oil traffic reached
its peak. Grain shipments were instead increasingly influenced by auctions for railcars that
combined delivery performance guarantees with the physical transportation infrastructure.
When these auction rates are combined with the traditional open-access tariff rates, they
explain almost all of the observed differences in locational commodity prices. These results
are consistent with an interpretation that the railcar auctions were used as a mechanism to
allocate scarce capacity to the customers with the highest willingness to pay for it, namely
buyers of wheat in Minneapolis.

   Because the shale oil phenomenon is still relatively new, our sample is necessarily limited
to five years or less. While this is sufficient to capture substantial variation in the utilization
of northern rail networks as oil prices rose and then fell, it is insufficient to empirically
estimate long-run effects. In particular there are not enough growing seasons captured in
our sample to test whether planting patterns would have changed had oil prices remained at
2012 levels for a substantially longer period.




                                                 23
References
Association of American Railroads. 2017.         “Overview of America’s Freight Rail-
  roads.” URL https://www.aar.org/BackgroundPapers/Overview%20of%20America’s%
  20Freight%20RRs.pdf. Accessed August 19, 2017.

BNSF Railway Company. 2014. “United States Rail Service Issues-Grain: Weekly Report
  of BNSF Railway Company.” STB Ex Parte No. 724 (2).

Brennan, Michael J. 1958. “The supply of storage.” The American Economic Review
  48 (1):50–72.

Carter, Colin, Gordon Rausser, and Aaron Smith. 2017. “Commodity Storage and the
  Market Effects of Biofuel Policies.” American Jounral of Agricultural Economics In Press.

Carter, Colin A and Aaron Smith. 2007. “Estimating the Market Effect of a Food Scare:
  The Case of Genetically Modified StarLink Corn.” Review of Economics and Statistics
  89 (3):522–533.

De Gorter, Harry and David R Just. 2010. “The social costs and benefits of biofuels: The
  intersection of environmental, energy and agricultural policy.” Applied Economic Perspec-
  tives and Policy 32 (1):4–32.

Genscape. 2016. “Genscape PetroRail Report.” Accessed December 31, 2016.

GeoGrain. 2016. “GeoGrain Historical Data.” Accessed September 1, 2016.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Rebecca Hellerstein. 2008. “A structural approach to
  explaining incomplete exchange-rate pass-through and pricing-to-market.” American Eco-
  nomic Review 98 (2):423–429.

Knittel, Christopher R., Ben S. Meiselman, and James H. Stock. 2015. “The Pass-Through of
  RIN Prices to Wholesale and Retail Fuels under the Renewable Fuel Standard.” (June):1–
  45.




                                            24
Koba, Mark. 2014. “Food or Fuel? The rail car shortage conundrum.” NBC News, September
  23, 2014.

Marion, Justin and Erich Muehlegger. 2011. “Fuel tax incidence and supply conditions.”
  Journal of Public Economics 95 (9):1202–1212.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2017. “Climate Data Online.” URL
  https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/. Accessed June 15, 2017.

Nixon, Ron. 2014. “Grain Piles Up, Waiting for a Ride, as Trains Move North Dakota Oil.”
  New York Times, August 25, 2014.

North Dakota. 2013. “Oil in North Dakota: 2013 Production Statistics.”

Prater, Daniel O’Neil Jr., Marvin E. and Adam Sparger. 2014a. “Shipments of Grain by
  Rail in Minnesota.” URL https://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/
  MinnesotaStateRailStatistics.pdf. Agricultural Marketing Service, Accessed August
  30, 2017.

———. 2014b. “Shipments of Grain by Rail in Montana.” URL https://www.ams.usda.
  gov/sites/default/files/media/MinnesotaStateRailStatistics.pdf. Agricultural
  Marketing Service, Accessed August 30, 2017.

Roberts, Michael J and Wolfram Schlenker. 2013. “Identifying supply and demand elasticities
  of agricultural commodities: Implications for the US ethanol mandate.” The American
  Economic Review 103 (6):2265–2295.

Sorenson, L Orlo. 1984. “Some impacts of rail regulatory changes on grain industries.”
  American Journal of Agricultural Economics 66 (5):645–650.

Tilley, Daniel S and Steven K Campbell. 1988. “Performance of the Weekly Gulf-Kansas City
  Hard-Red Winter Wheat Basis.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 70 (4):929–
  935.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2017a. “Crop Progress.” URL https://quickstats.nass.
  usda.gov/. Economics, Statistics and Market Information System, Accessed July 13, 2017.

                                            25
———. 2017b.           “Market News.”     URL https://www.marketnews.usda.gov/mnp/
  ls-report-config. Agricultural Marketing Service, Accessed March 19, 2017.

———. 2017c. “Quick Stats.” URL https://quickstats.nass.usda.gov/. National Agri-
  culture Statistics Service, Accessed June 15, 2017.

Vachal, Kimberly and Laurel Benson. 2015. “North Dakota Grain and Oilseed Transporta-
  tion Statistics: 2014-15.” Upper Great Plains Transportation Institute (286).

Vachal, Kimberly J and John D Bitzan. 2005. US grain rail market indicators. Upper Great
  Plains Transportation Institute, North Dakota State University.

Weyl, E. Glen and Michal Fabinger. 2013. “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of
  Incidence under Imperfect Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 121 (3):528–583.

Wilson, Wesley W and Frank A Wolak. 2016. “Freight rail costing and regulation: The
  uniform rail costing system.” Review of Industrial Organization 49 (2):229–261.

Wilson, William W and Bruce Dahl. 2011. “Grain pricing and transportation: dynamics
  and changes in markets.” Agribusiness 27 (4):420–434.

Working, Holbrook. 1949. “The theory of price of storage.” The American Economic Review
  39 (6):1254–1262.

Wright, Brian. 2014. “Global biofuels: key to the puzzle of grain market behavior.” The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (1):73–97.




                                             26
Figures

Figure 1: North Dakota oil carloads, wheat prices and wheat price spread.



                            Wheat Prices, Spread and Oil Cars
              12




                                                                                 25
              10




                                                                                                     20
                                                                                 Oil (Thousand Cars)
         Price ($/bu.)
                    8




                                                                                            15
            6




                                                                                      10
              4




                                                                                 5
              2




                                                                                 0
                 2010m1              2012m1                2014m1       2016m1
                                                    date

                          Hub Spot            Silo Price     Spread   Oil Cars




                                                     27
Figure 2: Wheat spread quintiles

               (a) Jan. 2013            (b) June 2013
                    2013 m1                  2013 m6




               (c) Oct. 2013            (d) Nov. 2013
                   2013 m10                 2013 m11




               (e) Dec. 2013            (f) Jan. 2014
                   2013 m12                 2014 m1




                                   28
Figure 3: Secondary grain car market prices and spreads. Car prices converted to dollars
per bushel assuming 3,500 bushels per car.

                                                      (a) BNSF

                                                     BNSF-GF (Nearby)



                           4
                           3
                    Price ($/bu.)
                           2
                           1
                           0




                              2010w1     2011w26          2013w1         2014w26            2016w1
                                                           date

                                       Non-Shuttle             Shuttle        Mean Spread



                                                       (b) UP

                                                     UP-Pool (Nearby)
                          4
                          3
                   Price ($/bu.)
                          2
                          1
                          0




                             2010w1     2011w26           2013w1         2014w26        2016w1
                                                           date

                                       Non-Shuttle             Shuttle        Mean Spread




                                                          29
Figure 4


                                           Wheat Price Effects




               1400
               1200
           800 1000
              c/bu
               600
               400




                  01jan2011             01jul2012              01jan2014               01jul2015
                                                        Date

                              Actual ND price                    Actual Minn. price
                              Counterfactual ND price            Counterfactual Minn. price




                                            Corn Price Effects
               800
               600
           c/bu
               400
               200




               01jan2011                01jul2012              01jan2014               01jul2015
                                                        Date

                              Actual ND price                  Actual Chicago price
                              Counterfactual ND price          Counterfactual Chicago price




                                         Soybean Price Effects
               1800
               1600
           1200 1400
              c/bu
               1000
               800




               01jan2011                01jul2012              01jan2014               01jul2015
                                                        Date

                              Actual ND price                  Actual Chicago price
                              Counterfactual ND price          Counterfactual Chicago price




                                                    30
Tables

Table 1: Major goods shipped by rail originating in North Dakota.


                                                        2010
                                             Cars (1000s) Share (%)
                          Wheat                     120.4          38%
                          Soybeans                   58.5           18%
                          Corn                       37.8           12%
                          Oil                        25.6            8%
                          Barley                     13.2            4%
                                 Total              255.5           81%
                                                        2012
                                             Cars (1000s) Share (%)
                          Oil                       171.2          39%
                          Wheat                      80.0           18%
                          Soybeans                   62.1           14%
                          Corn                       53.4           12%
                          Alcohols                   10.6            2%
                                                    377.2           87%
                                                        2014
                                             Cars (1000s) Share (%)
                          Oil                      343.2            50%
                          Wheat                     94.8            14%
                          Soybeans                  65.3            10%
                          Corn                      63.2             9%
                          Coal                      39.6             6%
                                                    606.1           89%
                          Notes: Compiled from STB Public Waybill
                          Sample for shipments beginning in the Bismark,
                          Fargo-Moorhead, Grand Forks and Minot
                          BEA areas.




                                              31
Table 2: Wheat elevator cash prices, Minneapolis (MGEX) hub price and oil carloads.


                                          2012         2013            2014         2015

                 Cash Price ($/bu.)
                 Mean                 $     8.24   $        7.26   $     6.08   $     5.06
                 Min.                 $     6.84   $        5.81   $     4.64   $     4.08
                 25th percentile      $     7.97   $        6.74   $     5.59   $     4.67
                 Median               $     8.27   $        7.42   $     6.08   $     5.14
                 75th percentile      $     8.54   $        7.74   $     6.62   $     5.35
                 Max.                 $     9.26   $        8.41   $     7.81   $     6.96

                 Minneapolis Spot - Cash Price ($/bu.)
                 Mean              $      1.49 $            1.63   $     2.59   $     1.95
                 Min.              $      0.89 $            1.03   $     0.59   $     0.66
                 25th percentile $        1.36 $            1.48   $     2.24   $     1.69
                 Median            $      1.50 $            1.60   $     2.51   $     1.95
                 75th percentile $        1.62 $            1.76   $     2.95   $     2.26
                 Max.              $      2.33 $            2.62   $     3.87   $     2.84

                 Total Oil Cars (1000/month)
                 Mean                      8.8              21.7         23.5         19.0
                 Min.                      3.1              17.2         20.4         13.9
                 25th percentile           5.2              21.0         21.5         17.0
                 Median                    8.0              21.2         24.1         18.9
                 75th percentile          11.6              24.5         25.1         21.4
                 Max.                     16.2              25.7         25.9         22.4

                 Obs.                       1136            1113         1044         1150




                                                       32
Table 3: Wheat price spreads and oil carloads.

                                    Wheat Price Spreads and Railroad Oil Shipments
                                       Model 1         Model 2        Model 3        Model 4         Model 5        Model 6


Oil Carloads (thousands)               0.047***       0.047***       0.048***        0.049***       0.048***       0.035***
                                       (0.0090)       (0.0090)       (0.0080)        (0.0090)       (0.0090)       (0.0100)

Diesel Prices                           -0.044         -0.039          -0.052         -0.072         -0.086        -1.910***
                                       (0.0800)       (0.0800)        (0.0700)       (0.0810)       (0.0820)        (0.4890)

Minneapolis Distance (100 miles)      -0.042***
                                       (0.0150)

Average Daily Low Temp.                                                                              -0.005        -0.011**
                                                                                                    (0.0040)       (0.0050)

Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain                                                                                     0.002
                                                                                                                    (0.0030)

Market (Silo) Effects                       No            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
Month Effects                               No             No            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
Harvest X Month Effects                     No             No             No            Yes              Yes            Yes
Observations                               4442          4442           4442           4442             4442           3292
Adj. R-sq.                                 0.32           0.37           0.42          0.96             0.96           0.96
Notes: Dependent variable is the difference between silo cash price and Minneapolis spot price in dollars per bushell. Average
low temperature is the average of recorded daily low temperatures in each state capital each month. Rail traffic exlcuding
oil and grain is the total number of carloads, measured in thousands, for BNSF and CP not including oil and grain each month.
Standard errors clustered by silo and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and
10 percent levels.




                                                              33
Table 4: Corn price spreads and oil carloads.

                                      Corn Price Spreads and Railroad Oil Shipments
                                        Model 1        Model 2         Model 3        Model 4        Model 5        Model 6


 Oil Carloads (thousands)                0.005*         0.005*        0.004**         0.003          0.005**         0.001
                                        (0.0030)       (0.0030)       (0.0020)       (0.0020)        (0.0020)       (0.0020)

 Diesel Prices                           0.007          0.008           0.01          0.025           0.036          0.048
                                        (0.0260)       (0.0260)       (0.0250)       (0.0220)        (0.0250)       (0.1380)

 Chicago Distance (100 miles)          0.134***
                                       (0.0110)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                                                            0.004***         0.001
                                                                                                    (0.0010)        (0.0010)

 Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain                                                                                   0.001***
                                                                                                                     0.0000

 Market (Silo) Effects                       No            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Month Effects                               No             No            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                     No             No             No            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Observations                               5413          5413           5413           5413            5413           4090
 Adj. R-sq.                                 0.47           0.65           0.74          0.94             0.95           0.95
 Notes: Dependent variable is the difference between silo cash price and Chicago spot price in dollars per bushell. Average
 low temperature is the average of recorded daily low temperatures in each state capital each month. Rail traffic exlcuding
 oil and grain is the total number of carloads, measured in thousands, for BNSF and CP not including oil and grain each month.
 Standard errors clustered by silo and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and
 10 percent levels.




                                                              34
Table 5: Soybean price spreads and oil carloads.

                                       Soy Price Spreads and Railroad Oil Shipments
                                        Model 1        Model 2         Model 3        Model 4        Model 5        Model 6


 Oil Carloads (thousands)                0.006*         0.006*         0.006*         0.004          0.007**         0.002
                                        (0.0030)       (0.0030)       (0.0030)       (0.0030)        (0.0030)       (0.0030)

 Diesel Prices                           -0.013         -0.011         -0.011         0.036           0.053*         0.281
                                        (0.0310)       (0.0310)       (0.0250)       (0.0320)        (0.0290)       (0.2120)

 Chicago Distance (100 miles)          0.203***
                                       (0.0170)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                                                            0.008***         0.005*
                                                                                                    (0.0020)        (0.0030)

 Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain                                                                                   0.002***
                                                                                                                    (0.0010)

 Market (Silo) Effects                       No            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Month Effects                               No             No            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                     No             No             No            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Observations                               5202          5201           5201           5201            5201           3910
 Adj. R-sq.                                 0.46           0.58           0.61          0.91             0.91           0.90
 Notes: Dependent variable is the difference between silo cash price and Chicago spot price in dollars per bushell. Average
 low temperature is the average of recorded daily low temperatures in each state capital each month. Rail traffic exlcuding
 oil and grain is the total number of carloads, measured in thousands, for BNSF and CP not including oil and grain each month.
 Standard errors clustered by silo and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and
 10 percent levels.




                                                              35
Table 6: Rail prices for wheat shipments, in revenue per bushel, and oil carloads.


                                Wheat Revenue Per Bushel and Oil Shipments
                                          Model 1        Model 2        Model 3       Model 4        Model 5


 Oil Carloads (thousands)                0.006***       0.006***       0.006***       0.006***      0.011***
                                         (0.0010)       (0.0010)       (0.0010)       (0.0010)      (0.0020)

 Diesel Prices                           0.124***         -0.017         -0.019        -0.019        -0.017
                                         (0.0260)        (0.0470)       (0.0500)      (0.0500)      (0.0510)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                                 0.0000        0.0000        0.0000
                                                                        (0.0010)      (0.0010)      (0.0010)

 Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain                                                     0.0000         0.0000
                                                                                      0.0000         0.0000

 Montana X Oil Carloads                                                                              -0.004*
                                                                                                    (0.0020)

 North Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        -0.006**
                                                                                                    (0.0020)

 South Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        -0.006**
                                                                                                    (0.0020)

 County Effects                             Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                    No               Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Observations                              3103             2501           2501          2501          2501
 Adj. R-sq.                                0.27             0.24            0.24         0.24          0.24
 Notes: Dependent variable is the price of rail transportation in dollars per bushel. Standard errors clustered
 by county and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10
 percent levels.




                                                      36
Table 7: Rail prices for corn shipments, in revenue per bushel, and oil carloads.


                                    Corn Revenue Per Bushel and Oil Shipments
                                            Model 1      Model 2        Model 3       Model 4        Model 5


 Oil Carloads (thousands)                    0.000        -0.001         0.000         0.000        -0.005**
                                            (0.0020)     (0.0020)       (0.0020)      (0.0020)      (0.0020)

 Diesel Prices                             0.144***       0.099          0.075         0.077         0.079
                                           (0.0360)      (0.0810)       (0.0820)      (0.0820)      (0.0820)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                                0.003**       0.003**       0.003***
                                                                        (0.0010)      (0.0010)      (0.0010)

 Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain                                                     0.0000         0.0000
                                                                                      0.0000         0.0000

 Minnesota X Oil Carloads                                                                            0.006
                                                                                                    (0.0040)

 Montana X Oil Carloads                                                                                 0
                                                                                                     0.0000

 Nebraska X Oil Carloads                                                                             -0.002
                                                                                                    (0.0040)

 North Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        0.009***
                                                                                                    (0.0030)

 South Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                         0.007*
                                                                                                    (0.0040)

 County Effects                             Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                    No               Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Observations                              3983             3155           3155          3155          3155
 Adj. R-sq.                                0.37             0.35            0.35         0.35          0.36
 Notes: Dependent variable is the price of rail transportation in dollars per bushel. Standard errors clustered
 by county and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10
 percent levels.




                                                       37
Table 8: Rail prices for soybean shipments, in revenue per bushel, and oil carloads.


                                    Soy Revenue Per Bushel and Oil Shipments
                                            Model 1      Model 2        Model 3       Model 4        Model 5


 Oil Carloads (thousands)                   -0.001        -0.001         -0.001        -0.001       -0.007**
                                           (0.0020)      (0.0020)       (0.0020)      (0.0020)      (0.0030)

 Diesel Prices                             0.145***       0.089          0.086         0.092          0.09
                                           (0.0340)      (0.0730)       (0.0730)      (0.0710)      (0.0710)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                                 0.0010        0.0010        0.0010
                                                                        (0.0010)      (0.0010)      (0.0010)

 Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain                                                     0.0000         0.0000
                                                                                      0.0000         0.0000

 Minnesota X Oil Carloads                                                                            0.0060
                                                                                                    (0.0040)

 Nebraska X Oil Carloads                                                                             0.0020
                                                                                                    (0.0040)

 North Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        0.011***
                                                                                                    (0.0030)

 South Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                         0.007*
                                                                                                    (0.0040)

 County Effects                             Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                    No               Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Observations                              4101             3271           3271          3271          3271
 Adj. R-sq.                                0.39             0.37            0.37         0.37          0.37
 Notes: Dependent variable is the price of rail transportation in dollars per bushel. Standard errors clustered
 by county and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10
 percent levels.




                                                      38
Table 9: Harvest-month adjusted rail wheat quantities and oil carloads.


                                         Wheat and Oil Shipments
                                        Model 1        Model 2        Model 3        Model 4       Model 5


 ln(Oil Carloads)                        -0.027        -0.034         -0.030        -0.045**      -0.108***
                                        (0.0200)      (0.0210)       (0.0210)       (0.0200)       (0.0260)

 ln(Diesel Prices)                       0.043          -0.07         -0.159         -0.231         -0.258
                                        (0.1900)      (0.3660)       (0.3700)       (0.3720)       (0.3720)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                              0.0000         0.0000         0.0000
                                                                     (0.0010)       (0.0010)       (0.0010)

 ln(Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain)                                               0.354***       0.347***
                                                                                    (0.0660)       (0.0650)

 Montana X ln(Oil Carloads)                                                                        0.072**
                                                                                                   (0.0320)

 North Dakota X ln(Oil Carloads)                                                                   0.108***
                                                                                                   (0.0310)

 South Dakota X ln(Oil Carloads)                                                                    0.003
                                                                                                   (0.0440)

 County Effects                          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                  No             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Observations                           3103            2501           2501           2501          2501
 Adj. R-sq.                              0.34           0.33           0.33            0.33         0.33
 Notes: Dependent variable is logged county monthly grain shipments. Standard errors clustered by county
 and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent levels.




                                                      39
Table 10: Harvest-month adjusted corn rail quantities and oil carloads.


                                           Corn and Oil Shipments
                                        Model 1        Model 2        Model 3        Model 4        Model 5


 ln(Oil Carloads)                        -0.018       -0.047**       -0.045**       -0.057***     -0.089***
                                        (0.0170)      (0.0190)       (0.0190)        (0.0180)      (0.0240)

 ln(Diesel Prices)                       0.238        0.824***       0.792***       0.646**        0.649**
                                        (0.1650)      (0.2930)       (0.2780)       (0.2560)       (0.2540)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                              0.005*         0.0040         0.0040
                                                                     (0.0020)       (0.0020)       (0.0020)

 ln(Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain)                                               0.334***       0.332***
                                                                                    (0.0560)       (0.0550)

 Minnesota X Oil Carloads                                                                            0.064
                                                                                                    -0.049

 Nebraska X Oil Carloads                                                                             0.03
                                                                                                   (0.0570)

 North Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        0.013
                                                                                                   (0.0360)

 South Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        0.081
                                                                                                   (0.0500)

 County Effects                          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                  No             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Observations                           3983            3155           3155           3155          3155
 Adj. R-sq.                              0.40           0.41           0.41            0.41          0.41
 Notes: Dependent variable is logged county monthly grain shipments. Standard errors clustered by county
 and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent levels.




                                                      40
Table 11: Harvest-month adjusted soybean rail quantities and oil carloads.


                                           Soy and Oil Shipments
                                        Model 1        Model 2        Model 3        Model 4       Model 5


 ln(Oil Carloads)                        -0.015        -0.021         -0.019          -0.02         -0.056*
                                        (0.0160)      (0.0160)       (0.0160)       (0.0160)       (0.0300)

 ln(Diesel Prices)                       0.064        0.729**        0.753***       0.638***       0.634***
                                        (0.1430)      (0.2890)       (0.2570)       (0.2340)       (0.2300)

 Average Daily Low Temp.                                              0.005*         0.005*         0.005*
                                                                     (0.0030)       (0.0030)       (0.0030)

 ln(Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain)                                               0.316***       0.301***
                                                                                    (0.0760)       (0.0740)

 Minnesota X Oil Carloads                                                                           0.0630
                                                                                                   (0.0490)

 Nebraska X Oil Carloads                                                                            0.0580
                                                                                                   (0.0630)

 North Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        0.0000
                                                                                                   (0.0390)

 South Dakota X Oil Carloads                                                                        0.094*
                                                                                                   (0.0500)

 County Effects                          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Harvest X Month Effects                  No             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Observations                           4101            3271           3271           3271          3271
 Adj. R-sq.                              0.40           0.40           0.40            0.40         0.40
 Notes: Dependent variable is logged county monthly grain shipments. Standard errors clustered by county
 and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent levels.




                                                     41
Table 12: Wheat carry and oil carloads.


                        Wheat Carry, Oil Shipments and Production
                                              1-Month         3-Month        6-Month


         Oil Carloads (thousands)              0.000          0.000          0.002**
                                              (0.0010)       (0.0010)        (0.0010)

         Montana X Oil Carloads                -0.001        -0.002***      -0.002***
                                              (0.0010)        (0.0010)       (0.0000)

         North Dakota X Oil Carloads           -0.002*        -0.001          -0.001
                                              (0.0010)       (0.0010)        (0.0010)

         South Dakota X Oil Carloads          -0.002**        -0.001*       -0.001***
                                              (0.0010)       (0.0000)        (0.0000)

         Market (Silo) Effects                    Yes             Yes             Yes
         Harvest X Month Effects                  Yes             Yes             Yes
         Min Daily Temperature                    Yes             Yes             Yes
         Rail Traffic                             Yes             Yes             Yes
         Observations                            2747            2208            1335
         Adj. R-sq.                              0.35             0.53           0.69
         Notes: Dependent variable is the difference between silo spot price and forward
         price at the horrizon indicated. Standard errors clustered by silo and date in
         parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and
         10 percent levels.




                                               42
Table 13: Error correction models for weekly price changes


                                 Error Correction Model for Weekly Price Changes

                                  Wheat                                    Corn                         Soybeans
                                     Minneapolis                                  Chicago                      Chicago
                          ND Price                              ND Price                          ND Price
                                        Price                                      Price                        Price

Lag Spread                  0.057        -0.159**                0.120             0.077           0.035          -0.081
                           (0.054)        (0.072)               (0.102)           (0.105)         (0.129)        (0.124)

Constant                     -8.0        26.177**                 -5.9             -3.1             -1.0           8.1
                            (8.65)        (11.52)                (6.37)           (6.53)          (10.15)         (9.74)

Observations                  208            208                   208          208                  208            208
Adj. R-sq.                   0.00           0.02                  0.00          0.00                 0.00           0.00
Residual Correlation                 0.82                                0.96                              0.97
Change in Spread                    84.42                                15.65                             27.07
Notes: Dependent variables are the weekly change in price at the specified location. Each week's ND price is the
average daily price across all elevators reporting prices in that week. The spread is the hub price (Minneapolis or
Chicago) minus the North Dakota price. Sample period: 10/01/2009-09/30/2013. Standard errors clustered by silo
and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent
levels.




                                                           43
Appendix: spatial variation of impacts

One perhaps counter-intuitive aspect of our base analysis was the non-uniform relationship
between price spreads and distance from major trading hubs. Recall that, in our basic
model 1, for example, wheat spreads decreased with distance from the primary trading hub
in Minneapolis.



Price Effects

To investigate this issue further, Table 14 explores heterogeneity in wheat spreads by distance
and state. Model 1 uses the full set of controls but allows for a quadratic relationship between
elevator distance and spread. We leave out silo mean effects to avoid collinearity with the
distance controls. The estimated effects suggest mean spread increases with distance from
Minneapolis for approximately 400 miles, roughly the diagonal distance across North Dakota,
and then decreases with distance. This is consistent with Figure 2 that suggests elevators in
western North Dakota and Montana may be less closely tied to the Minneapolis exchange
than the rest of the sample.

       To explore whether wheat spreads behave differently in different locations in response
to increasing oil car shipments, we interact the number of oil cars shipped with dummy
variables for each state. The omitted state is Minnesota. We take this approach rather
than interacting our distance measures with carloads to preserve power.24 The estimated
relationship for elevators in Minnesota is consistent with our earlier estimates. An increase of
10,000 oil carloads per month is associated with an increase in mean spread of approximately
$0.37 per bushel. The estimates for North Dakota and South Dakota are not significantly
different. However, the estimated relationship for Montana is about a third smaller than
Minnesota25 . This again suggests elevators in Montana may be affected differently by the
increase in oil carloads.
  24
     If instead we use a quadratic distance relationship and oil carload interactions, the point estimates imply
increasing oil carloads increases spread more with distance until about 400 miles from Minneapolis. However,
the estimates are not statistically significant.
  25
     I.e. 0.037 minus 0.011 or 0.26.


                                                      44
       Table 15 explores heterogeneity in the effects on corn and soybean spreads, as well as
wheat, across states. Overall, spread increases for corn and soybeans are substantially smaller
than for wheat. Column 1 reproduces the wheat results from Table 14 for comparison. For
both corn and soybeans the omitted state category is Iowa, where we see small, negative
and statistically significant relationships between carloads and spreads for corn and soy-
beans.26 Elevators in Nebraska are similar to those in Iowa and there is essentially no effect
for elevators in Minnesota and South Dakota. Estimates for North Dakota are positive and
statistically significant for both corn and soy. An increase of 10,000 oil carloads per month
is associated with a $.04 and $.09 per bushel increases in corn and soybean spreads, re-
spectively.27 These effects are an order of magnitude smaller than our estimates for wheat
spreads.



Quantity Effects

In section 5, we present evidence that congestion of railroads was a significant driver of
price-spreads during our sample period. We also present evidence that average shipment
quantities declined with the increase in congestion and rail-car prices. We now further
explore the spatial heterogeneity of the impacts on shipping quantities.

       As discussed previously, elevators in Montana typically ship wheat west to Pacific export
terminals. Elevators in Minnesota and eastern parts of the sample are more likely to ship to
eastern destinations. We refine the analysis on shipment quantities, presented in Table 9, by
estimating separate effects for eastbound and westbound shipments. We create an indicator
variable equal to one if the waybill lists California, Oregon or Washington as the shipment
destination. We then aggregate all the cars from a given county in each month by either
West Coast or Eastern destinations and use these totals as the dependent variable in our
regression analysis. The results are presented in Table 16. For Minnesota, a ten percent
increase in oil carloads is associated with a 0.76 percent decrease in oil carloads headed to
Eastern destinations. For Montana, a 10 percent increase in oil carloads is associated with a
  26
      The negative effect on spreads could be evidence of increase demand for grain from locations further
from North Dakota and therefore less affected by rail congestion.
   27
      (i.e. 10 × (−0.007 + 0.011) and 10 × (−0.009 + 0.018)))

                                                   45
2.1 percent decrease in shipments headed east but a 0.45 percent increase in shipments to the
West Coast. For shipments from North Dakota, there is essentially no effect for eastbound
shipments (-0.076 + 0.073 = -0.003), consistent with our assumption that Eastern demand
for North Dakota wheat is inelastic. However, an increase in oil shipments is associated with
a fairly large increase in shipments from North Dakota to the West coast (-0.076 + 0.073 +
0.071=0.068).

   Table 17 investigates whether the destinations for wheat shipments change when oil traffic
increases. Using the STB waybill shipment level data, we estimate linear probability and
probit models where the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if a shipment’s final
destination is in California, Oregon or Washington and zero otherwise. Models 1 though 4
are linear probability models estimated with OLS and model 5 assumes a Probit model. In
each case we control for harvest effects, minimum temperature, other rail traffic and mean
effects for originating county.

   Model 1 assumes the relationship between oil carloads and the probability of shipping
to the west coast varies linearly with an elevator’s from Minneapolis. Model 2 assumes a
quadratic relationship. In both cases, increasing oil shipments decreases the likelihood an
elevator ships to the West Coast. Model 3 presents results from a less restrictive specification
where we estimate the mean effects across states. Here, a 10 percent increase in oil shipments
is associated with a 0.33 percentage point increase an elevator in Montana ships to the West
Coast and a 0.22 percentage point decrease in the probability and elevator in South Dakota
ships to the West Coast. However, this model still masks potentially interesting heterogeneity
in the locations of elevators and where they tend to ship wheat.

   Our preferred models take the form of model 4 and model 5 where we create 200 mile
wide distance bins, again relative to Minneapolis, interacted with logged oil car shipments.
In model 4, an increase in oil car shipments is associated with a decrease in the likelihood
an elevator ships to the West coast for locations up to 400 miles from Minneapolis, though
our point estimates are quite noise. For elevators further west, increasing oil traffic is asso-
ciated with an increase in the likelihood an elevator ships west. For instance, at 400 to 600
miles, a 10 percent increase in oil car shipments is associated with a 0.33 percentage point


                                              46
increase in the probability a shipment goes west. This effect decrease somewhat for elevators
located further west, perhaps due to the fact the majority of these shipments already go to
West Coast destinations. Model 5 shows similar results, though the point estimates suggest
somewhat larger effects. Elevators less than 200 miles from Minneapolis are less likely to
ship west when oil traffic increases and elevators further west are more likely to ship to the
West Coast. The estimate for 400 to 600 miles, 0.789, equates to an average marginal effect
of 0.174. In other words, a 10 percent increase in oil shipments is associated with a 1.74
percentage point increase in the probability of shipping west. Overall, these effects suggests
some redirection of shipments associated with increase oil traffic.




                                             47
Table 14: Wheat price spreads and oil carloads by elevator distance and state.

                          Wheat Price Spreads, Oil Shipments and Distance
                                                             Model 1         Model 2


                    Oil Carloads (thousands)                0.034***        0.037***
                                                            (0.0090)        (0.0090)

                    Minneapolis Distance (100 miles)        0.243***
                                                            (0.0340)

                    MN Dist. Squared                        -0.029***
                                                             (0.0030)

                    Diesel Prices                           -1.941***       -1.892***
                                                             (0.4700)        (0.4980)

                    Montana X Oil Carloads                                    -0.011
                                                                             (0.0070)

                    North Dakota X Oil Carloads                               0.005
                                                                             (0.0090)

                    South Dakota X Oil Carloads                             -0.010***
                                                                             (0.0020)

                    Average Daily Low Temp.                  -0.011**         -0.010*
                                                             (0.0050)        (0.0060)

                    Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain          0.0030          0.0020
                                                             (0.0030)        (0.0030)

                    Market (Silo) Effects                        No             Yes
                    Harvest X Month Effects                     Yes             Yes
                    Observations                               0.526          0.546
                    Adj. R-sq.                                  0.53            0.55
                    Notes: Dependent variable is the difference between silo cash
                    price and Minneapolis spot price in dollars per bushell. Average
                    low temperature is the average of recorded daily low temperatures
                    in each state capital each month. Rail traffic exlcuding oil and grain
                    is the total number of carloads, measured in thousands, for BNSF
                    and CP not including oil and grain each month. Standard errors
                    clustered by silo and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote
                    significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent levels.




                                                       48
Table 15: Wheat, corn and soybean price spreads and oil carloads by elevator state.

                          Grain Price Spreads, Oil Shipments by Elevator State
                                                      Wheat           Corn            Soy


               Oil Carloads (thousands)             0.037***        -0.007*          -0.009
                                                    (0.0090)        (0.0030)        (0.0060)

               Diesel Prices                        -1.892***        0.055           0.253
                                                     (0.4980)       (0.1310)        (0.2070)

               Minnesota X Oil Carloads                              0.006*          0.007
                                                                    (0.0030)        (0.0050)

               Montana X Oil Carloads                 -0.011        0.016***
                                                     (0.0070)       (0.0050)

               North Dakota X Oil Carloads            0.005         0.011***        0.018**
                                                     (0.0090)       (0.0040)        (0.0080)

               Nebraska X Oil Carloads                               0.000           0.000
                                                                    (0.0020)        (0.0040)

               South Dakota X Oil Carloads          -0.010***        0.006*          0.008
                                                     (0.0020)       (0.0030)        (0.0050)

               Average Daily Low Temp.                -0.010*        0.0010          0.0050
                                                     (0.0060)       (0.0010)        (0.0030)

               Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain       0.0020        0.001***       0.002***
                                                     (0.0030)        0.0000        (0.0010)

               Market (Silo) Effects                     Yes              Yes            Yes
               Harvest X Month Effects                   Yes              Yes            Yes
               Observations                             3292             4090           3910
               Adj. R-sq.                               0.55             0.79           0.64
               Notes: Dependent variable is the difference between silo cash price and
               Minneapolis or Chicago spot price in dollars per bushell. Average low
               temperature is the average of recorded daily low temperatures in each state
               capital each month. Rail traffic exlcuding oil and grain is the total number of
               carloads, measured in thousands, for BNSF and CP not including oil and grain
               each month. Standard errors clustered by silo and date in parentheses. ***,
               ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent levels.
               For wheat, Minnesota is the omitted state. For corn and soybeans Iowa is the
               omitted state.




                                                     49
Table 16: Number of carloads shipped to the West Coast and oil carloads.


                           Quantities Shipped East and West
                                                             Wheat


                   ln(Oil Carloads)                        -0.076**
                                                           (0.0370)

                   MN X West X ln(Oil Carloads)              -0.075
                                                            (0.0710)

                   MT X ln(Oil Carloads)                   -0.136***
                                                            (0.0510)

                   MT X West X ln(Oil Carloads)            0.257***
                                                           (0.0280)

                   ND X ln(Oil Carloads)                     0.073*
                                                            (0.0410)

                   ND X West X ln(Oil Carloads)            0.071***
                                                           (0.0160)

                   SD X ln(Oil Carloads)                     0.0000
                                                            (0.0470)

                   SD X West X ln(Oil Carloads)              0.0360
                                                            (0.0430)

                   County Effects                                Yes
                   Diesel, Temperature and Traffic Controls      Yes
                   Harvest X Month Effects                       Yes
                   Observations                                 2812
                   Adj. R-sq.                                    0.29
                   Notes: Dependent variable is logged county monthly
                   grain shipments. Standard errors clustered by county
                   and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote
                   significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10
                   percent levels.




                                            50
Table 17: Wheat shipments to the West Coast and oil carloads.


                                     Wheat Shipments to the West Coast and Oil Shipments
                                                 Model 1       Model 2      Model 3      Model 4             Model 5
                                                   OLS           OLS           OLS        OLS                 Probit

       ln(Oil Carloads)                           -0.035**      -0.048**        -0.006         -0.016      -0.673***
                                                  (0.0150)      (0.0210)       (0.0060)       (0.0110)      (0.2490)

       Distance X ln(Oil Carloads)                0.001**        0.001
                                                  (0.0000)      (0.0010)

       Distance Squarred X ln(Oil Carloads)                      0.000
                                                                (0.0000)

       Montana X ln(Oil Carloads)                                             0.039***
                                                                              (0.0140)

       North Dakota X ln(Oil Carloads)                                          -0.001
                                                                               (0.0170)

       South Dakota X ln(Oil Carloads)                                          -0.028*
                                                                               (0.0140)

       Dist. 200 to 400 mi. X ln(Oil Carloads)                                                 -0.019        0.461*
                                                                                              (0.0170)      (0.2680)

       Dist. 400 to 600 mi. X ln(Oil Carloads)                                               0.049***       0.789***
                                                                                             (0.0160)       (0.2220)

       Dist. 600 to 800 mi. X ln(Oil Carloads)                                                 0.026        0.852**
                                                                                              (0.0220)      (0.3740)

       Dist. 800 to 1000 mi. X ln(Oil Carloads)                                                0.040*       0.889***
                                                                                              (0.0240)      (0.3100)

       ln(Diesel Prices)                           0.1840        0.1940         0.1610         0.1350        0.4490
                                                  (0.1250)      (0.1210)       (0.1310)       (0.1280)      (0.6920)

       Average Daily Low Temp.                     0.000         0.001          0.000          0.000         0.002
                                                  (0.0010)      (0.0010)       (0.0010)       (0.0010)      (0.0040)

       ln(Rail Traffic Excl. Oil and Grain)       -0.060***     -0.067**       -0.048**       -0.049**      -0.234**
                                                   (0.0210)     (0.0270)       (0.0200)       (0.0200)      (0.1040)

       County Effects                               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
       Harvest X Month Effects                      Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
       Observations                                4711           4711           4711           4711           3966
       Adj. R-sq. (Pseudo R-sq.)                   0.50            0.50          0.50           0.51           0.40
       Notes: Dependent variable is one if shipment terminates in CA, OR or WA and zero otherwise. Standard errors
       clustered by county and date in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and
       10 percent levels.




                                                              51
