                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SHADOW BANKING AND THE FOUR PILLARS OF
                     TRADITIONAL FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION

                                        Emmanuel Farhi
                                          Jean Tirole

                                      Working Paper 23930
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23930


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2017, Revised February 2020




The authors are grateful to Aimé Bierdel, Mathias Dewatripont, Veronica Guerrieri, Frédéric
Malherbe, Paul-Henri Moisson, John Moore, Francisco Nadal de Simone, Guillermo Ordonez,
Guillaume Plantin, Jeremy Stein, Joseph Stiglitz, John Vickers, four referees, and participants at
the Shanghai Frontiers of Macroeconomics conference, LACEA-LAMES Buenos Aires
conference, 2019 ASSA meetings, Bocconi, Central Banks of England, France, Luxembourg and
Uruguay, Harvard, NY Fed, and ULB for helpful comments. This project has received funding
from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement n°669217 - ERC MARKLIM). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Shadow Banking and the Four Pillars of Traditional Financial Intermediation
Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 23930
October 2017, Revised February 2020
JEL No. E0,G0

                                          ABSTRACT

Traditional banking is built on four pillars: SME lending, insured deposit taking, access to lender
of last resort, and prudential supervision. This paper unveils the logic of the quadrilogy by
showing that it emerges naturally as an equilibrium outcome in a game between banks and the
government. A key insight is that regulation and public insurance services (LOLR, deposit
insurance) are complementary. The model also shows how prudential regulation must adjust to
the emergence of shadow banking, and rationalizes structural remedies to counter financial
contagion: ring-fencing between regulated and shadow banking and the sharing of liquidity in
centralized platforms.


Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
emmanuel.farhi@gmail.com

Jean Tirole
Toulouse School of Economics
1 Esplanade de l'Universite
31080 Toulouse Cedex 6
FRANCE
jean.tirole@tse-fr.eu
1    Introduction
Traditional banking is built on four pillars: the commercial or retail bank is prudentially
supervised and in exchange gets access to lender of last resort and to deposit insurance.
It caters to “special depositors”, who want a liquid and safe vehicle for their savings, and
to “special borrowers”, the small and medium enterprises that need close oversight to
secure financing. These two activities are the “core functions”, the successful delivery
of which governments attach great social value to. Other investors and borrowers have
access and resort to financial markets. Other financial institutions traditionally have been
left unregulated and could not claim access to deposit insurance and public liquidity.
    This institutional framework is not a matter of course. The access to the “public insur-
ance services”- the discount window and other liquidity facilities on the one hand and
cheap deposits on the other - could be priced and offered to the financial system as a
whole. Besides, this conventional definition of retail banking is called into question by
recent developments. Many shadow financial institutions (money market mutual funds
and investment banks) gained access to public liquidity facilities during the 2008 crisis.
Another challenge to the conventional wisdom is the observation that in recent years
shadow banks have gained much market share in retail banks’ classical territories, the
core functions. This seems in the West to be due to a migration of activities in reaction
to tighter prudential standards. But they also have grown in importance in India and
other emerging markets. Shadow banks in China lend to small and medium enterprises
and cater to retail depositors through wealth management funds. Should we reconsider
the conventional SME lending/insured deposit taking/regulation/lender of last resort
quadrilogy?
    To start answering this question, we unveil the logic of the conventional wisdom.
While our work is normative, we build on the usual hazards facing financial systems:
over-leverage and bailouts, threat of migration to shadow banking, cross exposures be-
tween retail and shadow banking sectors. These modeling ingredients are there for good
reason. Moral hazard in the form of over-leverage (or more broadly risk taking), com-
bined with the possibility of bailouts, creates an externality of unregulated banking on
public finances. This externality may vindicate costly supervision. Cross-exposures (mo-
tivated by imperfect risk correlation and mutual insurance on our model) raise the possi-
bility of financial contagion, which allows us to investigate the desirability of ring-fencing
and of central counterparty clearing houses (CCPs). Mechanism design calls for optimally
devising institutions that best mitigate the combined hazards.
    This paper’s central insight is that there are basic complementarities between regu-


                                              2
lation and the other components of the quadrilogy. Through its monopoly privilege on
taxation -i.e. its access to future earnings-, the government has a special ability to cre-
ate liquidity and therefore to insure banks and/or individuals when private markets are
unable or unwilling to do so. However, deposit insurance (DI) and lender of last resort
(LOLR) services are costly for the officials (political opprobrium) or for society (as they re-
quire the government to raise funds even in financial straits). Banking supervision lowers
the cost of these put options on taxpayer money to the extent that it monitors leverage (in
our model) or more generally reduces banking moral hazard. SME lending magnifies the
benefit of regulation, as the fear of industrial disruption may trigger ex-ante-unwanted
banking bailouts.1
    Overall, the broad normative picture is one in which core banking clients- small depos-
itors and SMEs-, who are most affected by a banking failure and therefore are politically
sensitive, are served by a regulated entity and benefit (directly for depositors and indi-
rectly for SMEs) from extended insurance from the government. The attractive pricing of
this insurance in turn incentivizes banks to remain in the regulated sector instead of mi-
grating to the shadow banking sector. This picture chimes with the UK legislation, which
is cast in terms of the continuity of provision of “core services” – to households and SMEs
that lack non-bank alternatives.
    Our model, described in Section 2, has two dates. At date 0, the representative bank
chooses its leverage, freely so if in the shadow banking sector and in a constrained way
if part of the regulated sector. At date 1, the bank receives a random revenue (which
in practice reflects fee earnings, asset values or the availability of cheap deposits), and
honors (or not) its unsecured debt obligations. It then invests if it can: The bank, which
has a specific expertise in lending to the industry (to the SMEs) may be illiquid/unable
to finance it at date 1, and furthermore such an event is more likely if the bank is highly
levered. Furthermore, if the bank has issued insured deposits at date 0, the government
has to make good on these deposits when the bank cannot pay the depositors.
    An important distinction here is between bailouts and insurance.2 Bailouts arise when
the government would like to commit not to rescue the bank or its depositors, but cannot
refrain from doing so ex post when the bank is illiquid. By contrast, “public insurance
   1 The   key feature of bank loans to SMEs is that the government attaches social value to them. In practice
SME lending figure prominently as part of a bank’s “core functions”. The model applies more broadly to
systemically important functions such as payment systems, market making, etc.
    2 LOLR is often described as following Bagehot’s dictum: To avert panics, central banks should lend

early and freely (i.e. without limit), to solvent firms, against good collateral, and at “high rates”. In prac-
tice, it is very difficult to distinguish illiquidity from insolvency, and LOLR ends up subsidizing financial
institutions. We focus on this dimension and model LOLR as a commitment at date 0 to bail out banks at
date 1.


                                                      3
services” (LOLR for banks and DI for depositors) are contractual features3 in which the
government finds its own interest ex ante: It thereby monetizes its unique ability to pro-
vide liquidity in extreme events against other benefits, such as bringing the bank into the
regulated sector through an access to public liquidity and to cheap deposits. Section 3 de-
rives the complementarity between regulation and the two forms of liquidity assistance.
     The paper’s second contribution is to provide a rationale for two structural remedies:
ring-fencing and migration of transactions towards CCPs4 . Ring-fencing and CCPs fea-
ture prominently in a number of post-crisis reforms worldwide, and, for the former, in
the philosophy of the Glass-Steagall act (in force from 1933 through 1999 in the US) sep-
arating regulated commercial and unregulated investment banking. Nonetheless, to the
best of our knowledge, these policies have not yet been subject to a formal analysis. To
perform such an analysis, we introduce a rationale for cross-exposures among financial
institutions: Imperfectly correlated liquidity shocks create scope for desirable liquidity
pooling and therefore counterparty risk. We show that the provision of mutual insurance
among financial intermediaries is subject to gaming at the taxpayer’s expense in which a
regulated bank is only partially covered by its insurance counterparty and therefore holds
“bogus liquidity” (as was de facto offered by AIG in the CDS market)5 , and “syphons off”
its liquidity to a shadow banking entity (which happened when retail banks offered credit
lines to the conduits they had created).
     Section 4 first assumes that when counterparties are both supervised, the regulator can
learn the correlation structure between them (say through joint stress testing). It thereby
can prevent the hazards described above; a simple regulation forcing regulated banks to
co-insure through mutual lines of credit (which is a form of liquidity regulation) then
delivers the second-best welfare level. In contrast, such an understanding is not available
if one of the parties lies outside the regulated sphere, and liquidity pooling can then game
the supervisory system. Ring-fencing can help prevent such abuses.
     Second, we make the opposite polar assumption that, unlike the counterparties, the
regulator never learns the correlation structure. Ring-fencing then no longer suffices to
   3 In practice, examples of LOLR along these lines include access to the discount window and other facil-
ities which are reserved to regulated banks. Deposit insurance is also reserved to regulated banks.
    4 CCPs become the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer; they thereby ensure the future

performance of open contracts. Under the Basel framework, clearing member banks operating through a
“qualified CCP” get preferential capital treatment.
    5 The notion of “bogus liquidity” is documented by Yorulmazer (2013) (who does not use this term), who

analyzes the correlation between the insurer’s default and the bank’s shocks and argues that CDSs, which
according to Basel regulation, can be counted as hedges and allow banks to free up regulatory capital, have
been used to create a false sense of safety due to counterparty risk. There have also been concerns that
regulated banks be dependent on investment funds for their short-term funding (see Jin-Nadal de Simone
2016 for evidence on the exposure of major European banks to investment funds).


                                                    4
deliver the second best. Regulated banks can game the liquidity requirements and ar-
range bogus liquidity lines to each other, knowing that they will be protected by bailouts
anyway. They thereby maximize their put on taxpayer money. To restore the second best,
the regulator can complement ring-fencing with the requirement that liquidity pooling
occur through a CCP rather than bilaterally. This prevents banks from fine-tuning their
liquidity provision at the expense of the taxpayer, i.e. from engaging in risk selection.


2     Model
We start by setting up the model in Section 2.1. We then go through a thorough discussion
of our assumptions and modeling choices in Section 2.2.


2.1    Description
We first describe the model and later comment on the plausibility of, and robustness
to the key assumptions. There are two periods (t = 0, 1), a single good, and three
groups of players: investors, bankers, and the government (or “regulator”). At date 1,
all uncertainty is resolved with the realization of an aggregate state ω = (ω1 , ω2 ), where
ω1 ∈ { G, B} is the fiscal state and ω2 ∈ { g, b} is the liquidity state for the banks which
are indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. The fiscal state is verifiable but the liquidity state is not.

    • The fiscal state ω1 ∈ { G, B} determines the shadow cost 1 + λω1 of public funds.
      The deadweight cost of taxation λω1 is lower in the good fiscal state G than in the
      bad fiscal state B, i.e. 0 ≤ λG < λ B .

    • The liquidity state ω2 ∈ { g, b} determines the common revenues rω2 of the banks.
      The revenues of the banks are higher in the good liquidity state g than in the bad
      liquidity state b, i.e. r g > rb . For simplicity we assume that r g = 2 and rb = 0.

    • All probabilities are denoted by p. . The probability of fiscal state ω1 ∈ { G, B} is
      pω1 . The conditional probabilities are denoted pω2 |ω1 and the probability of state
      ω = (ω1 , ω2 ) is pω ≡ pω1 pω2 |ω1 . The probability of a good fiscal state and liquid
      banks is pGg , etc.

   There is no store of value in the economy and the correlation of banks’ liquidity shocks
precludes any cross-insurance (we relax this assumption in Section 4). Furthermore, as
in Holmström and Tirole (1998), we assume that consumers/investors cannot commit to
pay any funds in the future. As a result, while they can save, they can neither borrow

                                             5
nor grant credit lines to bankers. This will imply that only the government, through its
exclusive access to taxpayer money, can provide liquidity in bad times. This builds the
foundations for the unique ability of the government to offer lender of last resort (LOLR)
and deposit insurance (DI).


Investors. There are two kinds of investors.6 “Ordinary” investors/consumers have
risk-neutral preferences with no discounting over consumption. Their utility from con-
sumption vector {c0 , c1,ω } is given by Eω [c0 + c1,ω ]; these depositors will in equilibrium
be uninsured. They have large endowments in every period. “Special depositors” are for-
malized as in Gennaioli et al (2012, 2013), Stein (2012) and Caballero-Farhi (2018): They
are ex-ante risk averse (à la Epstein-Zin)—actually infinitely risk averse—at date 0; they
are willing to pay 1 + θ with θ > 0 at date 0 for the certainty of receiving 1 at date 1 (they
are willing to pay 1 for 1 beyond that amount). These deposits must be absolutely safe in
order to be valued. There is a mass µ ≤ 1 of special depositors.
    Since bankers experience an aggregate liquidity shock with some probability, they can-
not supply safe deposits on their own. They must rely partly on the government. It may
therefore be optimal for the government to run a deposit insurance scheme. This deposit
insurance scheme promises to make whole every special depositor who has deposited
funds in a given bank in case this bank experiences a liquidity shortfall. Bankers can then
market this insured product at price 1 + θ at date 0 (the state will have no incentive to
constrain this decision as it can always recoup an arbitrary part of the banker’s rent from
cheap deposits through the date-0 pricing of the deposit insurance service); furthermore,
charging the special depositors’ willingness to pay for the service, or for that matter any
amount exceeding 1, implies that ordinary depositors lose money if they masquerade as
special depositors.


Bankers. There is a mass 1 of bankers protected by limited liability. Each banker i ∈
[0, 1] will need to finance a “project” (understand “SMEs”) requiring a unit investment at
date 1. The involvement of the banker is indispensable to run his project, which can be
motivated by special knowledge or expertise. As there is no store of value in the economy,
this date-1 investment must be financed from the bank’s date-1 revenue or through a
transfer from the state. As stated earlier, the bank’s date-1 revenue rω2 is random with
r g = 2 and rb = 0.7
   6 Of course, depositors may have several incarnations. They may be special depositors for returns up to
1, and ordinary depositors beyond that level.
    7 We could alternatively assume that the investment need is random.




                                                    6
     At date 0, each bank i issues wholesale, uninsured debt with face value {diω1 } to be
reimbursed at date 1. This debt can be contingent on the fiscal state ω1 , which is verifiable,
but not on the liquidity state ω2 , which is not.
     The state-contingent debt is reimbursed at the beginning of date 1, just after revenue
accrual. We assume that bankers are protected by limited liability and that unsecured
debt repayments cannot exceed revenue and are hence given by min{diω1 , rω      i }. The jus-
                                                                                  2
tification for the upper bound is either that the government is committed to enforce the
bailinability of uninsured debt (in the spirit of recent regulatory reforms) or that credi-
tors have no bargaining power in renegotiations with the government (and thus cannot
demand compensation).
     This issuance decision captures bank i’s risk-taking and will be called “choice of lever-
age”. Bank i may also issue µi insured deposits, necessarily with the assent of the govern-
ment, which as we have seen is indispensable for the creation of safe claims.
     In the absence of regulation (shadow banking), the bank freely chooses leverage. We
will thereby capture the idea that unmonitored balance sheet decisions may make the
bank illiquid and unable to pursue its activities in the absence of liquidity assistance;
such illiquidity may occur even in the absence of leverage.
     The project’s payoff comes in the form of a non-pledgeable, private benefit b > 1
for the banker. Banker i values consumption c0 at date 0 and the private benefit from
investment according to
                                     U ≡ Eω [c0i + bxωi
                                                        ].

where xωi = 1 if bank i is able to invest at date 1 and x i = 0 otherwise. The key feature,
                                                          ω
shared by all models of liquidity management, is that the surplus associated with contin-
uation is not fully pledgeable to investors and so refinancing problems may emerge.


Government. At date 0 the regulator may monitor (regulate) banks that are not in the
pure shadow banking sector. Monitoring bank i means setting8 its leverage {diω1 } (a form
of capital requirement) and costs c ≥ 0.9
    Second, the government may raise revenues by taxing consumers at date 1 and use the
proceeds for bailouts (of banks and/or their depositors) and to honor its public insurance
services. As started earlier, the collection of taxes for these purposes is costly: collecting
1 involves a cost of public funds equal to 1 + λω1 , where the deadweight costs of taxation
   8 It
      in fact suffices to set a (state-contingent) upper bound for the bank’s liability.
   9 Some  elements of this activity- such as counting wholesale liabilities- are straightforward. But figuring
out the implications of maturities, correlations, credit line and derivative exposures and the like can be
competence- and time-intensive. We are agnostic as to the level of this cost, except for the fact that the more
complex the banks’ activities, the higher c is likely to be.


                                                      7
satisfy λ B > λG ≥ 0. By contrast, rebating one unit of revenue to consumers does not
entail any efficiency benefit.10
    The government can contract at date 0 on public insurance services (LOLR and DI)
for date 1 with either regulated or shadow banks, or both; indeed, we aim at demonstrat-
ing the complementarity of regulation and public insurance services. LOLR consists in
promising a bank to bring the missing cash if there is too little cash to invest 1 at date
1 when investment is meant to take place (see exact timing below); this service is con-
tingent on the verifiable state, i.e. the fiscal state. Similarly, DI is a promise to special
depositors to make up for any shortfall in the deposit contract’s reimbursement of 1; and
the DI agreement between bank i and the government specifies a volume µi of deposits.
    Next, we describe the government’s preferences. The government puts a welfare
weight of 1 on consumers/investors, ordinary or special, implying in particular that spe-
cial depositors will not be bailed out ex post at date 1 if the commitment to DI has not
been extended ex ante at date 0. The government also puts weight on bank stakeholders
(to be interpreted as the SMEs that rely on the banking relationship: credit crunch foun-
dations are provided in Section 2.2), and zero or positive weight on bankers, with a total
resulting weight11 β on a project being implemented; the social value β of continuation
satisfies
                                    1 + λB > β > 1 + λG .

This assumption guarantees that bankers lacking cash at date 1 receive a discretionary
bailout in state G but not in state B. It also implies that at date 1 in state B, the government
would like to renege on any promise of liquidity assistance that would be part of the
LOLR scheme, and is only prevented from doing so by its commitment at date 0.
   For future use, we define the expected deadweight losses

                                     Λω2 ≡ Σω1 ∈{G,B} pω1 pω2 |ω1 λω1

associated with one unit of public transfer to banks (or via the bank to depositors), con-
tingent on the liquidity state ω2 ∈ { g, b}. The average shadow cost is

                                     λ̄ ≡ Λ g + Λb = pG λG + p B λ B .
  10 As will shortly become clear, deposit insurance transfers to special depositors to make them whole has
date-0 (but not date-1) efficiency benefits since θ > 0, and we fully take them into account in the analysis.
   11 More generally the weight put on bankers could be positive, as long as it is smaller than 1. In that case,

β is the total weight put on bankers and on bank stakeholders.




                                                       8
Payoffs. Let mi = 1 if bank i is monitored (regulated) and mi = 0 if it is not. The
equilibrium values of {diω1 } are chosen by the government if bank i is regulated and is
determined by the incentives of banker i seeking to maximize his utility if it is not. The
total date-0 transfer made by the state to bank i is τ0i : it encompasses insurance premia
for DI and LOLR and subsidies for abiding by regulatory constraints, and can be positive
or negative; to simplify the notation, this we leave this dependence implicit.
    Bank i’s utility is

                                        i
                             Ui ≡ Eω [bxω + min{diω1 , rω2 } + (1 + θ )µi + τ0i ].              (1)

The term bxω i reflects the benefits of continuation. The last three terms in U add up to the
                                                                               i
                                                      i
banker’s total net date-0 income: the term min{dω1 , rω2 } is the date-0 proceeds of debt
issuance, the term (1 + θ )µi the date-0 revenue from special deposits, and the term τ0i the
date-0 transfer from the government. The expression of Ui ignores the date-0 endowment
(and possible activities) of the bank.
    Total (government + bank) welfare is

                    1h
           Z
                                       i
  W ≡ Eω                 (b + β − 1) x ω + rω2 + θµi − cmi
                0
                                                                                          i i
                                                         i
                                            −λω1 max{0, xω + µi + min{diω1 , rω2 } − rω2 } di . (2)

W adds up for each bank i: (a) the social value of investment (b + β − 1) if it takes place;
(b) the date-1 revenue rω2 ; (c) the social surplus θ on each unit of deposit; (d) the cost c
of monitoring, if any; and (e) the shadow cost of public funds on each public payment
at date 1. Note that because of our assumption of transferable utility at date 0, date-0
transfers τ0i does not appear in this expression. Conditional on {diω1 }, µi , xω  i , and mi ,

these transfers influence the respective levels of utility of the state and of bankers but not
total welfare.


Public policy. We assume that all banks are treated symmetrically through a one-size-
fits-all scheme. We will verify later in Section 3.5 that symmetry is optimal under a simple
condition. Therefore, we omit the i indices unless otherwise stated. But we will also
characterize the changes to the analysis if this condition is not satisfied and show that the
optimal scheme may involve otherwise identical banks selecting different options.
    The government sets a single regulatory contract {τ0 , k, l, m, {dω1 }}, where: τ0 is the
transfer from the government; k = 1 if there is DI and k = 0 if not; l = 1 is there is LOLR
and l = 0 if not; m = 1 if regulation is required and m = 0 is not; and dω1 are prescribed

                                                      9
                   debt levels (which are only enforced if the bank is regulated).
                       Abusing notation, we denote by W (k, l, m, {dω1 }) the value of W in (2) when banks’
                   leverage is {dω1 }. In this expression, we have µi = µ if and only if k = 1 (DI). Otherwise
                   we have µi = 0.12 Similarly, we have xω  i = 1 if either: r       i     i               i
                                                                               ω2 ≥ dω1 + µ + 1; or rω2 < dω1 +
                   µi + 1 and either l = 1 (LOLR) or ω1 = G (bailout). Otherwise have xω     i = max{0, r
                                                                                                           ω2 −
                   diω1 − µi }.
                       “Pure shadow banking” is always available to the banker as an outside option, and the
                   corresponding payoffs can be replicated by the regulatory contract k = l = m = τ0 = 0.13


                  Timing. After observing the proposed regulatory policy {τ0 , k, l, m, dω1 }, the banks choose
                  whether to abide by the regulatory contract or to operate in the shadow banking sector.
                  The timing is summarized in Figure 1. In Section 3, there is no (reason for an) interdepen-
                  dence among banks, and so we can viewfrom                  the the
                                                                                   banks’   decisions of which sector to join as
sfer from the government; k = 1 if there is DI and k = 0transfer  if not; l = 1 is    government;
                                                                                    there is LOLR k = 1 if there is DI and k = 0 if not; l = 1 is there
                                   14
 l = 0 if not; m =independent.
                    1 if monitoring is required and m = 0and               0 if not;
                                                                      l =Pure
                                                                 is not.                   1 if monitoring is required and m = 0 is not. Pure shadow
                                                                                     m = banking
                                                                                 shadow
ways available to theThe    government
                         banker as an outsidechooses            is always
                                                 option,regulatory
                                                           and the          available
                                                                         policy
                                                                     corresponding      to thetobanker
                                                                                   in order
                                                                                       payoffs          as an outside
                                                                                                  maximize
                                                                                                 can           W (k, l,option,
                                                                                                                        m, {dωand}) the
                                                                                                                                    sub-corresponding pa
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                be  replicated    by the regulatory    contract k = l = m  = t   = 0.12
eplicated by the ject   to the contract
                  regulatory   banks’ participation         = 0.12
                                        k = l = m = t0 constraint          which determines τ0 (they can choose to0 be pure
Abusing notation,    we denote   by W (So
                                        k, l,we
                                              m, {solve   theoptimal
                                                   dw1 }) an         Abusing
                                                                          W innotation,
                                                              value of mechanism            we
                                                                                 (2) whendesign denote by W (k, l, m, {dw1 }) the value of W in (2) whe
                                                                                            banks’
                  shadow     banks).                     1 Introduction                              iproblem.
rage is {dw1 }. We have µi = µ if and only if k = 1 (DI). leverage    is {dwe
                                                              Similarly,         . Wexhave
                                                                            w1 }have   i   µ = µ if and only if k = 1 (DI). Similarly, we have
                                                                                       w = 1
ther: rw2   min{diw1 , rw2 } +  i                    i    if either:i rw2     min{dw , rw2 } + µi + 1;’ or rw2 < min{diw1 , rw2 } + µi + 1 and eith
                                                                                     i
                             0 µ + 1;’ or rw2 < min{dw1 , rw2 } + µ + 1 and either1 l = 1 {t0 , k,1l, dw1 }
LR) or w1 = G (bailout).                                  (LOLR) or w1 = G (bailout).

                       (i) Government offers regulatory                                 (i) State w is realized.       Revenue r 2
                           contract {t0 , k, l, m, {dw1 }}                                                             } l, m, {dw1w}}
                                                                                                            {{dtiw0 ,1 k,
                                                                                            materializes.
                    (ii) Banks either accept                                      (ii) Debt repayment min{diw1 , rw2 }.
ing. After observing the  the proposed
                                contract orregulatory
                                             become policy {t0 , k, l, dw1 }, the banks     choose xi 2 {0, 1}.
                                                                                  (iii) Investment         w
e in the regulated (m =pure 1) orshadow
                                   shadowbanks.
                                             (m = 0) banking Timing.
                                                                sector. TheAfter
                                                                             timing
                                                                                  (iv)isDepositor
                                                                                         summa-
                                                                                  observing     the proposed
                                                                                                       repayment.    regulatory policy {t0 , k, l, dw1 }, the bank
                    (iii) Each
d in Figure 1. In Section         bankisi no
                            3, there      chooses  itsfor an) interdependence among banks,
                                             (reason            to be in the regulated     (m = 1) or shadow
                                                                                  (v) Government,          if called (m     = 0)rescue,
                                                                                                                        to the     banking sector. The timing is
                          leverage                                                      13    {t0 , k, l, dw1 , dw1 ,m H , dw1 ,mT }
so we can view the banks’ decisions of which sector to rized    join asinindependent.   inspects    the   bank   to  ascertain     the
                                                                          Figure 1. In Section 3, there is no (reason for an) interdependence amon
                          if it decides to be
                                                                                        remaining cash in the bank, and
                          a pure shadow bank; and abidesand so we can view the banks’ decisions of which sector to join as independent.1
                                                                                        bails it out (state G)       or, if the bank has
                          by the regulatory contract otherwise.                                              {diw1 }
                                                                                        opted in the regulatory contract,
                                                                                        honors its LOLR contract (state B)
                                                                                        and its DI contract. H
                                                                                                           w2 = m

                                                       Figure 1: Timing for bank’s operations.
                                                                                                          mH
                      12 At the optimum, the mass of special depositors who are serviced by each bank is at a corner, either 0 or
                   µ, and so we only consider these values.
                      13 In our model, there is no private demand for supervision, and so were we to Tallow the private sector to
                                                                                                           m
                   operate the regulation technology, it would not use it unless it were compelled to do so. By contrast, there is
                   a public demand for supervision stemming         from the
                                                             Traditional      desireistobuilt
                                                                          banking        reduce
                                                                                              onthe fiscal
                                                                                                 four      coststhe
                                                                                                       pillars:  of bailouts and LOLR.
                                                                                                                    commercial   or retail bank is prude
                      14 In Section 4, imperfect correlation will lead to liquidity pooling, and so for instance the benefit of joining
                                                         tially supervised and in exchange gets access to lender of last resort and to deposit
                   the shadow banking sector may depend on whether other banks do so.
                                                         surance. It caters to “special depositors”, who want a liquid and safe vehicle for th
                                                     savings, and to “special borrowers”, the small and medium enterprises that need clo
                         Figure 1: Timing for bank’s operations.      10financing. These two activities are the “core functions”, the success
                                                     oversight to secure
                                                     delivery of which governmentsFigure
                                                                                    attach 1: Timing
                                                                                           great      forvalue
                                                                                                 social   bank’s
                                                                                                               to.operations.
                                                                                                                   Other investors and borro
n our model, there is no private demand for supervision, and so were we to allow the private sector to
                                                              ers have access and resort to financial
ate the regulation technology, it would not use it unless it were compelled to do so. By contrast, there is
                                                                                                              markets. Other financial institutions traditiona
2.2   Discussion of modeling choices
A number of assumptions require explanations.
(a) Modeling of special depositors
Our use of Epstein-Zin preferences implies that government support is required to create
the liabilities that depositors demand. While this unique ability is by and large descrip-
tive, recent history has taught us that non-banks create quasi-safe assets that appeal to
such investors, and that governments come to the rescue of entities (money market mu-
tual funds, life-insurance vehicles) that do not deliver their explicitly or implicitly guar-
anteed return. Our companion paper (Farhi-Tirole 2020) assumes instead that special de-
positors’ preferences, and the associated demand for safe assets, admit a Von Neumann-
Morgenstern representation; special depositors need money at date 1 to accomplish or ful-
fill specific needs. The state may be tempted to make good on a financial claim that is held
primarily by special depositors when the claim fails to deliver. We show that the shadow
banking sector may cleverly use financial engineering so as to attract special depositors
and create a put on taxpayer money. Another interesting feature is the phenomenon of
clientele-dependant valuations: special depositors may in the absence of bailout prefer
portfolio 1 to riskier portfolio 2, but nonetheless purchase (outbid ordinary depositors
on) portfolio 2 that then becomes safer than portfolio 1 due to the investor bailout trig-
gered by the special-depositor-heavy clientele. Some ordinary depositors benefit from an
investor bailout as they mix with special depositors. Despite these differences (and oth-
ers), the basic insight of a complementarity between supervision and liquidity assistance
services holds.
(b) Indispensability of banker for investment
That the banker is indispensable is much stronger than needed for the results. For one
thing, disposing of the banker deprives the banker of the private benefit attached with
managing the asset; it thus makes it costly for the government to ex-ante ensure banker
participation, unless alternative bankers at date 1 have sufficient cash to pay for the full
private benefit. For another, in the absence of indispensability, managerial turnover costs
would make firing the banker time-inconsistent given the absence of adverse selection in
the model.
(c) Absence of store of value
The absence of store of value makes the government the only source of liquidity outside
the banking sector. The correlation of banking shocks further implies that inside liquidity
(that produced by the banking sector) is insufficient. Like in other models of liquidity
shortages, one could introduce stores of value, provided that they are scarce, i.e. cannot


                                             11
allow the banking sector to self-insure against all macro shocks at no cost. Costly stores
of value would still make it efficient for the public sector to bring liquidity, at least in tail
events.
(d) Narrow banking
Relatedly, an alternative to public insurance services would be narrow banking: The gov-
ernment would issue sufficient debt that banks could hoard at date 0, and banks’ lever-
age (now net of liquidity hoarding) would be regulated so as to preclude any transfer
of public funds to the banks at date 1. This alternative however would be suboptimal.
Revenues associated with the banking activity can be pledged to special depositors and
special borrowers, thereby limiting the need to rely on government funds (which come
together with a distortionary cost) to the cases where banking revenues fall short. Narrow
banking would require more reliance on government distortionary taxation since special
deposits and SME lending would be covered more extensively.
(e) Foundations for β
The key assumption underlying the possibility of bailouts is that the government cares
sufficiently about credit flowing to the productive sector. The foundations for this are
standard.15
(f) Public insurance services
Recall that LOLR means that the government commits at date 0 to enable the date-1 unit
investment if the bank has less than 1 at the end of date 1, and similarly that DI means
that the state commits at date 0 to make special depositors whole at the end of date 1 if
the bank does not have enough funds to do so .
    In principle, the LOLR and DI options could be made contingent on the liquidity state
ω2 . For expositional simplicity only, we assumed that this aggregate liquidity state is
not verifiable. One can imagine that the only verifiable information regarding aggregate
liquidity comes in the form of reports by the government. In our model, the government
would always prefer at date 1 to slant its report ex post in order to minimize its LOLR
and DI liabilities.
    This restriction affects only one of our results. Were regulatory contracts contingent
  15 Following Holmström-Tirole (1997), suppose that, at date 0, each bank makes an investment in knowl-
edge/staff so as to be able to invest in, and monitor a mass 1 of firms, each with investment need 1 at
date 1 and no net worth. At date 1, firms which have invested succeed or fail (then return 0). Success is
guaranteed if none of the bank, the firm’s managers and the workers shirks. Otherwise, success accrues
with probability 0. Shirking at date 1 brings benefit b to the bank, benefit b f to the firm manager and shirk-
ing by the workers yields them bw . There is no payoff beyond the incentive payoffs b, b f and bw of these
stakeholders. To simplify the firms’ revenue in case of success is b + b f + bw , so that it covers incentive
payments. We then get β = β b b + β f b f + β w bw , where β b , β f and β w are the welfare weights for bankers,
firms and workers.


                                                       12
on the entire state ω, offering LOLR to regulated and shadow banks would be equally
costly for the government: the quadrilogy would become a trilogy, the theory making no
prediction on whether LOLR is better targeted at regulated or shadow banks (so it would
be offered to both or to none). Were the liquidity state verifiable, the regulator could
perfectly detect excess leverage. In state B, the LOLR option could be made contingent
on the other banks’ themselves being illiquid (there would be no change in state G, as
the bank is then bailed out anyway). Furthermore, if there were idiosyncratic as well as
aggregate shocks, and even if the aggregate liquidity state were verifiable, then regulation
would lower the state’s cost of LOLR, and so the quadrilogy would re-emerge.
    One can combine the two paradigms by assuming that with some probability z ∈ (0, 1)
the entire state ω is verifiable, while with the complementary probability only the fiscal
state ω1 is verifiable. All results, including the strict complementarity between regulation
and LOLR, then hold.16
(g) State-contingency of debt
Because we assume that the liquidity state ω2 is not verifiable, debt contracts dω1 can
only depend de jure on the fiscal state ω1 . However, because of limited liability, debt
repayments min{dω1 , rω2 } are de facto contingent on the liquidity state. Furthermore
because rb = 0, it can easily be verified that all the results of the model would go through
unchanged if we had instead allowed debt contracts to be de jure contingent on both the
fiscal and the liquidity state.
(h) Timing
The bank repays creditors and invests before depositors are repaid and LOLR commit-
ments/bailouts are implemented. This assumption captures, in a stylized way, the fact
that banks have complex and continuously evolving balance sheets, and that neither de-
positors nor the banking supervisor monitor the bank’s operations in continuous time.
This raises the possibility that bad surprises happen, with too little cash left to pay back
depositors or to finance the economy.
(i) Existence of shadow banks
Like most models of shadow banking, our framework posits that the government can-
not prevent banking activities from developing outside the regulatory umbrella (or that
shadow banks cannot be arbitrarily taxed, as enough taxation would de facto force banks
  16 Another  approach goes as follows: Suppose that in state b of widespread illiquidity, some banks have
revenue 2 and others revenue 0 depending the realization of a purely idiosyncratic shock. The regulator
does not know which banks have revenue 0. Thus the absence of liquidity in a bank in state b may be
due to lack of luck or to the syphoning off of revenue 2 through a debt level of 2. The regulator then faces
a trade-off between not offering LOLR and offering LOLR and giving rise to moral hazard. So again the
provision of LOLR is cheaper when the bank is regulated, and the quadrilogy obtains.


                                                    13
to be regulated). There are different rationales for this (realistic) assumption. First, the
government and legislation may not react fast enough to financial innovation that enables
corporate entities to offer banking services. Second, the regulator may find some activ-
ities/products too complex to be regulated and the benefits of regulation would not be
worth the monitoring cost. Third, and following some of the literature, the shadow bank-
ing sector may be viewed as offering some breathing room to the industry, even though
it may have detrimental consequences as well, such as those modeled here. We could
obviously allow the government to tax shadow banks as long as the tax is low enough for
shadow banking to remain an attractive outside option.
(j) Date-0 activities
For notational simplicity, we ignore date-0 activities, for instance date-0 lending or in-
vestment which could be the cause of the random date-1 return, or else any fixed cost
investment. These could be added to the model, but, being separable, would not affect
the qualitative results.
(k) Moral hazard
We identify banking moral hazard with the choice of leverage. We could equivalently
assume that it relates to a decision affecting the net date-1 return, i.e. either the revenue or,
as we did in a previous version of the paper, a reinvestment need. Again, these alternative
modeling choices do not affect the results.
(l) Endogenous shadow price of public funds
We consider an exogenous cost of public funds (but have allowed it to be correlated
with the banks’ liquidity shock, as banks and government might be affected by the same
macroeconomic shock). Following the doom-loop literature, though, the cost of public
funds might depend on the banks’ leverage, as Spain and Ireland learnt the hard way.17
The analysis can be extended to accommodate such endogeneity of λ at the cost of a more
complex analysis (which requires solving for fixed points).
(m) The government’s commitment
The paper makes a key distinction between a “bailout” and “LOLR”. The former refers
to a potentially18 involuntary recapitalization that follows an observation that the bank
does not have the funds to continue; the government ex post bails out the bank because
it has an important stake in the bank’s continuation, although it might want to commit
  17 The  other leg of the doom loop- with the government debt’s credibility affecting the banks’ balance
sheets- by contrast is already captured by the presumed correlation.
   18 “Potentially” refers to the fact that bailouts are desirable in state ( Gb ) (in which the bank has no cash

anyway), and undesirable in state ( Gg) (in which the bank does have enough cash, but may have committed
it to investors).



                                                       14
ex ante not to do so, in order to avoid excess leverage. The latter by contrast is a time-
inconsistent intervention that is triggered by an earlier commitment. Our model thus
adopts the paradigm of “commitment and renegotiation”: parties to a contract can each
demand that the contract be enforced but can renegotiate the contract if both benefit from
doing so.
    The potential undesirability of bailouts raises the question of whether parties who lose
when the bank is recapitalized (CDS holders, bank’s competitors, taxpayers. . . ) should
not be able to sue the government for rescuing the bank. Such ability to challenge govern-
ment decisions would not change anything as long as the government has the bargaining
power in renegotiations; but more generally it could enhance the government’s ability
to commit not to bail out banks. In practice though, the government cannot be sued for
this (there are exceptions: other countries may challenge the rescue within the state-aid
rules). Such empowerment would presumably confer nuisance power on many economic
agents, as the large number of actions taken by national and local governments every day
all could be challenged by a multitude of agents with a (possibly very small) stake in the
decisions; this would certainly stall any public action. The study of optimal challenges to
public policies clearly lies well beyond the scope of this paper, so we content ourselves
with taking on board the existing institutions.
(n) Banker’s payoff function
We assumed that the banker values only date-0 consumption. If banker i’s utility were
equal to Eω [c0i + c1,ω
                     i  + bxωi ], the only function of leverage would be to pump out cash

out of the bank so as to benefit from a bailout (in fiscal state G) or LOLR (in fiscal state
B). There would still be a social benefit from regulating the leverage and a complemen-
tarity between regulation and public insurance services. Alternatively, there could be an
intrinsic, and not only a strategic, demand for leverage. First, the banker might be more
impatient than the investors: E[c0i + δc1,ω i + bxωi ], where δ < 1 (equivalently, investors

might be willing to pay a premium for the ability to benefit from a scarce savings technol-
ogy). Second, we could introduce a date-0 banking investment, combined with a limited
net worth of the bankers, who then need to borrow. For all these reasons, our assumption
on the banker’s utility function is not restrictive.


3    Shadow banking and the quadrilogy
We now present the solution of the model laid down in the previous section. We first
derive the outcome under pure shadow banking, i.e. when the bank is unregulated and
is not offered any public insurance service; this outcome later defines the reservation

                                            15
utility U SB of a representative bank and is associated with welfare W SB .
     We then solve the social planning problem of the maximization of social welfare
W (k, l, m, {dω1 }). We exploit the fact that utility is transferable between the bank and the
government at date 0. The bank’s utility is equal to its shadow banking reservation utility,
and the government’s utility is equal to total welfare minus the bank’s reservation utility,
W (k, l, m{dω1 }) − U SB . The date-0 transfer τ0 from the government to the bank, which
can be positive or negative, is chosen so as to make the bank indifferent to becoming a
shadow bank.
     We show that there are complementarities between regulation and public liquidity sup-
port: the net benefits of DI and LOLR are greater under regulation than in the absence of
regulation; equivalently, the presence of liquidity support (DI or LOLR) increase the net
benefits of regulation. These complementarities are the signature of economies of scope in
regulation: regulation facilitates both LOLR and DI.19
     Because of these complementarities, the traditional banking quadrilogy naturally emerges
at the optimum with the coexistence of lending to SMEs, DI, regulation, and LOLR. Pub-
lic liquidity support (DI and LOLR) may be underpriced in order to prevent migration to
the shadow banking sector.20
     We first derive social welfare under the all the different configurations of (k, l, m). We
divide the analysis into two parts: shadow banking (m = 0) in Section 3.1 and regulated
banking (m = 1) in Section 3.2. Then in Section 3.3, we establish the complementari-
ties between regulation and public liquidity support and derive the conditions for the
emergence of the traditional banking quadrilogy. In the analysis up to this point, shadow
banking influences the optimal arrangement only by serving as an outside option. Fi-
nally in Sections 3.4 and 3.5, we analyze natural extensions that can give rise to the actual
coexistence of traditional and shadow banking.
  19 In our model, the balance sheet monitoring technology takes the form of a fixed cost. Indeed, the cost
of monitoring the balance sheet of a bank to predict shortages of cash, which mostly arises from setting
up an informational infrastructure (for reporting, auditing, etc.), is unlikely to change much whether the
shortages lead to bailouts of the bank or of its depositors. This naturally gives rise to increasing returns
to scope in regulation. Milder versions of this assumption would preserve but soften this conclusion, as
would happen for example if we assumed that the cost preventing the abuse of LOLR and DI is larger than
the each of the costs but smaller than the sum of the costs of preventing the abuse of these public provision
programs.
   20 As Peltzman (1989) argues: “The putative motive for this [government guarantee of deposits] subsidy is

to use the banks as the government’s agents for providing a cheap, liquid substitute for government money.
The quid for this quo is that banks should refrain from using their access to the government guarantee
simply to maximize profits.” [We are grateful to John Vickers for referring us to Peltzman’s work].




                                                     16
3.1    Shadow banking
We start by analyzing the case of shadow banking where banks are not monitored and so
bank leverage is unregulated. As described above, a bank’s objective is two-fold: invest,
and receive money from debt and/or deposits issuance. Investing dominates receiving
money as the private benefit exceeds the cost of investment (b > 1). But the two need
not be inconsistent. Indeed, left unsupervised, the bank has an incentive to issue as much
as possible in state G so that dG = 2; it thereby collects maximal date-0 revenue without
jeopardizing date-1 investment, which is secured by the subsequent bailout. The same is
true in state B if the bank benefits from LOLR so that d B = 2. By contrast, in the absence of
LOLR, the bank cannot count on a bailout in state B, and is better off limiting its liability
to d B = 1, so as to have enough cash to undertake the investment.


(a) Pure shadow banking

Under pure shadow banking (and so without access to public liquidity insurance ser-
vices), the bank optimally sets dG = 2 for state G. It thereby receives 2pGg at date 0
from investors. Being an empty shell in state G, it is rescued by the government (receives
bailout 1 to invest) and obtains benefit b from continuation. In state ( B, g) by contrast, it
cannot count on a bailout. Because b > 1, the bank prefers to continue, and it therefore
issues debt d B = 1. The bank cannot continue in state ( B, b) since it has no revenue and
receives no bailout. Its utility in the shadow banking sector is therefore

                                  U SB = (1 − p Bb )b + [2pGg + p Bg ].

Social welfare further accounts for the cost 1 + λG of the bailout in fiscal state G as well
as of the social benefit of continuation β when it occurs:21

                            W SB = (1 − p Bb )(b + β − 1) + 2p g − λG pG .

   This expression for W SB embodies the expected surplus from investment assuming
private-sector financing, (1 − p Bb )(b + β − 1), plus the expected date-1 revenue, 2p g , mi-
nus the deadweight loss of public financing of investment in the good fiscal state, λG pG .

  21 The  net effect of bailouts on welfare can be positive or negative depending on the relative strength
of two effects: first, bailouts allow the bank to continue in state ( G, b); second, bailouts allows the bank to
increase leverage without risking termination in state ( G, g). Bailouts are efficient as in Bianchi (2016) when
the former effect dominates the latter. In this case, bailouts are a form of implicit public outside liquidity,
which remedies the lack of private inside liquidity that banks could rely on to weather liquidity shocks in
state ( G, g).

                                                      17
                                              Fiscal state

                                   1 + λG < β          1 + λB > β

                                          G                    B

                      r = 2: g    bailout, invest            invest
    Liquidity state
                      r = 0: b    bailout, invest       no invest

                                        Pure shadow bank

(b) LOLR

With systematic access to public liquidity, a shadow bank selects to always be an empty
shell: dG = d B = 2. Because it already counted on a bailout in state G, LOLR has an effect
only in the B state. The net social benefit of LOLR is

                          W SBL − W SB = p Bb (b + β − 1) − p B λ B .

                                      G                        B
                                                       LOLR, invest
                          g
                                                           −λ B
                                                       LOLR, invest
                          b
                                                     b + β − (1 + λ B )
                        Shadow bank + LOLR (compared with pure SB)

     The first term corresponds to the net social benefit of investment, b + β − 1 in state
( B, b). The second term is the shadow cost of public funds in state B.


(c) DI

With deposit insurance, the shadow bank (which does not internalize depositor or tax-
payer welfare) sets dG = 2 as earlier, and d B = 2 in the presence of LOLR and d B = 1
without LOLR. In both cases, the net social benefit associated with DI is, per unit of
deposit, θ, minus the deadweight loss associated with the full provision of the deposit
repayment (as the bank always manages to be an empty shell by the time the repayment
to depositors is due), Λ g + Λb = pG λG + p B λ B = λ̄. And so the net benefit of deposit
insurance in the shadow banking sector is

                                 W SBD − W SB = µ(θ − λ̄).

                                                18
                                           G                B

                               g      µ(θ − λG )       µ(θ − λ B )

                               b      µ(θ − λG )       µ(θ − λ B )

                          Shadow bank + DI (compared with pure SB)

   We collect these results in a proposition.

Proposition 1. (optimum in the absence of regulation)
   The optimal arrangement given no regulation (m = 0) features

  (i) LOLR (l = 1) and continuation in all states if and only if

                                                                      pB
                              W SBL > W SB ⇐⇒ b + β − 1 > λ B              ,                 (3)
                                                                      p Bb

      and otherwise no LOLR (l = 0) and continuation in all states except state B when there are
      no revenues at date 1.

 (ii) DI and servicing of special depositors (k = 1) if and only if

                                     W SBD > W SB ⇐⇒ θ > λ̄,                                 (4)

      and otherwise no DI and no servicing of special depositors (k = 0).

There is no direct complementarity between LOLR and DI: The net benefit of LOLR and
DI combined is [W SBL − W SB ] + [W SBD − W SB ]. The conditions (3) and (4) for LOLR and
DI can thus be applied independently. For example, the optimal arrangement features
LOLR and DI if (3) and (4) hold, LOLR but no DI if (3) does but (4) does not, etc. As
we will see, the possibility of regulation creates an indirect complementarity (natural co-
variation) between these two forms of public liquidity support.


3.2   Regulated banking
We now analyze the case of regulated banking where banks are monitored and so bank
leverage is regulated.




                                                19
(a) Pure regulated banking (no insurance services)

A regulated bank is optimally constrained to set dG = 1 so that it continues by itself in
state ( G, g) and is saved by the government in state ( G, b). The bank still sets d B = 1. The
efficiency gains of regulation come from the fact that the deadweight loss associated with
bailouts in state ( G, g) is avoided. The net benefit of regulation in the absence of LOLR or
DI is
                                   W RB − W SB = pGg λG − c.


                                         G                 B
                                     no bailout
                               g
                                        λG
                               b

                               Regulated bank (compared with pure SB)


(b) LOLR

In the shadow banking sector, LOLR generates moral hazard in the form of an increase in
leverage to d B = 2. With regulation, this increase in leverage is prevented and the bank
is constrained to set d B = 1. The efficiency gains of regulation come from the fact that the
deadweight loss associated with LOLR in state ( B, g) is avoided. The net social benefit of
LOLR given regulation is

             W RBL − W RB = [W SBL − W SB ] + p Bg λ B = p Bb [b + β − (1 + λ B )].

                                       G                   B

                           g
                                                     LOLR, invest
                           b
                                                   b + β − (1 + λ B )

                        Regulated bank + LOLR (compared with pure RB)


(c) DI

In the shadow banking deposit insurance is triggered in both states whether or not the
bank has a revenue. With regulation, deposit insurance is triggered only when the bank

                                              20
does not have a revenue. Bank leverage is constrained at dG = d B = 1 − µ so as to be able
to finance one unit of investment and to repay µ special depositors when its revenue are
equal to 2.22


                                               G                 B

                                   g           µθ                µθ

                                   b      µ(θ − λG )        µ(θ − λ B )

                               Regulated bank + DI (compared with pure RB)

The net benefit of deposit insurance given regulation is

                     [W RBD − W RB ] = [W SBD − W SB ] + µΛ g = µ(θ − Λb ).

Proposition 2. (optimum given regulation)
   The optimal arrangement given regulation (m = 1) features

  (i) LOLR (l = 1) and continuation in all states if and only if

                                   W RBL > W RB ⇐⇒ b + β > 1 + λ B ,                                     (5)

      and otherwise no LOLR (l = 0) and continuation in all states except state B when there are
      no revenues at date 1.

  (ii) DI and servicing of special depositors (k = 1) if and only if

                                        W RBD > W RB ⇐⇒ θ > Λb                                           (6)

      and otherwise no DI and no servicing of special depositors (k = 0).

Like under shadow banking, there is no direct complementarity between LOLR and DI.
The conditions (5) and (6) for LOLR and DI can be applied independently. For example,
  22 As long
          R as the banks are all regulated, there are multiple ways of achieving the same DI outcome. For
example µi di = µ is consistent with µi = µ for all i; each bank’s debt is then constrained to not exceed the
free cash flow left once investment and deposits are covered: diω1 ≤ 1 − µ. Alternatively, one can specialize
banks, i.e. allocate all deposits to a fraction µ of them (which then have µi = 1), and require that each of
these banks issue no debt (diω1 = 0), while the non-deposit-taking ones can issue debt (diω1 ≤ 1). These
two options are equivalent if it is optimal to regulate all banks and then our maintained “one-size-fits-all”
treatment makes us choose the former. However, as we will observe in Section 3.5, this treatment is not
warranted if it is optimal to regulate deposit-taking banks but to not to regulate non-deposit-taking banks;
the second option is then uniquely optimal, and we will therefore accommodate it.

                                                     21
the optimal arrangement features LOLR and DI if (5) and (6) hold, LOLR but no DI if (5)
does but (6) does not, etc. But there is an indirect complementarity (natural co-variation)
between these two forms of public liquidity support.


3.3    Complementarity of regulation and public liquidity services
Leveraging the analysis in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we can write down the policy problem as
the maximization of social welfare over all the different possible arrangements:

                                             max W (k, l, m),
                                            {k,l,m}

where

            W (k, l, m) = W SB + [W SBL − W SB ]l + [W SBD − W SB ]k
                            + [W RB − W SB ]m + [(W RBL − W RB ) − (W SBL − W SB )]ml
                            + [(W RBL − W RB ) − (W SBD − W SB )]mk.                                     (7)

   The right-hand side of this expression features both linear terms in l, k, m and quadratic
terms in ml and mk. The following corollary confirms that the coefficients of the quadratic
terms are positive, which indicates complementarities between regulation and public liq-
uidity support: the net benefits of DI and LOLR are greater under regulation than in
the absence of regulation; equivalently, the presence of liquidity support (DI or LOLR)
increase the net benefits of regulation.

Corollary 1. (complementarity) Public insurance services and regulation are complements:

                     W RBL − W RB = W SBL − W SB + p Bg λ B > W SBL − W SB

and
                     W RBD − W RB = W SBD − W SB + µΛ g > W SBD − W SB .

   The complementarity between regulation and LOLR and that between regulation and
DI are the signature of economies of scope in regulation: regulation facilitates both LOLR
and DI.23 This complementarity is at the heart of the quadrilogy: the coexistence of lend-
ing to SMEs, deposit taking DI, regulation, and LOLR.
   Armed with these results, we can now characterize the overall optimal arrangement.
  23 Thisrationale for the co-existence of lending and deposit-taking is distinct from the one articulated by
Kashyap et al. (2002). They also emphasize economies of scope but arising from a different mechanism: the
need for a pool of safe and liquid assets for these two imperfectly correlated activities.

                                                      22
Proposition 3. (traditional banking system)

  (i) Regulation is optimal if and only if the maximization of W (k, l, m) yields m = 1, i.e. iff
      c ≤ c∗ , for some regulation cost threshold c∗ ≥ pGg λG , where pGg λG is the benefit of
      avoided bailouts.

  (ii) A traditional banking system with regulation, LOLR and DI is optimal, while LOLR and
       DI would not be granted to shadow banks if and only if

                                     0 < p Bb [b + β − (1 + λ B )] < p B λ B                              (8)

                                            Λb < θ < λ̄ = Λ g + Λb                                        (9)

                         c ≤ c∗ = pGg λG + p Bb [b + β − (1 + λG )] + µ(θ − Λb ).                        (10)


3.4    Observed heterogeneity and the coexistence of the two sectors
Assume now that banks differ in how hard they are to monitor. It may be that some
activities, such as SME and mortgage lending or plain-vanilla interest-rate and exchange-
rate derivatives, are sufficiently well-understood to be reasonably supervised by the gov-
ernment, while others involve very complex instruments such as bespoke derivatives,
that either are poorly understood by the government or are extremely time-consuming to
monitor and assess. One can imagine that there is a distribution of banks, each associated
with a pattern of banking activities and characterized by its monitoring cost.24 The mon-
itoring cost is c for a fraction α of banks and +∞ for the remaining fraction. The latter
banks are necessarily in the shadow banking sector, while the former have a choice.25 So
this extended version boils down to the previous one for α = 1. A bank’s value of the
monitoring cost is observable by the supervisor.
    The heterogeneity of activities creates the possibility of co-existence of regulated and
shadow banks in equilibrium. Regulated banks may enjoy LOLR and DI, while shadow
banks may enjoy neither LOLR nor DI. And special depositors are serviced by regulated
banks because doing so is more efficient since it economizes on public funds and on the
associated deadweight costs of taxation.
  24 Actually the banks can be ex-ante identical. What matters is that activities differ in their surveillance

cost. One of the strengths of our modeling is that we do not presume that some banks cannot do certain
things.
  25 For example, securitized assets, which are held to a large extent by shadow banks, might be intrinsically

harder to understand and monitor due to their complexity.




                                                     23
Corollary 2. (heterogeneity) Assume that conditions (8) through (10) hold. Then, there are two
sectors in the economy. A fraction α of the banks are regulated and enjoy LOLR and DI (k = l =
m = 1); the remaining fraction 1 − α is in the shadow banking sector and has no public liquidity
support (k = l = m = 0); special depositors are serviced by regulated banks (and all are serviced
if α ≥ µ).


3.5      One-size-fits-all or a menu of options?
The fact that all banks are ex-ante identical suggests that a single option is optimal. This
is so only subject to an extra condition. Intuitively, the allocation of deposits does not
matter, provided that µi ≤ 1 for all i so that a bank with revenue 2 can both cover its
investment and service its depositors if its leverage is low enough (nil if µi = 1), as long
as: (a) all banks are supervised; and (b) DI pricing makes them indifferent to taking more
or less insured deposits (which is always doable). However, when µ < 1, it conceivably
may be desirable to specialize banks and split them into two groups: those which serve
special depositors and are monitored, and those which have no special depositors and are
part of the shadow banking sector.

Proposition 4. ((sub)optimality of menus)

    (i) Suppose that W RB + max{W RBL − W RB , 0} ≥ W SB + max{W SBL − W SB , 0} (monitor-
        ing is optimal even in the absence of special depositors). Then the optimal regulation can be
        implemented through a single, one-size-fits-all contract (with e.g. µi = µ).

    (ii) By contrast, if W RB + max{W RBL − W RB , 0} < W SB + max{W SBL − W SB , 0} (implying
         that monitoring is suboptimal in the absence of special depositors), W RB + max{W RBL −
         W RB , 0} + max{W RBD − W RB , 0} > W SB + max{W SBL − W SB , 0} + max{W SBD −
         W SB , 0} (implying that it is optimal to service all special depositors and that it is more effi-
         cient to do so in the regulated banking sector), and µ < 1 (implying that special depositors
         can be serviced by a fraction of the banks), then the optimal regulation consists in a menu
         of two options (equally attractive to banks): one with deposit insurance in the regulated sec-
         tor (with µi = 1), and one without deposit insurance in the shadow banking sector (with
         µi = 0).


4      Contagion, ring-fencing, and CCPs
So far liquidity shocks were perfectly correlated and so there was no rationale for liq-
uidity pooling and therefore for counterparty risk. In practice, liquidity pooling occurs

                                                     24
through credit default swaps, interest and FX swaps, lines of credit, guarantees, money
market lending, and other varieties of financial instruments. To capture liquidity pooling
and its regulatory consequences, we allow liquidity shocks to be imperfectly correlated.
We assume that banks are able to recognize the patterns of correlation. The regulator can-
not assess the correlation when one of the two counterparties is in the shadow banking
sector: Figuring out the correlation requires at the very least the supervision of both bal-
ance sheets. When both counterparties are regulated, we look at the polar cases in which
the regulator learns (say, through joint stress tests) or does not learn the pattern of correla-
tion of the two institutions. Imperfect regulatory knowledge will create opportunities for
gaming which can be thwarted by structural remedies: ring-fencing the regulated sector
from the shadow banking sector; or setting up a central counterparty clearing house (CCP).
    We start by setting up the model in Section 4.1. We discuss our modeling choices in
Section 4.2. We then analyze optimal liquidity sharing in Section 4.3. In Section 4.4, we
ask when optimal liquidity sharing can be implemented, by examining the opportunities
for regulatory gaming and how this can be contained via ring-fencing and CCPs. Finally,
in Section 4.5, we consider an extension where activities in the regulated and shadow
banking sectors are naturally imperfectly correlated, which creates a cost of liquidity seg-
regation, and work out its implications for the optimal arrangement of liquidity sharing,
public liquidity support, and regulation.


4.1    Setup
Suppose, for expositional simplicity only, that there are no special depositors (µ = 0).
The model is otherwise a generalization of the perfect-correlation model. The fiscal states
G and B are as earlier. The possible realizations of the aggregate liquidity state are now
ω2 ∈ { g, b, m H , m T }. States g and b are as before: all banks receive revenue r g = 2 and
rb = 0, respectively, and so there is no cross-insurance opportunity. By contrast, in states
m H and m T (which are intermediate in terms of total liquidity), half of the banks receive
revenue 2 and the other half receive revenue 0. More precisely, there are two equal-size
“groups” or “types”26 of banks: H (heads) and T (tails). The realization of a coin toss
(heads or tails, equally likely) occurs at the beginning of date 1. In sub-state m H , banks in
group H receive revenue 2, while banks in group T receive no revenue; and conversely in
sub-state m T .
   As earlier, the fiscal state ω1 ∈ { G, B} is verifiable. The liquidity state ω2 is partly
  26 Belonging   to group H or T is the only parameter distinguishing banks at date 0; so we can legitimately
refer to it as the bank’s “type”.



                                                     25
verifiable, in a way that will make the model of Section 3 nested in this one: the verifiable
partition is {{ g, b}, m H , m T }. We assume that, unlike g and b, m H and m T are verifiable
and can be contracted on at date 0. In particular, bankers can write debt contracts promis-
ing repayment diω1 up to limited liability in states ω with ω2 ∈ { g, b} exactly as before,
as well as debt contracts promising repayments diω up to limited liability in states ω with
ω2 ∈ {m H , m T }. Similarly, the government can offer separate LOLR contracts guarantee-
ing reinvestment indistinctly in states ( B, g) and ( B, b) exactly as before, as well in states
( B, m H ) and ( B, m T ).
     At date 0, banks do know which group they, and their potential counterparties belong
to. Counterparties observe each other’s leverage.27 By contrast, and as announced earlier,
we will assume that the regulator never observes the type of a shadow bank; and we will
consider the two polar cases in which the regulator knows or does not know the type of
a supervised bank.
     When pm H = pmT = 0, the model is strictly isomorphic to our baseline model, in which
there is no scope for liquidity sharing. When pm H = pmT > 0, there are opportunities for
liquidity sharing between different types of banks in the “insurance opportunity” states
m H and m T . A transfer from a cash-rich bank to a cash-poor one enables investment
in both, and thereby economizes on public funds that would go to the cash-poor bank
in a bailout (state G) or a LOLR operation (state B). Two banks are said to be “natural
counterparties” if one belongs to group H and the other to group T. They are “correlated-
risk counterparties” if they belong to the same group. The analysis of states g and b is
the same as in Section 3. So the focus of this section will be entirely on the insurance-
opportunity states m H and m T .
     We introduce the following financial contracts. A bank can sign state-contingent
liquidity-sharing contracts at date 0, over and above the debt contracts that we have al-
ready introduced.28 We will focus on contracts in which one bank promises to transfer 1
in state m H and the other in exchange promises to transfer 1 in state m T ;29 we will look at
  27 Ifwe allowed for multiple counterparties (which is not needed here: one counterparty is sufficient to
exhaust insurance opportunities), we would further require that a bank observes the overall date-0 bal-
ance sheet, including other liquidity-sharing contracts, so as to preserve informational symmetry among
counterparties.
  28 The rationale for cross pledging is different from that in Diamond (1984). In that paper, the benefits

come from economies of scope in incentive provision. In our model instead, it is a form of risk sharing
which does not help remedy an internal agency problem. Instead, our focus is on the agency problem of
banks in cahoots to avoid sharing liquidity.
  29 At date 1, the grantee can threaten to take the grantor into a bankruptcy proceeding if the latter does

not abide by its commitment; but if the grantor has no revenue, there is no bankruptcy proceeding (to
ensure that, one may envision a small cost of bankruptcy proceedings). It does not matter whether banks
can observe or not each other’s revenue because they know each other’s type and therefore can infer each
other’s revenue. If a bank with revenue does not honor its due payment as a grantor, then the grantee can


                                                    26
whether such contracts suffice to implement the optimum, and when they do not, at how
centralized liquidity pooling and dispatch enables society to reach this optimum. Such
mutual insurance contracts are best thought of as swaps, transferring mechanically cash
between the two banks in a state-contingent manner.30
   The modified timing is described in Figure 2 (recall that there are no special deposi-
tors), with the novel part highlighted in bold.

             0                                                            1

      (i) Government offers regulatory              (i) State w is realized. If w 2 = mH
          contract.
                                                         banks H (T) receive 2 (0), and
      (ii) Banks either accept                           conversely if w 2 = mT.
            the contract or become                  (ii) Exercise of liquidity-
            pure shadow banks.                            sharing contracts if w 2 = mH or w 2 = mT.
      (iii) Each bank i chooses its                 (iii) Debt repayment.
            leverage if it decides to be
            a pure shadow bank; and abides          (iv) Investment.
            by the regulatory contract otherwise.   (v) Government, if called to the rescue,
      (iv) Banks observe each                           inspects the bank and bails it out
           other’s leverage and type and                (state G) or, if the bank has opted in
                                                         the regulatory contract, honors its LOLR
           can write bilateral
           liquidity sharing                             contract (state B).
           contracts.


                                Figure 2: Timing under bilateral hedging.

    Our contemplated policy interventions will impose constraints on the choice of coun-
terparties in liquidity sharing contracts at stage (iv) of date 0. Ring fencing is the require-
ment that the counterparty of a regulated bank itself be in the regulated sector. A CCP
requirement will refer to a contract on an exchange rather than a bilateral one (see below
for more detail).


4.2    Discussion of modeling choices
(a) Definition of ring fencing
In the public debate, “ring fencing” mostly refers to the insulation of a relatively safe retail
bank performing traditional activities from a riskier and harder-to-monitor investment
bank that is part of the same financial entity. Indeed, the Vickers rule in the UK leaves the
investment bank unregulated and just prevents it from “polluting” the regulated entity.
get the payment in court.
  30 Had we introduced pledgeable income, we could have alternatively interpreted the contracts as mutual

credit lines, which the two parties commit to at date 0 (indeed, the signature of a committed credit line is
that this credit line would not necessarily be granted ex post).



                                                    27
Our insights apply just the same when the unregulated entity is part of the same group
and when it is independent from the retail bank.
(b) One-way hedging contracts
Insurance contracts need not be bilateral; there could be stand-alone contracts, like CDSs,
in which case multiple contracts would be needed so as to achieve the required insurance.
For example, a bank of group H (the grantee) can sign a liquidity-sharing contract with a
counterparty bank of group T (the grantor), whereby the grantor pays 1 to the grantee in
state m T .
(c) Risk profile as a choice
In this version of the model, each bank is exogenously assigned a type (H or T). Alter-
natively, we could have assumed that each bank chooses its risk profile, namely whether
to be an H or a T bank. Anticipating on the results, the logic behind the insight that the
regulated sector must be ringfenced from the shadow sector remains the same under this
moral-hazard version of the model, because the profile choice of a shadow bank reacts to
the possibility of matching with a regulated bank of the same group. The insight about
using CCPs also carries over: Assuming that constituting a portfolio of type H is more
expensive (as expensive, cheaper) than building a portfolio of type T if a majority of (half,
a minority of) banks choose the H option, the equilibrium in which banks divide equally
between the H and T choices is still an equilibrium under ring-fencing and use of a CCP,
while assortative matching still prevails when the regulator is unable to assert the banks’
types even within the regulated sector.
(d) Ring-fencing vs. location of the bailinable debt
Recent reforms aiming at a substantial enlargement of the scope of bailinability (in the
past de facto, although not de jure, circumscribed to equity) to most unsecured bank liabil-
ities stress that the bailinable debt of banks should be held outside of the banking sector.
This location of the bailinable debt differs in spirit from the idea of ring-fencing, and is
more related to the avoidance of double counting (the old concern about “double gear-
ing”): bailouts are not reduced by the bailinability of a bank A liability if it held by bank
B, which due to the loss of money must in turn be bailed in (or reduce credits to SMEs).
The idea therefore is that retail banks’ distress spill over to the shadow banking sector,
while ring-fencing aim at preventing the reverse.
(e) Verifiability of intermediate liquidity state
    We have assumed that liquidity states m H and m T are verifiable and can be contracted
on at date 0. This allows bankers to sign targeted debt and liquidity sharing contracts
for these states. This also allows the government to avoid inefficiently extending LOLR

                                             28
support in these states. Basically, these assumptions decouple private and public liquidity
decisions in the intermediate liquidity states m H and m T from those in states g and b that
we have analyzed in the previous section. They allow enough flexibility to deliver the
efficient pooling of liquidity under adequate regulation and monitoring, as well as the
gaming of bailouts under inadequate regulation and monitoring, which are precisely the
phenomena that we want to analyze in this section.
    Because expositional simplicity requires the basic model to be a special case of this
one, we keep the assumption that liquidity states g and b are contractually indistinguish-
able. However, assuming that only {m H , m T } (and not m H and m T ) is verifiable would
have been equally consistent with this nesting logic. In that alternative formulation, the
liquidity contracts would be based on coarser information and take the form of mutual
credit lines in state {ω1 , ω2 } with ω2 ∈ {m H , m T }, to be reimbursed at the end of date 1
if there is any cash left in the bank then. Anticipating a bit, the same gaming possibility
would arise: when the regulator is unaware of correlations, two correlated-risk counter-
parties could write a “cross-insurance” contract that is not one, and leaves them with
probability 1/2 with no cash in state { G, ω2 } with ω2 ∈ {m H , m T }, triggering a bailout.
This alternative treatment is more intricate, though, which explains our modeling choice.


4.3       Socially optimal liquidity sharing
Consider the liquidity states m H and m T . The socially efficient arrangement consists in:
(a) the sharing of liquidity between two natural counterparties in the two states H and
T; and (b) the absence of leverage in these states: diω m H = diω mT = 0 for ω1 ∈ { G, B}.
                                                         1        1
In state m, each bank ends up with income 1, allowing it to cover its investment need
without any government money. When banks that are natural insurance counterparties
engage in such liquidity sharing, the occurrence of bank distress is minimized, allowing
the government to economize on taxpayer money (leaving scope only for a bailout in
state ( G, b) in the absence of regulation and a possible LOLR rescue in state ( B, b)). Thus,
to reach maximal welfare, the regulator must not only induce banks to join the regulated
sector and perhaps give them access to LOLR, but also ensure that the banks are hedged
through proper risk-transfer schemes. This raises the issue of potential gaming of the
hedging function.31
  31 Itis interesting in this respect to look at the case of pure shadow banks. Pure shadow banks share
liquidity in the bad, but not in the good fiscal state (or equivalently, for the good fiscal state they contract
with a correlated-risk counterparty). This yields

                                   U SB = (1 − p Bb )b + 2pGg + pGm + p Bg



                                                      29
Proposition 5. (optimal risk sharing) Social welfare is maximized by

  (i) in states ω with ω2 ∈ { g, b}: the same allocation (i.e., the same leverage dω1 and the same
      public policy and liquidity assistance {k, l, m}) as when pm H = pmT = 0,

 (ii) in states ω with ω2 ∈ {m H , m T }: setting dω1 m H = dω1 mT = 0 and arranging liquidity-
      sharing contracts among natural counterparties (i.e. matching a type H with a type T).


4.4   When is optimal liquidity sharing implementable?
Let us assume that the implementation of the optimum requires regulation. It may or
may not involve LOLR for states ( B, g) and ( B, b). By contrast, it never involves LOLR
for states ( B, m H ) and ( B, m T ). Recall also that we have assumed away special depositors
for simplicity so that DI is an empty policy.
    In order to implement optimal liquidity sharing, and thereby the full optimum, the
regulator needs to regulate not only leverage but also the existence of liquidity sharing
contracts by mandating that each bank enter a pair of bilateral liquidity sharing arrange-
ments for states ω with ω2 ∈ {m H , m T }. However, this is not enough as banks face
perverse incentives in the choice of their counterparty.


Ring-fencing and within-regulated-sector correlation monitoring

Consider first fiscal state B. In states ( B, m H ) and ( B, m T ), the banks want to be cov-
ered as there will be no bailout and no LOLR. So, for these states, natural counterpar-
ties spontaneously engage in an optimal liquidity-sharing arrangement and specify debt
d Bm H = d BmT = 0.
    More interesting is fiscal state G. Suppose first that the regulator imposes to each
regulated bank to limit its leverage to dGm H = dGmT = 0 and to enter a bilateral liquidity-
sharing arrangement. As long as each bank picks a natural counterparty in the regulated
sector, optimal risk sharing is implemented. But the banks have incentives to game this
requirement and engage in bogus liquidity provision with correlated counterparties (see
below). If the government is not careful along dimensions that we will make clear, banks
will succeed in evading the insurance imperative, thereby preventing the implementation
of the optimum.
and
                              W SB = U SB + (1 − p Bb ) β − pG (1 + λG ).




                                                  30
    Consider first the case where the government does not impose that the counterparties
be in the regulated sector. It is then unable to monitor the correlation of a shadow bank
counterparty with a regulated bank. A regulated bank has an incentive to sign a liquidity-
sharing contract with a correlated-risk counterparty (i.e. of the same type) in the shadow
banking sector for states ( G, m H ) and ( G, m T ). Consider for example the case where the
regulated bank is of type H and picks a counterparty in the shadow banking sector of
type H. The shadow bank increases its leverage to dGm H = 3.32 Their contract specifies a
transfer of 1 to the shadow bank in state m H and to the regulated bank in state m T . The
regulated bank has the “right contract with the wrong bank”.
    In state m H , the regulated bank has revenue 2, does not pay anything to creditors (it is
constrained to dGm H = 0) and pays 1 to the shadow bank which combines this payment
with its revenue of 2 to pay down its debt of 3. This represents liquidity syphoning from
the regulated sector to the shadow banking sector. In state m T , the shadow bank has no
revenue and defaults on the payment of 1 that it must make to the regulated bank; both
banks are then bailed out. This represents bogus liquidity provision by the shadow bank
to the regulated bank. It increases the reliance on bailouts of the regulated bank.33 By
forming such a coalition and engaging in bogus liquidity provision, the banks generate
a joint surplus of pGm H at the taxpayer’s expense which they can split at date 0 through
appropriate transfers between themselves.34 This shows that ring-fencing the regulated
and shadow banking sectors is a necessary condition for the implementation of the opti-
mum.35
    The conclusion is therefore the following:
  32 As  earlier, bailinability of unsecured claims implies that uninsured investors cannot receive more than
there is in cash at the bank.
   33 The model exhibits a form of “liquidity syphoning” in that liquidity flows from the regulated sector to

the shadow banking sector without any flow in the other direction. Liquidity syphoning and bogus liquid-
ity are therefore two sides of the same coin. Our timing does not allow for transfers from the government to
a regulated bank to directly leak to a shadow bank. However, it allows for an indirect form of leaking since
liquidity syphoning and bogus liquidity increase the cost of bailouts in the regulated sector. In this sense,
public liquidity is indirectly syphoned from the regulated sector to the shadow banking sector. Extensions
of the model could capture direct public liquidity syphoning.
   34 The joint surplus is computed in reference to the counterfactual where the two banks are regulated and

engage in contracts with natural counterparties, and where regulated banks are prevented from engaging
in contracts with shadow banks through ring-fencing. Under this counterfactual, the utility of a regulated
bank is equal to that of a shadow bank.
   35 Our purpose here is simply to point at the necessity of ring-fencing, and not to compute the exact

deadweight loss associated with allowing liquidity sharing between regulated and shadow banks. Indeed,
suppose that all banks are regulated; a bank that deviates and becomes a shadow bank can create com-
petition among regulated banks to be its counterparty. Then all the private surplus generated by bogus
liquidity and liquidity syphoning accrues to the shadow bank. And so the reservation utility of all banks if
all banks are to be kept in the regulated sector is higher than when ring-fencing is prohibited. Again we do
not solve for the optimal policy in the absence of ring-fencing.


                                                     31
Proposition 6. (ring-fencing and correlation monitoring)

  (i) In the absence of ring-fencing, regulated banks enter bilateral liquidity-sharing contracts
      with correlated-risk shadow banks, leading to bogus liquidity and liquidity syphoning in
      states ( G, m H ) and ( G, m T ).

  (ii) The optimum can be implemented via bilateral liquidity-sharing contracts between banks if
       (a) both parties to the hedging contract are in the regulated sector, and if (b) the regulator
       is able to monitor their correlation (though joint stress testing, say), so as to check that they
       are natural counterparties.

   This leaves open the question, to which we turn next, of how the optimum can be
implemented when instead the regulator cannot assess correlations even when the two
banks both belong to the regulated sector.


Ring-fencing and absence of correlation monitoring: the role of CCPs.

Consider now the case where the government imposes ring-fencing by stipulating that
regulated banks cannot sign liquidity-sharing contracts with shadow banks, but that it
does not observes type (H or T) even in the regulated sector, and so cannot monitor cor-
relations within the regulated sector.
    Our assumptions that leverage is regulated and that taking money out of the bank for
private purposes would constitute an abuse of corporate assets leave little scope for moral
hazard under regulation in our model. To reintroduce some incentive to game the cross-
insurance mechanism, we assume that excess cash in the bank can be wasted and produce
(arbitrarily small) private benefits for the banker. Namely, assume that bankers at date 1
can consume free cash flow36 and that they value a unit of free cash flow available at the
end of date 1 at ε < 1, where ε can be arbitrarily small, but strictly positive. This relaxes
the extreme assumption in our baseline model that bankers value only continuation but
not cash at date 1 and does not alter our previous analysis.
    A regulated bank then has an incentive to sign a liquidity-sharing contract with a
correlated-risk counterparty in the regulated banking sector in state ( G, m).37 In the ab-
sence of LOLR, the only difference with the case considered above is that the counterparty
  36 At the end of period 1, say, provided that there was no inspection.
  37 This  only proves that the absence of monitoring of such contracts leads to gaming. The regulator might
impose that the same liquidity-sharing contract apply to both { G, m H } and { G, m T } on the one hand and
to { B, m H } and { B, m T } on the other hand so as to impose a cost on such gaming: Choosing a correlated-
risk counterparty then would lead to no investment with probability 1/2 in the latter states. However this
would not discourage correlated-risk counterparties to match as long as p Bm H /pGm H = p BmT /pGmT is not
too large.


                                                    32
cannot increase its leverage because it is regulated. Consider for example the case of a reg-
ulated bank of type H signing a liquidity-sharing contract with a regulated bank of type
H in states ( G, m H ) and ( G, m T ). In state ( G, m H ), each bank has revenue 2; one of them
pays 1 to the other, and is left with 1, which is then used for investment as dGm H is con-
strained to be 0. The other bank has a surplus of 2 after investment. In state ( G, m T ) both
banks default on the payment due to the other because of the absence of revenues (an-
other case of bogus liquidity) and both banks are bailed out. By forming such a coalition
and engaging in bogus liquidity provision, the banks generate a joint surplus of 2pGm H e
at the taxpayer’s expense.38 This shows that under bilateral contracts, monitoring cor-
relations in the regulated sector is a necessary condition for the implementation of the
optimum.
    An alternative arrangement to implement optimal liquidity sharing is to set up a CCP.
Banks in the regulated sector are forced to participate in the CCP and banks in the shadow
banking sector are banned from participating (ring-fencing). More precisely, banks are
forced to enter a bilateral liquidity-sharing contract with the CCP. The CCP centralizes
liquidity sharing. At date 1, member banks are called upon to provide 1. Those which do
not contribute and demand liquidity assistance are audited and receive 1 if they indeed
are missing cash. In equilibrium half of the regulated banks are of type H while the other
half is of type T, so the CCP is indeed able to perform the intermediation. Shadow banks
are banned from signing liquidity-sharing contracts with the CCP and with regulated
banks.
    This arrangement guarantees the efficient distribution of liquidity within the regu-
lated sector and eliminates bogus liquidity by preventing banks from fine-tuning their
liquidity provision at the expense of the taxpayer. The key is that the CCP removes the
counterparty risk that banks are endogenously generating by picking correlated counter-
parties. Should shadow banks be prevented from participating in the CCP by imposing
ring-fencing blocks any syphoning of liquidity to the shadow banking sector and any
bogus liquidity provision by the shadow banking sector? Using the same institutional
arrangement as described above, shadow banks could indeed join the CCP scheme pro-
vided that they can be audited if they refuse to contribute to the CCP. In practice, though,
the inspection might be harder than for a regulated bank, as no data has been accumu-
lated by the regulator about the shadow bank prior to the liquidity sharing event.
   The conclusion is therefore the following:
  38 Asabove, the joint surplus is computed in reference to the counterfactual where the two banks are
regulated and engage in contracts with natural counterparties, and where regulated banks are prevented
from engaging in contracts with shadow banks through ring-fencing.


                                                 33
Proposition 7. (CCPs)

  (i) With ring-fencing but in the absence of correlation monitoring in the regulated sector, reg-
      ulated banks enter bilateral liquidity-sharing contracts with correlated-risk regulated banks
      in which there is bogus liquidity in states ( G, m H ) and ( G, m T ).

 (ii) If correlations within the regulated sector cannot be observed, an alternative implementation
      can be used to reach the optimum: mandating participation in a CCP in the regulated sector.


4.5   Observed heterogeneity and coexistence of the two sectors
The arguments above apply in a model where a representative fraction 1 − α of banks
have a monitoring cost equal to ∞. Banks with infinite monitoring cost operate in the
shadow banking sector.
    We continue to denote by (m, l ) the configuration applying to banks with finite mon-
itoring cost c. Under the same assumptions as above, the optimal arrangement has the
following features: banks with finite monitoring costs are monitored in the regulated sec-
tor, benefit from LOLR, and pool their liquidity among natural insurance counterparties
in aggregate states ω with ω2 ∈ {m H , m T }; and banks with infinite monitoring costs
are not monitored in the shadow banking sector, do not benefit from LOLR, and pool
their liquidity among natural insurance counterparties only in aggregate state ( B, m H )
and ( B, m T ).
    As in Proposition 6, the underlying liquidity arrangement can be implemented by
mandating regulated banks to enter bilateral liquidity-sharing contracts between natural
counterparties within the regulated sector. This requires both ring-fencing and either the
monitoring of correlations or the use of CCPs within the regulated sector.


4.6   Shadow banking as diversification and the costs of liquidity segre-
      gation
As in Section 3.4, one can imagine that banks are heterogeneous in their activities and so
logically are not subject to exactly the same shocks. Heterogeneous activities also can help
justify the existence of a shadow banking sector, which so far was a pure nuisance for the
social planner (shadow banking defined the banks’ reservation values and augmented
their rents). In this case, shadow banking is socially useful, but is still a constraint on
what the regulator can achieve. Ring-fencing on the other hand limits liquidity pooling
and so therefore now comes with a meaningful tradeoff.


                                               34
    We accordingly modify the setup to point out a potential cost of segregating liquidity
across sectors. Consider the model with a fraction 1 − α of banks with an infinite regu-
lation cost. The government knows at date 0 who are these natural shadow banks. We
modify the stochastic structure of the economy, only in liquidity state m. We assume that
the ex-ante type of a bank is perfectly correlated with its monitoring cost.39
    This means that there is no scope for liquidity sharing in state m neither within the
regulated sector nor within the shadow banking sector. Liquidity sharing can only be im-
plemented across the regulated and shadow banking sectors via cross exposures. When
α < 1/2, banks with finite monitoring costs are on the short side of the liquidity mar-
ket. In this case, there is no change in the outside option of operating in the shadow
banking sector. Mandating liquidity sharing for regulated banks via bilateral liquidity
sharing with shadow banks increases welfare by reducing the fiscal cost of bailouts in
both sectors.40 When α > 1/2, there is a tradeoff: Mandating liquidity sharing via bi-
lateral liquidity-sharing contracts (with potential ex-ante transfers) across sectors reduces
welfare by increasing the outside option of operating in the shadow banking sector on the
one hand, but increases welfare by reducing the fiscal cost of bailouts in both sectors.41


5    Relationship to the literature
There are widely different views, both among economists and in the policy debate, about
the social merits of shadow banking. The most positive view states that regulatory con-
straints stifle innovation, limit lending and distort markets; shadow banking then offers
some breathing room and undoes a state failure. See for example Ordoñez (2018) for an
elaboration of this point in a model where banks are asymmetrically informed about their
investment opportunities, and where migration into the shadow banking sector provides
a way for the banks with the best opportunities to pursue them by avoiding blunt regu-
lation.42
  39 Implicitly, this assumption de facto ensures that banks with low monitoring costs can operate both in

the regulated and in the shadow banking sectors while banks with high monitoring costs can only operate
(at finite cost) in the shadow banking sector.
  40 Note that this requires checking that shadow banks do not grant multiple credit lines, which might be

challenging in practice given that the balance sheets of shadow banks are not regulated.
  41 The government can always adjust transfers to implement the equilibrium where banks with a finite

regulation cost do not migrate to the shadow banking sector. To go beyond implementation and guarantee
unique implementation, the government may need to allow transfers to depend on the mass of banks in
the shadow banking sector.
  42 Feve et al. (2019) provide some evidence of such migration in response to higher capital requirements.

See also Buchak et al. (2018) who study the rise of fintech and non-fintech shadow banks in the residential
lending market and find that financial technology innovation can account for about 35% of shadow bank



                                                    35
    Different strands of the academic literature articulate a more negative view. One
branch of the literature stresses regulatory arbitrage: Shadow banking is then a (perhaps
unavoidable) nuisance. The regulatory arbitrage view includes two possible subviews.
In the first, retail banks evade capital requirements by providing liquidity support off-
balance-sheet to shadow banks; Acharya et al (2013) find evidence that such regulatory
arbitrage was a key motive behind setting up ABCP conduits, as losses from conduits re-
mained with retail banks43 . The underpricing of this absence of effective risk transfer was
corrected by Basel 3, which put the corresponding exposures back on the retail bank’s bal-
ance sheet. The second subview, spelled out for example in Acharya-Richardson (2009)
and Claessens et al. (2012), involves capital requirement “evasion” by shadow banks,
which face no capital adequacy requirement and yet receive public assistance. Shadow
banks cut regulatory corners and have their cake and eat it too: They are free of con-
straints in normal times, and are bailed out if tail risk materializes.44 Perhaps consistent
with this view, Buchak et al. (2018) also finds that the migration to shadow banking in-
duced by the increasing regulatory burden faced by traditional banks account for 55% of
shadow bank growth over the same period.
    Another branch of the literature stresses behavioral factors: Shadow banks exploit
neglected risk. Gennaioli et al (2012, 2013, 2015) assume that investors overweigh a fa-
vorable scenario upon good news and similarly overreact when bad news occur. Shadow
intermediaries create false substitutes for truly safe bonds. Financial crises can be trig-
gered by the repricing of risk following the sudden realization of the true risks embedded
in these pseudo-safe assets. In Farhi-Tirole (2020), shadow banks can create relatively (but
not entirely) safe assets via financial engineering to attract special depositors but without
exploiting the behavioral biases of the latter.
    Finally, a last branch of the literature emphasizes comparative advantage.45 For ex-
ample, in Hanson et al (2015), households are willing to pay a premium for safe assets, as
in Stein (2012).46 Safe assets can be created in two ways; in the regulated sector through
deposit insurance offered by the state in exchange of costly capital requirements; by an
growth over the period 2007-2015.
   43 See also Gorton-Metrick (2010) and Pozsar et al (2013).
   44 In the context of these two subviews, Farhi-Tirole (2012, 2018) and Di-Iasio-Pierobon (2012) emphasize

strategic complementarities in regulatory arbitrage arising from a security in numbers due to the fact that
bailouts are imperfectly targeted.
   45 See e.g. Perotti (2014) for an early policy discussion.
   46 The demand for safe assets also figures prominently in Diamond (2019)’s theory of segmentation. In

Diamond, firms tranche their liabilities so as to create relatively safe assets (debt), which are then held
by banks. Banks transform these assets into really safe assets (deposits) through an equity add-on. In our
model, only the state can create safe assets, but it finds it cheaper to do so if banks themselves hold relatively
safe assets. The state then optimally piggybacks on the banks’ balance sheets to do so.


                                                       36
early exit option and the costly liquidation of assets in the shadow sector. In equilibrium,
shadow banks therefore hold relatively liquid assets. The paper does not analyze optimal
regulation, but identifies an externality in the unregulated sector, due to fire sales. This ex-
ternality creates a tendency for the shadow banking sector to be too large compared to the
regulated sector. Chrétien-Lyonnet (2019) pursue this logic by assuming that rather than
outside investors, it is banks in the regulated sector that purchase the assets that are liq-
uidated by shadow banks, and that they do so using cheap insured deposits. They study
the resulting interactions between the two sectors. Relatedly, Gertler et al. (2016) build
a model in which wholesale shadow banks borrow from regulated retail banks which in
turn raise deposits from households. In their model, the relative size of the two sectors is
determined by a tradeoff between assumed comparative advantages of wholesale banks
in managing assets and of retail banks in overcoming agency frictions in fund borrowing.
In a different vein, Moreira-Savov (2017) emphasize the coexistence of money (securiti-
zation products that are safe and liquid all the time) and shadow money (securitization
products that are safe and liquid most of the time). In their model, compared to money,
shadow money economizes on collateral but is more fragile. Periods of low uncertainty
are associated with expansions in shadow money and economic booms, which come to
an end when uncertainty increases, shadow money collapses, and the economy tanks.
    Our model incorporates elements of these different branches of the literature. At its
core is a problem of regulatory arbitrage, along the lines of the two corresponding sub-
views mentioned above: Shadow banks avoid the capital requirements of the regulated
sector and yet receive some public support in the form of bailouts; banks in the regu-
lated sector must also be prevented by regulation from extending liquidity support to
shadow banks. An extension of our model (see Sections 3 and 4) also incorporates a no-
tion of comparative advantage: Some activities are simply too costly to regulate, perhaps
because they are too complex, and so they are better performed by the shadow banking
sector. Moreover, to the extent that the risks of the shadow banking sector are not per-
fectly correlated to those of the regulated sector, allowing for the two sectors not only to
co-exist, but also to share some risks, is desirable (see Section 4).
    Few papers study optimal regulation in the presence of a shadow banking sector.
Beguenau-Landvoigt (2018) solve for optimal capital requirements in a quantitative model
where banks can migrate to the shadow banking sector in the presence of exogenous
bailouts occurring with a higher probability in the regulated sector than in the shadow
banking sector. The idea that regulation must account for the possibility of migration of
banking activities can be found in earlier papers.47 For example, Grochulski-Zhang (2014)
  47 See   e.g. Hanson et al. (2011) for an early policy discussion.


                                                        37
analyze a model à la Diamond-Dybvig (1983), where regulation is motivated by a pecu-
niary externality arising from the possibility of private re-trades among banks as in Farhi
et al. (2009), and introduce shadow banking as a nuisance in the form of a participation
constraint which limits the scope of regulation. Similarly, Plantin (2015) sets up a model
where a bank engages in excessive risk-taking and evades regulatory risk-monitoring
through securitization and the granting of lines of credit to the resulting conduits. In his
regulatory-evasion model, shadow banking is therefore a nuisance, and he shows that
tightening capital requirements may spur a surge in shadow banking activity and reduce
welfare. Harris et al. (2014) emphasize a different perverse effect of tighter regulation,
namely that increased capital requirements can actually induce risk shifting in the regu-
lated banking sector because of bailouts and because the competition of shadow banks is
more intense for safe positive net-present-value projects than for risky negative-present
value projects. In a different vein, Bengui-Bianchi (2014) analyze the optimal design of
capital controls in a small open economy with pecuniary externalities when some pos-
sibility of evasion exists. In their model, tighter capital controls curb risk-taking in the
regulated sector, increase it in the unregulated sector, and are overall desirable.
    Elements of the quadrilogy are embodied in general equilibrium models, such as Be-
genau (2019)’s calibrated estimation of the optimal capital adequacy requirement. In the
latter, banks issue risk-free deposits, supply credit and engage in risk-taking.48 Her main
point is that stricter capital requirements may increase the supply of credit: while the di-
rect, partial equilibrium effect is a reduction in credit, an increase in capital requirement
reduces deposits and, through a substitution effect, the cost of unsecured borrowing (la-
belled “equity” in her framework), raising the possibility of a credit expansion.
    Our theory is unique in explaining the complementarities between regulation, LOLR,
and DI, and in showing how the optimal deployment of these attributes endogenously
gives rise to a regulated banking sector associated with the aforementioned attributes
and a shadow banking sector devoid of them. Relative to the existing literature, our pa-
per also makes forays into two new areas: the complementarity between the four classic
markers of traditional banking, and the use of ring-fencing and CCPs, adding two fur-
ther markers. Finally, our paper emphasizes and distinguishes between bank bailouts
and investor bailouts.
  48 Government  subsidies are modeled in a reduced-form fashion as transfers that increase in the size,
leverage and losses of the banking sector.




                                                  38
6      Conclusion
We studied the optimal regulation of banks when supervision reduces moral hazard and
the riskiness of balance sheets and financial intermediaries can migrate to shadow bank-
ing in response to regulatory requirements. We did not posit that shadow or retail banks
had a comparative advantage, and rather derived differences in their behavior from equi-
librium considerations.
    Our main insight is the complementarity between regulation and the forms of insur-
ance provided by the state: LOLR to banks and deposit insurance to depositors. Insurance
is costly and supervision helps reduce the risk that its promises are called upon. Our anal-
ysis makes room for both bank and depositor implicit and explicit guarantees. Second,
we provide the first formal rationale for ring-fencing and for incentivizing the migration
of transactions towards CCPs. To this purpose, we showed how imperfect regulatory in-
formation may lead to gaming of hedging among financial intermediaries, resulting in
banks being only partially covered as they hoard bogus liquidity and in public liquidity
being syphoned off to the shadow sector. Overall the picture emerging from the analysis
is an hexalogy: prudential supervision of banking goes hand in hand with servicing spe-
cial borrowers (SMEs) and special lenders (retail depositors), LOLR, deposit insurance,
incentivized migration to CCPs and ring-fencing.49
    There are many alleys for future research. For example, our model has logically led
to a focus on public supervision as the externalities were on public finances. In practice,
monitoring is performed both by the public sector (banking supervision) and by the pri-
vate sector (holders of shares and other bailinable securities, rating agencies), and in both
cases it is potentially subject to moral hazard and capture. So it may be useful to look at
the respective stakes, and to derive the optimal pattern of monitoring in richer environ-
ments. In our core model in Section 3, there are no private incentives to monitor because
there is no way for banks to dilute creditors. A previous version of this paper considered
a different model with moral hazard in the choice of riskiness of bank projects as opposed
to moral hazard in leverage. We showed that there were private incentives to monitor, but
that private monitoring incentives were likely weaker than public monitoring incentives
because of fiscal externalities.
    Another issue relates to universal banks and the choice between regulating institutions
vs. regulating activities. We have not analyzed the question of banks involved in different
    49 These
           insights are likely to apply more broadly to systemically important functions such as payment
systems, market making, etc. In particular, the payment system is based on trust that itself relies on the
existence of relatively safe claims, obtained either from collateral-taking or from the government’s presence
as a regulator and lender of last resort.


                                                     39
activities, some traditionally thought of as belonging to the regulated sector and some
traditionally thought of as belonging to the shadow banking sector. Our model suggests
an argument for regulating institutions rather than activities to the extent that liquidity
can be reallocated more easily inside universal banks than through arms-length financial
transactions. Opening-up the black box of financial institutions and tackling the question
of firm boundaries is an important area where future research will be needed.50
    Needless to say, the sharp picture obtained in the paper is only meant to stress natural
covariations. Reality as always is more complex than the model suggests. The unique
features associated with the traditional banking sector themselves impose costs, leading
to a finer overall picture. We hope that future work will sharpen this analysis.




  50 First attempts at studying the costs and benefits of separation of traditional lending and investment

banking and therefore the merits of universal banking are provided by Shy and Stenbacka (2017) and Vick-
ers (2017).


                                                   40
References
Acharya, V., and M. Richardson, eds., (2009) Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a
  Failed System, John Wiley and Sons.
Acharya, V., Schnabl, P., and G. Suarez (2013) “Securitization without Risk Transfer,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 107(3): 515–536.
Beguenau, J., and T. Landvoigt (2018) “Financial Regulation in a Quantitative Model of
   the Modern Banking System,” Working Paper 3558, Stanford Graduate School of Busi-
   ness.
Beguenau, J. (2019) “Capital Requirements, Risk Choice, and Liquidity Provision in a
   Business-Cycle Model,” forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
Bengui, J., and J. Bianchi (2014) “Capital Flow Management when Capital Controls Leak,”
   Minneapolis Fed Working Paper.
Berg, T., and J. Gider (2017) “What Explains the Difference in Leverage between Banks
   and Non-Banks?” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52(6): 2677–2702
Bernheim, D. Peleg, B. and M. Whinston (1987) “Coalition-Proof Nash Equilibria I. Con-
   cepts,” Journal of Economic Theory, 42(1): 1–12.
Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., and A. Seru (2018) “Fintech, Regulatory Arbitrage,
   and the Rise of Shadow Banks,” Journal of Financial Economics, 130(3): 453-483.
Caballero, R.J., and E. Farhi (2018) “The Safety Trap,” Review of Economic Studies, 85: 223-
   274.
Chrétien, E., and V. Lyonnet (2019) “Traditional and Shadow Banks,” Working Paper
   2019-11, Fisher College of Business.
Claessens, S., Z. Pozsar, L. Ratnovski and M. Singh (2012) “Shadow Banking: Economics
   and Policy,” IMF Staff Discussion Note, 12/12,
   http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2187661.
Di Iasio, G., and F. Pierobon (2012) “Shadow Banking, Sovereign Risk and Collective
   Moral Hazard,” http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2060839.
Diamond, D. W., and P.H. Dybvig (1983) “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 91(3): 401–419.
Diamond, D. W. (1984) “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 51(3): 393–414.
Diamond, W. (2019) “Safety Transformation and the Structure of the Financial System,”
   Research Papers Series, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Farhi, E., Golosov, M., and A. Tsyvinski (2009) “A Theory of Liquidity and Regulation of
   Financial Intermediation,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 973–992.
Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2012) “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and Systemic
   Bailouts,” American Economic Review, 102(1): 60–93.
Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2018) “Deadly Embrace: Sovereign and Financial Balance Sheets
   Doom Loops,” Review of Economic Studies, 85(3): 1781–1823.

                                            41
Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2020) “Clientele-Dependent Asset Pricing,” forthcoming mimeo.
Feve, P., Moura, A., and O. Pierrard (2019) “Financial Regulation and Shadow Bank-
   ing: A Small-Scale DSGE Perspective,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 101:
   130–144.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (2012) “Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation,
  and Financial Fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3): 452–68.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (2013) “A Model of Shadow Banking,” The
  Journal of Finance, 68: 1331–1363.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (2015) “Neglected Risks: The Psychology of
  Financial Crises,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 105(5): 310–314.
Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N and A. Prestipino (2016) “Wholesale Banking and Bank Runs in
   Macroeconomic Modelling of Financial Crises,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited
   by John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, 2: 1345–1425, chapter 16.
Gorton, G., and A. Metrick (2010) “Regulating the Shadow Banking System,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 41: 261–312.
Grochulski, B., and Zhang, Y. (2015) “Optimal Liquidity Regulation with Shadow Bank-
   ing,” FRB Richmond Working Paper No. 15-12,
    http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2673540.
Hanson, S., Kashyap, A.K., and J. Stein (2011) “A Macroprudential Approach to Financial
  Regulation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 3–28.
Hanson, S., Shleifer, A., Stein, J. and R. Vishny (2015) “Banks as Patient Fixed-Income
  Investors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 117: 449–469.
Harris, M., Opp, C. and M. Opp (2014) “Higher Capital Requirements, Safer Banks?
  Macroprudential Regulation in a Competitive Financial System,” Wharton Working
  Paper (revised 2017).
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (1997) “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds and the
  Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 663–691.
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (1998) “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 106(1): 1–40.
Jin, X., and F. Nadal de Simone (2016) “Tracking Changes on the Intensity of Financial
    Sector?s Systemic Risk,” BCL WP 102.
Kashyap, A.K., Rajan, R., and J.C. Stein (2002) “Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Expla-
   nation for the Coexistence of Lending and Deposit-Taking,” Journal of Finance, 57(1):
   33–73.
Moreira, A., and A. Savov (2017) “The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking,” Journal of
  Finance, 72(6): 2381–2432.
Ordoñez, G. (2018) “Sustainable Shadow Banking,” AEJ: Macroeconomics, 10(1): 33–56.
Peltzman, S. (1989) “The Economic Theory of Regulation after a Decade of Deregulation,”
   Brookings Papers: Microeconomics, 1989: 1–59.


                                           42
Perotti, E. (2014) “The Roots of Shadow Banking,” in Claessens, Stijn et al. (eds), Shadow
   Banking, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago International Banking Series.
Plantin, G. (2015) “Shadow Banking and Bank Capital Regulation,” Review of Financial
   Studies, 28(1): 146–175.
Pozsar, Z., T. Adrian, A. Ashcraft and H. Boesky (2013) “Shadow Banking,” Economic
   Policy Review, 19(2): 1–16.
Shin, H. (2012) “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium,” IMF Economic Review, 60:
   155–192.
Shy, O., and R. Stenbacka (2017) “Ring-Fencing, Lending Competition, and Taxpayer Ex-
   posure,” available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2874316 or
   http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2874316.
Stein, J. (2012) “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 127: 57–95.
Vickers, J. (2017) “Economics of Structural Reform of Banks,” Thys Visser Lecture 3.
Yorulmazer, T. (2013) “Has Financial Innovation Made the World Riskier? CDS, Regula-
   tory Arbitrage and Systemic Risk,” discussion paper.




                                           43
