                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                RELIGIOUS COMPETITION AND REALLOCATION:
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF SECULARIZATION IN THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION

                                         Davide Cantoni
                                        Jeremiah Dittmar
                                        Noam Yuchtman

                                       Working Paper 23934
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23934


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2017




 Helpful and much appreciated suggestions, critiques and encouragement were provided by
 Ernesto Dal Bo, Matt Notowidigdo, Yona Rubinstein, Jan Luiten van Zanden, Hans-Joachim
 Voth, and seminar participants at Bonn, Harvard, LSE, NYU Stern, UC Davis, Utrecht, the AEA
 meetings, the DAE meeting at the NBER Summer Institute, the RES meeting, the University of
 California GEM-BPP Research Workshop, the University of Munich Conference on the Long
 Shadow of History, and the World Economic History Congress. Excellent research assistance was
 provided by Julia Bewerunge, Tillmann von Carnap, Florian Dobler, Nikolaus Drax, Russell
 Gasdia, Max Hofl, Selina Hofstetter, Carolin Maier, Matthias Mall, Daniela Miehling, and
 Skipper Seabold. Cantoni acknowledges research support from the Marie Curie Career
 Integration Grant. Dittmar acknowledges research support from the European Research Council.
 The authors have no conflict of interest, financial or otherwise, related to this study. The views
 expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2017 by Davide Cantoni, Jeremiah Dittmar, and Noam Yuchtman. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
 provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Religious Competition and Reallocation: The Political Economy of Secularization in the Protestant
Reformation
Davide Cantoni, Jeremiah Dittmar, and Noam Yuchtman
NBER Working Paper No. 23934
October 2017
JEL No. E02,J24,N13,N33

                                           ABSTRACT

Using novel microdata, we document an unintended, first-order consequence of the Protestant
Reformation: a massive reallocation of resources from religious to secular purposes. To understand
this process, we propose a conceptual framework in which the introduction of religious competition
shifts political markets where religious authorities provide legitimacy to rulers in exchange for
control over resources. Consistent with our framework, religious competition changed the balance
of power between secular and religious elites: secular authorities acquired enormous amounts of
wealth from monasteries closed during the Reformation, particularly in Protestant regions. This
transfer of resources had important consequences. First, it shifted the allocation of upper-tail
human capital. Graduates of Protestant universities increasingly took secular, especially
administrative, occupations. Protestant university students increasingly studied secular subjects,
especially degrees that prepared students for public sector jobs, rather than church sector-specific
theology. Second, it affected the sectoral composition of fixed investment. Particularly in
Protestant regions, new construction shifted from religious toward secular purposes, especially the
building of palaces and administrative buildings, which reflected the increased wealth and power of
secular lords. Reallocation was not driven by preexisting economic or cultural differences. Our
findings indicate that the Reformation played an important causal role in the secularization of the
West.

Davide Cantoni                                        Noam Yuchtman
Seminar für Wirtschaftsgeschichte                     Haas School of Business
University of Munich                                  University of California, Berkeley
80539 Munich                                          Berkeley, CA 94720
Germany                                               and NBER
Davide.Cantoni@econ.lmu.de                            yuchtman@haas.berkeley.edu

Jeremiah Dittmar
Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
dittmar.academic@gmail.com
1     Introduction
How does religious competition influence the allocation of resources between religious and secu-
lar uses? In this paper, we study the paradigmatic case of the Protestant Reformation: the moment
when the most powerful institution in Western Europe—the Catholic Church—experienced a pro-
found competitive shock. We document how the introduction of religious competition during the
Reformation transformed the European economy, sharply shifting the allocation of resources from
religious to secular uses. We argue that the interaction between religious competition and politics
was critical to this process.
     Prior research on religious competition focuses on the relationship between producers and con-
sumers of religion in a market for salvation (Iannaccone, 1998; Ekelund et al., 2006; Iyer, 2016). We
argue that the introduction of religious competition crucially affects a second market—in which
state authorities secure political legitimacy from religious elites (Rubin, 2017). Introducing this
missing market generates novel hypotheses. First, competition should induce resource realloca-
tion away from the church sector and towards secular uses. Second, competition should drive
resource reallocation towards uses specifically favored by secular rulers. We examine rich mi-
crodata on the allocation of resources in early modern Germany, and find evidence supporting
both hypotheses.1 While the Reformation was a religious movement, we find that its unintended
consequence was to promote economic secularization: a significant shift in the balance of power
toward secular authorities, and a sharp and immediate reallocation of resources toward secular
purposes.
     We present a conceptual framework that captures a core feature of religion in history: the
role of religion in legitimizing political elites (Weber, 1978; North et al., 2009). Within our frame-
work, the pre-Reformation era can be understood as an equilibrium in which a monopolist reli-
gious producer (the Catholic Church) provided political legitimacy to secular authorities at a high
price—charged in the form of control over resources, tax exemptions, and some degree of political
power.2 The Reformation represented a competitive shock in the market for salvation, as stud-
ied by Ekelund et al. (2006): Protestant reformers offered a popular, lower-cost alternative to the
Catholic Church. Crucially, this shock to the market for salvation also impacted the market for
political legitimacy. During the Reformation, the value of Catholic legitimacy fell and the bar-
gaining power of secular rulers vis-à-vis religious elites rose. Protestant reformers’ need to strike a
bargain with secular lords meant that they would accept a lower price in exchange for conferring
legitimacy. Where Protestants were willing to grant secular authorities extensive control of church
resources, the need to maintain doctrinal consistency restricted the bargains Catholics could offer.
     The posited new equilibrium in the market for legitimacy has implications for the allocation of
    1 Weuse “Germany” as a short-hand to refer to the German-speaking lands of the Holy Roman Empire.
    2 Evenbefore the Reformation, rulers in early modern Europe were arguably less reliant on political legitimation by
religious authorities than rulers in, for example, the Islamic world or in earlier periods in Europe history (Rubin, 2017).
We discuss the pre-Reformation equilibrium in the market for legitimacy in further detail below.


                                                            1
resources between secular and religious uses. Increased labor demand by enriched and empow-
ered rulers, and the decline in clerical services required for salvation in Protestant theology, will
reduce church-sector labor demand relative to the secular sector. As a consequence, returns to in-
vestments in human capital specific to church careers will fall and forward-looking students will
shift their human capital investments accordingly. Shifts in resources toward secular authorities
will also be reflected in fixed investments, such as large scale urban construction, which embody a
full set of factors of production. The new equilibrium will also have implications for the allocation
of resources within the secular sector: specifically, resources will shift toward uses that reflect the
enhanced bargaining power of secular rulers.
    We begin to evaluate these hypotheses by documenting the new equilibrium in the market for
political legitimacy in the years after 1517, when Martin Luther posted his famous 95 Theses. As
indicators of the shifting bargain between secular and religious authorities, we examine the expro-
priation of monasteries and wealth transfers from the Catholic Church to secular lords. Qualita-
tive and quantitative evidence show sharp reallocations toward secular control of resources—not
just a transfer from Catholic church uses to Protestant ones. Transfers of resources from the con-
trol of church elites to secular lords occurred in both Catholic and Protestant territories, but were
particularly pronounced in the latter.
    We then directly test the implications of our framework for resource allocation using rich mi-
crodata. We assemble new, highly disaggregated data on the degrees received by, and occupa-
tional outcomes of, German university graduates, and on construction events at the town-by-year
level, across over 2,000 German towns. We distinguish between religious and secular human capi-
tal investments, occupations, and fixed capital investments. Specifically, we assign to the religious
sector the study of theology; taking a position as a monk, priest, etc.; and the construction of a
church. We assign to the secular sector, non-theological degrees; occupations in public adminis-
tration and the private sector; and the construction of a palace, hospital, or merchant hall.3 Our
data also allow us to test for shifts within the secular sector between uses favored by state author-
ities and other private uses.
    To study the market for highly skilled labor, we examine individual-level data on the ca-
reer choices of university graduates before and during the Reformation.4 We show that during
the Reformation, graduates from Protestant universities shifted toward secular occupations, and
away from religious ones (e.g., becoming city councillors or guild masters, rather than priests or
monks).5 We find no pre-Reformation differences in occupational choice trends between univer-
   3 Our  classification of religious and secular sectors of the economy includes some areas of ambiguity: for example,
hospitals were funded and staffed by both religious and secular agents. We discuss the implications of such ambiguity
further below.
   4 The important roles played by human capital elites in European history have been explored by Mokyr (2009);

Cantoni and Yuchtman (2014); Squicciarini and Voigtländer (2015); Dittmar and Meisenzahl (2016). We build on their
work by discussing a specific source of variation in university students’ selection into fields of study and careers.
   5 Particularly in light of Protestant attacks on Catholic Church corruption, this result calls to mind of work by Mur-

phy et al. (1991), who study the allocation of talent between a rent-seeking and productive sector. We focus here on


                                                           2
sities that would become Protestant and those that would remain Catholic. Our results reflect the
transmission of the shock to the market for religion into causal effects on the labor market.6 Re-
flecting the new political economy equilibrium, we specifically find an increase in administrative
jobs among graduates from Protestant universities.
    A second implication of the new equilibrium is the allocation of forward-looking students’
human capital investments away from church-specific degrees, toward secular ones. Indeed, we
find that immediately after the start of the Reformation, individuals at Protestant universities
reallocated their human capital investments away from theology degrees, and toward the study
of more general, secular subjects.7 The data are consistent with the Reformation playing a causal
role in driving educational choices: we do not observe pre-Reformation declines in the study
of theology or pre-Reformation differences in degrees granted between universities that would
become Protestant and those that would remain Catholic. We additionally find significant shifts
towards degrees in law and arts, subjects that differentially prepared students for careers in public
administration.
    We finally consider a third measure of resource allocation: major construction events as sum-
mary statistics for the allocation of bundles of resources, embodying land, physical, financial, and
human capital. During the Reformation new construction events shifted from religious purposes
toward secular ones (e.g., from churches to administrative buildings and lords’ palaces). Figure 1,
panel A, shows a striking pivot from church sector construction to secular sector construction pre-
cisely at the time of the Reformation. This sectoral reallocation away from church uses occurred
differentially more in Protestant territories, as we document below. Again, the evidence is consis-
tent with the Reformation playing a causal role: we find no evidence of a pre-Reformation shift
toward secular construction, or of differential pre-Reformation trends in construction between
Catholic and Protestant territories. Consistent with our conceptual framework, Figure 1, panel B,
shows that within the category of secular construction, there was a sharp pivot precisely toward
the uses favored by empowered secular lords: the construction of palaces and administrative
buildings.
    The disaggregated nature of our construction data allows us to test an additional hypothesis:
to the extent that the resource reallocation we observe was ultimately driven by religious compe-
tition, one would expect to observe larger differences in construction between Protestant regions
and Catholic regions far from Protestant lands—the latter being exposed to less religious compe-
tition than Catholic lands on a Protestant border (Ekelund et al., 2006 emphasize the importance
of such spatial variation in religious competition). Indeed, we find a larger shift toward secular
documenting the reallocation of resources across sectors, leaving the study of efficiency or productivity consequences
to future work.
    6 Note that the causal effect of the Reformation on occupational choice reflects both changes in labor supply and

changes in labor demand.
    7 See Altonji et al. (2012) for a contemporary analysis of how students’ college major choices are affected by expecta-

tions of future labor market outcomes.



                                                            3
                                                  A. Secular and Church Construction                           B. Secular Construction by Type
                                    2000                                                          700
   Cumulative Construction Starts




                                    1500                                                          525




                                    1000                                                          350




                                    500                                                           175




                                      0                                                            0
                                           1475     1500    1525     1550     1575     1600             1475   1500    1525        1550   1575        1600

                                                                    Secular                                       Administrative           Palaces
                                                                    Church                                        Economic                 Military
                                                                                                                  Welfare                  Other


                                                  Figure 1: Construction Activity Around the Time of the Reformation
Cumulative construction events by sector and sub-sector, over time. Left-hand panel shows the cumulative number of
new construction events in the religious and secular sectors in Germany. Right-hand panel disaggregates the secular
sector construction events into mutually exclusive and exhaustive sub-sectors. The “Administrative” sub-sector in-
cludes courts, town halls, and customs houses. The “Economic” sub-sector comprises private sector construction, such
as mills, restaurants, and breweries. The “Welfare” sub-sector includes schools and hospitals. The “Palaces” sub-sector
includes castles and hunting lodges. The “Military” sub-sector includes barracks and arsenals. Town-level construction
data come from the Deutsches Städtebuch and are aggregated for all of Germany. Vertical line marks 1517, when Martin
Luther circulated his 95 Theses.




                                                                                              4
construction in comparing Protestant regions to Catholic regions far from a Protestant border than
in a comparison with Catholic regions close to a Protestant border.
    Our construction data also allow us to rule out competing explanations for our findings. One
alternative to our proposed political economy mechanism is that what appears to be secularization
is a mere relabeling of activities that were simply transferred from Catholic Church jurisdiction to
Protestant secular lords. For example, historical construction supporting social service provision is
difficult to assign definitively to the religious or secular sectors. However, when we disaggregate
secular construction into finer categories, we do not observe a shift in construction for potentially
ambiguous social service provision during the Reformation; we see a shift in unambiguously sec-
ular construction (lords’ palaces and administrative buildings, as suggested by Figure 1, panel B).
Another alternative is that the apparent secularization reflects the transfer of spending commit-
ments to religious warfare conducted by secular authorities. However, in our analysis of finer
categories of secular construction, we observe no shift in military construction through 1600.
    In assessing whether the Reformation played a causal role in driving sectoral reallocation one
first worries about unobserved differences between eventually-Protestant and Catholic territories
and universities. However, it is unlikely that territory- or university-specific unobservables ex-
plain our findings: territories and universities that would become Protestant exhibit no significant
differences in human and physical capital investment trends prior to the Reformation.8
    Another natural concern is that time-varying and territory-specific unobservables may have
driven both the adoption of Protestantism and the reallocation of resources toward secular pur-
poses. A large literature documents a wave of urban support for the Reformation and that cities
were key locations where reformist ideas and constituencies developed (Ozment, 1975; Hamm,
1994). One might wonder whether cities at the leading edge of the Reformation drive our find-
ings. However, we find virtually identical results when we limit our analysis to small towns. An-
other possibility is that changes in economic conditions drove both the adoption of Protestantism
and secularization. To explore this possibility, we examine a set of territories where the timing of
adoption was plausibly exogenous—due to unanticipated changes in rulers. We find that within
these territories, where the timing of religious change was independent of underlying economic
conditions, the same pattern of reallocation ensues.
    Our findings provide new empirical evidence on the links among the Reformation, seculariza-
tion, and economic change. Ekelund et al. (2006) link the Reformation to growth via secularization,
focusing on the market for salvation and arguing that the Reformation shifted resources from the
Catholic Church directly to the private sector in the 16th century. Rubin (2017) suggests another
crucial dimension, arguing that the Reformation was associated with the emergence of a more
   8 The question of why particular territorial lords adopted the Protestant religion is an important one, addressed
in Cantoni (2012), Rubin (2014), and Curuk and Smulders (2016). Our findings of parallel pre-Reformation trends
in monastery closures, occupational choices, human capital investments, and construction activity, discussed below,
suggest that the sources of variation in adoption were generally not associated with our outcomes of interest prior to
the Reformation.



                                                          5
secular political economy, particularly in Protestant regions. He specifically highlights the historic
association between secularization and growth, contrasting Europe with the Islamic world (see
also Chaney, 2008 and Kuran, 2011). Our work conceptually synthesizes Ekelund et al. (2006)
and Rubin (2017) and quantitatively tests hypotheses from the resulting framework. Supporting
both Ekelund et al. (2006) and Rubin (2017), we provide the first quantitative empirical evidence
identifying the Reformation as playing a causal role in the emergence of a more secular society in
Protestant Europe. Our finding that the Reformation in fact shifted resources to the state (i.e., ter-
ritorial lords) underscores the interaction of religion and politics, as suggested by our conceptual
framework and by Rubin (2017). It suggests a different (perhaps complementary) path leading
from the Reformation to growth from that emphasized by Ekelund et al. (2006).9
    More broadly, previous research has considered the long-run effects of the Reformation on
the European economy through its influence on culture (Weber, 1904/05), education (Becker and
Woessmann, 2009), and politics (Rubin, 2017).10 Up to now, there has been little empirical work
documenting the Reformation’s economic consequences prior the 19th century.11 We shed light
on the path from the Reformation to long-run economic change, identifying the causal impact of
the Reformation on the emergence of a more secular society in Europe, and in Protestant Europe
in particular. The process of economic secularization that we document can be seen as having two
components: first, the strengthening of territorial lords—promoting institutional secularization—
and second, a reallocation of economic inputs toward secular purposes, specifically those favored
by territorial lords—reflecting allocational secularization.12 Both components played an important
role in producing a modern, secular West (Durkheim, 1893; Mills, 1959; Saint-Simon, 1975) and
also—very early by global standards—produced conditions that have been linked by scholars to
modern economic growth (Weber, 1904/05; Kuran, 2011; Rubin, 2017).13
    Our findings also provide empirical evidence allowing us to contribute to classic debates in
social science. In perhaps the most famous social science work on the Reformation, Max Weber
argued that religious reform shaped economic behavior and thus contributed to the rise of capi-
talism.14 Subsequent research has tested for a causal effect of Protestantism on economic growth,
   9 To  be clear, while we do not observe reallocation of resources toward private secular purposes, the introduction of
religious competition may have stimulated private sector economic activity along margins other than those we study.
   10 This literature is itself closely related to a larger literature on the economic consequences of religion and culture

(e.g., Barro and McCleary, 2003; McCleary and Barro, 2006; Guiso et al., 2006; Nunn, 2009; Kuran, 2011; Alesina and
Giuliano, 2015).
   11 This gap in the literature has been noted by Becker et al. (2016). Dittmar and Meisenzahl (2016) provide evidence

on both long- and short-run consequences of the Reformation operating through changes in city-level institutions that
varied across Protestant cities, highlighting within-Protestant differences, as opposed to territory-level differences in
religion we study here.
   12 Our findings on resource reallocation in response to a shock to the religious sector complement a large contempo-

rary literature on sectoral shocks and the allocation of economic inputs, particularly labor (e.g., Davis and Haltiwanger,
2001; Autor et al., 2016; Charles et al., 2016a,b).
   13 Surprisingly little evidence exists establishing a direct link from the Reformation to secularization, with many

scholars arguing for the importance of intermediate factors such as industrialization, social conflict, or nationalism
(e.g., McLeod, 1981; Norris and Inglehart, 2004; Martin, 2005; Becker and Woessmann, 2013; Becker et al., 2017).
   14 To be fair, this is a simplification of the “Weberian” argument. In the original, Weber’s focus is specifically on



                                                            6
finding mixed results (Becker and Woessmann, 2009; Cantoni, 2015; Dittmar and Meisenzahl,
2016). Our evidence suggests a causal effect of the Reformation on economic activity—as sug-
gested by the stylized Weberian view—but along a very different margin, and working through a
different mechanism from that which is traditionally emphasized.
    Tawney (1926) provides the classic response to Weber, emphasizing prior socioeconomic changes
that drove the Reformation. The rich data we assemble on the allocation of resources before and
after the Reformation allow us to observe patterns of economic activity that might have foreshad-
owed the Reformation. In data on human capital and fixed investments, we do not observe any
trends towards secularization prior to the Reformation. In occupational choice we do observe
overall trends away from church employment, though we do not observe any differential pre-
trends towards secularization in regions that would adopt Protestantism. This suggests that the
post-Reformation resource reallocation we observe was not previously in motion, and was not
inevitable.
    Yet, initial conditions were critical to the process that we document. First, prior to the Reforma-
tion, European society was already characterized by important forms of secularization—including
the separation of secular and religious power that is central to the political market that we empha-
size in our conceptual framework. Second, growing commerce and economic change framed the
religious critiques of the reformers themselves: Catholic Church corruption was attacked precisely
in the commodification and marketization of salvation, as exemplified by Luther’s critique of the
sale indulgences. Indeed, our conceptual framework highlights the conflict between lords and the
Catholic Church that plays an important role in Tawney’s thinking about the underlying causes
of the Reformation. We thus emphasize that we identify a causal role for the Reformation on the
allocation of resources, but we do not rule out economic factors driving the Reformation.15
    In what follows, we first, in Section 2, present a historical overview of the Reformation viewed
through a framework linking religion to Europe’s political economy and the allocation of re-
sources. In Section 3, we describe the datasets that we constructed to study the Reformation’s
economic consequences and document the reallocation of resources between the religious and sec-
ular sectors and across uses within the secular sector. In Section 4 we offer concluding thoughts.


2    Religious competition: conceptual framework and historical evidence
We model the Reformation as a competitive shock to the Catholic Church, which had been a mo-
nopolist producer of salvation for believers and the sole source of religiously-derived political
legitimacy for secular rulers in Western Europe for hundreds of years. In this section, we first
present our informal model of religious competition in Western Europe. We then discuss the
Calvinism and does not exclude reverse causality, i.e. economic factors shaping religious change (Weber, 1904/05).
  15 Tawney’s (1926) analysis receives further support in our finding of unintended secularization produced by a reli-

gious movement; he writes that the Reformation’s political economy consequences were “without design, and against
the intention of most reformers” (Tawney, 1926, p. 88).


                                                          7
pre-Reformation equilibrium. Next, we describe the Reformation as a shock to competition and
discuss the post-Reformation equilibrium, providing historical evidence on the changed bargain
between secular and religious elites. Finally, we discuss the implications of the new equilibrium
for the allocation of resources in Europe, laying out the hypotheses that we test in our empirical
analysis below.

2.1     Overview
Much prior work on the economics of religion has considered churches as producers and believers
as the consumers of salvation and perhaps other “club goods” (e.g. Ekelund et al., 2006). Believers
pay a price, comprising financial, time, and other costs. This approach to the analysis of religious
service provision provides a powerful lens through which to view religious monopoly and the
entry of a competitor. A monopolist church will charge a price above marginal cost, as would
any monopolist service provider, and a perfectly price-discriminating monopolist will extract all
of the surplus in the market. Entry by a competitor will reduce prices in the market for salvation,
leaving consumers better off.
      To understand the economy-wide effects of the introduction of religious competition, we be-
lieve that a model must also incorporate a second market: one in which secular authorities pay a
price to churches in exchange for political legitimacy, in the form of the church’s endorsement of
a ruler. The price paid by the secular lord for the church’s endorsement is typically the lord’s own
endorsement and protection of the church’s theology, as well as some set of temporal concessions:
money, land, economic privileges, and political power. The bargains struck in this market for po-
litical legitimacy have been critical to the organization of human societies for millennia, but have
been relatively understudied by economists (see Chaney, 2013, and Rubin, 2017, for important
exceptions).
      Entry of a competitor in a monopolistic religious environment will affect both markets. First,
the entrant will charge a lower price than the incumbent in the market for salvation. The incum-
bent will lower its price of salvation as well, but will be constrained in changing the price too
much: changes in price typically amount to a change in doctrine, which is extremely costly for a
religion’s legitimacy. Thus, the prices in the market for salvation will fall, particularly for believers
purchasing salvation from the entrant. The market for legitimacy will in turn be affected through
three channels. The entrant will reduce the ability of the incumbent church to confer legitimacy
by questioning its theology. The attraction of believers to the entrant religion will also reduce the
value of legitimacy conferred by the incumbent. Finally, the ability to bargain with two providers
of religiously-derived political legitimacy will allow secular rulers to bargain down the price paid
to either entrant or incumbent. Thus, entry will unambiguously reduce the price paid by secular
lords to religious authorities.
      Our model delivers predictions that are not a feature of existing models that emphasize the
market for salvation. By focusing on the political market, our model additionally predicts a shift

                                                   8
in the bargain between secular and church elites. This shift—the lower price in the market for
church-derived political legitimacy—could have first order economic consequences, as we discuss
below.

2.2     Before the Reformation: the Catholic religious monopoly in Western Europe
At the start of the 16th century, just prior to the Reformation, the Catholic Church enjoyed a virtual
monopoly in the market for religion in Western Europe and extraordinary wealth and power (the
foundation stone of St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome was laid in 1506). The Church functioned as an
expensive intermediary between lay people and the divine, with services conducted in Latin and
substantial resources devoted to supporting specialist clerics (Cameron, 1991). It is unsurprising
that the Church was so rich: as a monopolist producer of salvation for believers and of religiously-
derived political legitimacy for rulers, it was able to extract enormous rents from the payment of
tithes and sacramental fees, as well as from its huge land holdings.16
      However, the Church’s ability to extract rents was not unlimited. Its privileges and the mone-
tization of salvation through the sale of indulgences produced discontent among some believers,
thus threatening the Church’s authority—this would come to a head, of course, in Luther’s post-
ing of his 95 theses in 1517. The Church was also constrained in its ability to extract rents from
secular lords, with whom there was continual conflict over the control of resources, jurisdiction
over territory, and the authority to appoint individuals to positions of powers (e.g., bishops).17
Secular princes in Europe claimed their authority as derived directly from God, arguably making
them less reliant on religious endorsements for their political legitimacy than rulers in, for exam-
ple, the Islamic world. Rubin (2017) argues that this relatively limited reliance on religious elites
by secular authorities in Europe, relative to the Islamic World, played a crucial role in shaping
political economy in the two regions for centuries.
      The pre-Reformation relationship between secular authorities and Church elites was one of
continual bargaining over power and resources. Bargaining reflected the political structure of the
Holy Roman Empire, which was an imperial federation of semi-autonomous principalities. At
the highest level was conflict between the Holy Roman Emperor and the Pope over the “price” of
endorsement of secular rulers—in particular, the Holy Roman Emperor—by the Catholic Church.
During the 11th century “Investiture Controversy,” the Pope and Emperor contested the right
to appoint clerics to positions of immense power and wealth. Pope Gregory VII appeared to
have succeeded in extracting a higher price for Church endorsement when he excommunicated
  16 For example, the Catholic Church controlled approximately one-third of all farmland in the principality of

Württemberg before the Reformation (Ocker, 2010, p. 56), and approximately 26 percent of farmland in the lordship of
Ruppin (Cohn, 1987, p. 172).
  17 Evidence of shared rents before the Reformation can be seen in the cooperation and agreements between secular

and church elites. For example, before the Reformation monasteries provided the majority of baggage carts used to
supply the armies of lords and were obliged to provide food and hospitality for lords and their entourages when lords
traveled through their domains. See Cohn (1987) for details.



                                                         9
Emperor Henry IV (withdrawing the Emperor’s legitimacy), leading Henry to beg Gregory for
reentry into communion, famously standing barefoot in the snow at Canossa in 1077. Yet, the
Church was far from being all powerful, and after further bargaining—often in the form of violent
conflict—secular and Church authorities agreed to a compromise in the Concordat of Worms of
1122, which granted secular lords de facto power in the appointment of bishops, while respecting
the Church’s de jure right to invest bishops with their spiritual symbols of power.18 However,
conflict over resources continued: for example, just prior to the Reformation, the great defender of
the Catholic Church, Emperor Charles V, took control of Catholic Church assets—e.g. the domain
of the Bishop of Utrecht, as well as Arras and Cambrai (Ocker, 2010, p. 60).
      Analogous conflicts characterized the relationships between religious elites and the territorial
lords and we study in this research. Church institutions possessed numerous privileges (e.g., tax
exemptions and monopoly rights) and controlled huge swathes of land within the principalities
of the Holy Roman Empire. Secular lords were regularly engaged in attempts to claw back some
of the revenues lost: passing laws eliminating tax exemptions and imposing obligations on the
Church as landowner (Cohn, 1987, p. 162).

2.3     The Reformation: the introduction of religious competition
Entry in the market for religion — In October 1517, Martin Luther posted his famous 95 theses
critiquing Church practices. Luther’s critiques focused on the exhorbitant price of salvation due
to corruption in the Catholic Church, and particularly the sale of “indulgences,” which believers
purchased to secure early release from purgatory. While Luther did not set out to challenge the
religious monopoly of the Catholic Church, a clear break between the Church and Luther emerged
in 1521, when the Edict of Worms condemned him as a heretic (see Table 1 for a summary of the
major events of the Reformation). Luther and his supporters responded by developing an agenda
for religious reform. Protestant reformers disseminated their ideas widely, rapidly, and relatively
cheaply using the newly invented printing press (Rubin, 2014; Dittmar and Seabold, 2016).

                Table 1: Timeline of Major Reformation Events in Germany, 1517–1648


                    Date     Event
                   1517      Luther posts 95 theses in Wittenberg
                   1521      Edict of Worms condemns Luther as a heretic
                   1530      Formation of Schmalkaldic League of Protestant princes
              1546–1547      Schmalkaldic War
                   1555      Peace of Augsburg establishes cuius regio, eius religio principle
              1618–1648      30 Years’ War

  18 See
       Berman (1983) for a discussion of the consequences of this conflict and the reforms of Pope Gregory VII for the
development of legal institutions in Europe.



                                                         10
    Protestant innovations attracted believers and princes by lowering prices in the markets for
salvation and for legitimacy. In the market for salvation, the key Protestant innovation was dis-
intermediation between the believer and God, which significantly lowered the cost, and price, of
salvation.19 Luther emphasized the importance of an individual believer’s relationship with God
and salvation by faith alone; he also reduced the number of sacraments from seven to two. These
innovations reduced the need for a priestly bureaucracy in Protestant regions. Cameron (1991,
p. 159) writes that, “For laypeople, the point about the Reformation was that it abolished the ex-
pensive and complicated apparatus to which they had resorted so regularly for the good of their
souls.”
    Protestants also developed a critique of monasticism and argued that monastic control over
resources was unjustified. This message was popular with believers. A declaration from the 1520s
captures the popular spirit: “It is well known and clear to all that everywhere there are too many
monasteries, and that they unashamedly claim to be outside the world, and yet together with the
large foundations they even bring into their own possession all the goods of the world . . . we have
considered together and decided to tolerate no monastery any longer, but to close them” (quoted
in Cohn, 1979, p. 28).
    The wealth held by monasteries represented the largest share of the Catholic Church’s income-
producing real estate (Ocker, 2010, p. 56) and was central to the Reformation-era bargain in the
market for religiously derived political legitimacy. Expropriation of monastery wealth was enor-
mously tempting to secular lords, but it required a legal and religious justification. Secular lords
attempted to extract from Protestant theologians religious and legal arguments for the seizure of
Catholic Church property; this was precisely an attempt to bargain down the price of religiously-
derived political legitimacy at the center of our conceptual framework.20
    Secular rulers began expropriating monasteries in the 1520s and the Catholic Church responded
by filing claims for restitution at the Reichskammergericht—the highest court of the Holy Roman
Empire. Reflecting the “better bargain” secular rulers were offered by the religious entrant, Protes-
tant theologians provided detailed legal support for the reallocation of resources in memoranda.
These memoranda justified the property rights claims of Protestant rulers with arguments, “con-
structed around meticulous citations of Canon and Roman law” (Ocker, 2010, p. 57). Thus,
Protestant theologians based their arguments on the body of ecclesiastical law developed by
Catholic jurists over previous centuries.21 Protestant theologians argued that secular lords who
  19 We emphasize differences between Catholic and Protestant theology. Lutheranism was the predominant form of
Protestantism in the territories we examine. However, it should be emphasized that Lutheran doctrine developed over
the period we study and that there were multiple currents within Lutheranism and Protestantism more broadly—e.g.
Zwinglianism and Calvinism also offered low cost salvation relative to Catholicism, but did not assign such centrality
to salvation by faith alone (Pettegree, 2004, p. 33). Similarly, while we emphasize the salience of material incentives,
religious choices were clearly also shaped by beliefs (Cohn, 1987).
  20 Note that some negotiation between lords and religious elites over lords’ rights to Church property also existed in

regions that remained Catholic.
  21 Ocker (2006, p. 13) describes these memoranda as “among the most overlooked works of the sixteenth century

reformers”.


                                                          11
adopted Protestantism and took control of church property were: (i) preventing misappropriation
by (Catholic) church agents and (ii) acting in a manner consistent with their legally recognized
role as lay administrators of church property (i.e., as church wardens or Kirchenvögte).
    A purge of Protestant jurists from the Reichskammergericht threatening secular lords’ claims to
formerly monastic wealth was followed by the formation of the Schmalkaldic League—a military
defense alliance—in 1530. A key objective of the Schmalkaldic League was to maintain secular
rulers’ control over former church property (Cohn, 1987).22
    Given the legal and political uncertainty, some Protestant rulers proceeded with caution; the
Elector of Saxony only put confiscated properties under his own chancellery in the 1540s, follow-
ing the suspension of the Reichskammergericht (Ocker, 2010, p. 56, 60). The settlement after the
Schmalkaldic War (1545–6) effectively provided legal sanction to prior property transfers (Wha-
ley, 2011). Similar timing characterized the settlement of related property claims: for example,
Protestants also moved to expropriate the assets of some bishoprics, in “a lengthy process usually
only completed after 1555” (Ocker, 2010, p. 172). We study the implications of these evolving
changes in lords’ control of property for resource allocation, below.
    It is important to note that Protestant theologians’ justification of the expropriation of Catholic
property did not by itself establish a “low price” of legitimacy for secular rulers. There remained
the question of how expropriated wealth could be used: would territorial lords be able to use
confiscated resources for themselves—indicating a true reallocation of resources from the religious
to the secular sphere? Or, would the allocation of resources simply shift from formerly Catholic
religious purposes to Protestant ones (including social welfare)? We next investigate the details
of the bargains struck between Protestant territorial lords and religious elites within this open-
ended policy, presenting evidence on monastery closure and the reallocation of monastic resources
during the Reformation.

Monastery closure and the reallocation of resources — We first document patterns of closure,
gathering data on 3,094 monasteries described in Jürgensmeier and Schwerdtfeger (2005–2008).
For each monastery, we collect data on its location, date of foundation, and date of closure, if
applicable.23 In Figure 2, we present a map of the monasteries open in the German lands of the
Holy Roman Empire, highlighting those that closed in the 16th century.
    Our analysis of monastery closure focuses on over 2,200 towns contained in the Deutsches
  22 The  importance of property rights to the League is apparent in negotiations between Protestant princes and the
(Catholic) emperor: the official 1540 position paper of the Schmalkaldic League addresses the question of property
rights first and religious doctrine second.
   23 The data include both monasteries and convents, and we use the term “monasteries” as a short-hand. Closure

dates are directly coded from Jürgensmeier and Schwerdtfeger (2005–2008). For over 67 percent of monasteries,
Jürgensmeier and Schwerdtfeger (2005–2008) provide information on foundation dates. For the remaining monas-
teries, we first gather evidence on initial monastery construction by order and location from the Deutsches Städtebuch.
We identify the foundation dates of any residual monasteries from territorial archives. For example, for monasteries in
Baden-Württemberg we review the databank “Klöster in Baden-Württemberg” maintained by the Landesarchiv Baden-
Württemberg (the State Archive) at https://www.kloester-bw.de/index.php. We then cross-check against individual
monastery entries on www.wikipedia.de. In total, we identify foundation dates for 3,085 of 3,094 monasteries.


                                                          12
         Figure 2: Monasteries and Monastery Closure During the Reformation in Germany
Map of all monasteries in Jürgensmeier and Schwerdtfeger (2005–2008). White circles indicate monasteries that remain
open throughout the time period under study. Black triangles indicate monasteries that were opened prior to the
Reformation but closed between 1517 and 1600. Territorial boundaries come from Nüssli (2008).




Städtebuch.24 For every town, we calculate the number of monasteries within 25 kilometers open
in each year. We exploit cross-sectional variation in territorial religion, assigning each town to its
secular lord following Nüssli (2008) for 1500 (we refer to this as the “Euratlas” coding of territories)
and coding religion using Cantoni (2012).25
    We present the pattern of monastery closure during the Reformation in Figure 3. We plot
  24 We use “town” to describe the generic entry in the Deutsches Städtebuch, as the modal location was small. But it is

worth noting that the Deutsches Städtebuch covers, and our data include, all incorporated units of Germany, including
large cities.
  25 Jurisdiction in early modern Germany involved fluid and overlapping claims among authorities. We thus view

the Euratlas region as a proxy for actual jurisdiction over the time period we study. Another complication is posed
by the existence of a small number of “free cities” that are not subject to a territorial lord. Most of these free cities are
dropped from our analysis, and our results are robust to excluding them entirely. A complete list of territories and their
(eventual) religion can be found in Online Appendix Table A1. Because not every city can be assigned a religion using
this mapping, as a robustness check, we directly code the religion of as many towns as possible using hand-collected
evidence from the Deutsches Städtebuch, and find very similar results.


                                                             13
                                                 10




                 Average Number of Monasteries
                                                 8



                                                 6



                                                 4



                                                 2

                                                      1475   1500   1525          1550          1575   1600
                                                                           Year

                                                                       Catholic Territories
                                                                       Protestant Territories



            Figure 3: Monastery Closure in Catholic and Eventually-Protestant Germany
Average number of monasteries within 25 km of towns included in the Deutsches Städtebuch. Assignment of towns to
religious denominations is done by matching each town to its territorial lord identified in the Euratlas for 1500, and
using the territorial lord’s religion as coded by Cantoni (2012). Vertical line marks 1517, when Martin Luther circulated
his 95 Theses.




the average number of monasteries within 25 kilometers of towns that would become Protestant
and that would remain Catholic. Prior to 1517, the average number of monasteries proximate
to towns was quite steady. The number of monasteries near towns that would remain Catholic
was somewhat higher than near towns that would become Protestant, a fact that can be explained
by the location of Catholic cities—more likely to be in the “older,” southern and western parts
of the Empire. Importantly, however, trends are very similar in the two sets of towns prior to
1517. Following the posting of Luther’s 95 theses in 1517, the density of monasteries declined
across Germany, but with important heterogeneity across religions. In towns whose territorial
lords adopted Protestantism, there was a sharp decline in the number of monasteries during the
Reformation: a reduction of over two-thirds by 1600. In towns whose lords remained Catholic,
the decline was significantly smaller.
    The fundamental question we next address is whether the closure of monasteries produced
inter-sectoral reallocation of resources or intra-sectoral reallocation. The allocation of formerly
Catholic resources would be determined by the bargain between secular and church elites. The
“price” Protestant theologians initially offered to secular rulers was high: formerly Catholic re-
sources were to be devoted to religious uses. Ocker (2010, pp. 54–55) writes that Protestant clergy


                                                                       14
proposed using confiscated monastic wealth to support Protestant pastors and to establish a “com-
mon chest” for social welfare; he continues, “theologians only granted rulers a free hand in church
property when property remained after the needs of schools, poor relief, and public welfare had
been met.” Historical evidence suggests that some formerly Catholic resources were, indeed, used
for church and social welfare purposes. In the Electorate of Saxony (Luther’s home), monastic
resources were transferred to a common chest that provided support for orphans and the poor.
Incomes were also used to support former monks. For example, in Württemberg monks were
offered annual pensions of 25 guilders, equivalent to 254 days of skilled wages (Wolgast, 2014,
p. 110).26
    Over time, however, the price fell, and Protestant theologians conceded a greater share of re-
sources to lords. While the theologians advising the Schmalkaldic League drafted an agreement
assigning confiscated lands to Protestant church uses, this agreement was rejected by the rulers of
Pomerania and Württemberg and never adopted by the League (Wolgast, 2014, p. 130).27 Histori-
cal evidence indicates that large-scale transfers of wealth to secular rulers became the norm; Wol-
gast (2014) provides numerous descriptions of secular lords seizing church property and enriching
themselves, of which we highlight several here. In Hesse, Landgrave Philipp received annual rev-
enues of 16,500 guilders in 1532 from monastery lands and 25,000 guilders in 1565, equivalent to
one-seventh of total state revenues and around 1,000 person-years of skilled wages. Overall, 40
percent of monastic wealth in Hesse went to the ruler—not to religious, educational, or social wel-
fare purposes. In East Frisia, Count Enno II converted the monastery in Norden into a summer
residence for himself and converted the monastery at Ihlow into a residence for his brother. In
Württemberg, Duke Ulrich extracted 40,000 guilders’ income from monastery lands. In Branden-
burg, monasteries were allowed to keep their privileges following the adoption of Protestantism
in exchange for a payment of 300,000 guilders. Protestant theologians provided legal justifications
for these property transfers and thus served as “the technicians of religious legitimacy” (Ocker,
2006, p. 13).
    In Table 2, we summarize the historical evidence on church property expropriation by secular
lords in the Protestant regions we study. We find evidence of significant enrichment of territorial
lords in 16 of 18 territories, indicating a shift in the bargain between secular and religious author-
ities and inter-sectoral resource allocation: lands and riches that once belonged to the Catholic
Church were conceded by Protestant religious elites to secular lords’ control.
    The shift of bargaining power from religious to secular elites transferred not only resources
toward secular lords, but also political power. Cohn (1987, p. 176) writes that “The acquisition of
church property and the strengthened administration which it encouraged were bound up with
many less tangible advantages gained by the means of the Reformation. Functions that had once
  26 Guilders here and below (traditionally abbreviated as “fl.”)
                                                              are converted to person-year equivalents using average
wage data for skilled labor in Munich, Augsburg, and Leipzig, taken from Allen (2012).
  27 The incumbent Catholic Church also made concessions over the control of resources to secular lords in territories

that remained Catholic.


                                                           15
                                             Table 2: Monastery closure and expropriation in Protestant territories

                                       Year        % Monasteries      Transfer to
      Territory                      Reformed         Closed           by Lord                                Evidence from Wolgast (2014)
      Anhalt                            1537             83%               Yes        Monasteries expropriated, e.g. Ballenstedt and Mehringen (p. 76)
      Baden                             1555             32%               No         —
      Brandenburg                       1539             74%               Yes        Treasures taken to Berlin, covering 300,000 fl. state debt (pp. 71-72, 150)
      Brunswick-Calenberg               1584             46%               Yes        Expropriation and taxation to pay for ruler’s servants and horses (p. 161)
      Brunswick-Lüneburg               1529             80%               Yes        Expropriation of monasteries, churches (p. 57)
      Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel           1568             55%               Yes        Expropriation of monasteries (p. 230)
      Denmark                           1536             64%               Yes        Expropriation, monastery at Husum converted to palace (see note)
      East Frisia                       1535             92%               Yes        Conversion of monasteries to palaces and stone quarries (pp. 114–115)
      Hesse                             1526             76%               Yes        Diversion of monastic incomes (p. 47)
      Mecklenburg                       1549             75%               Yes        Monastery expropriation, conversion to palace at Güstrow (p. 195)




16
      Nassau                            1542             42%               Yes        New taxes on monasteries and palace construction (see note)
      Palatinate                        1546             60%               Yes        Expropriation of monasteries, income of 100,000 fl. per year (pp. 177, 220)
      Pomerania                         1534             94%               Yes        Monastery expropriation (p. 101)
      Ruppin                            1539             56%               Yes        Ruler doubles land ownership appropriating monastery lands (see note)
      Saxony (Ducal)                    1539             96%               Yes        Property seizure and sale revenues of 150,000 fl. (pp. 141-142)
      Saxony (Electorate)               1527             92%               No         —
      Upper Palatinate                  1546             45%               Yes        Expropriation of monasteries, income of 50,000 fl. per year (pp. 220)
      Württemberg                      1534             67%               Yes        Expropriations, silver melted down, gold seized (p. 107)
     Table lists Protestant territories and the year of territorial reform as in Cantoni (2012). Data on monasteries and monastery closures are from Jürgensmeier and
     Schwerdtfeger (2005–2008). Evidence on the transfer of church resources and property to secular lords is from Wolgast (2014). We calculate the percentage of
     monasteries closed as the mean town-level closure rate in a territory, with town-level closures measured by the closure rate of monasteries within 25 kilometers
     of each town. Towns are located in territories using Euratlas (Nüssli, 2008). In Nassau, new taxes were imposed on monasteries starting in 1525 and helped fund
     construction of the castle at Weilburg from 1533-1549 (Schliephake, 1884, pp. 235-236). In Ruppin, the ruler’s share of territorial lands rose from 21% to 39% between
     1500 and 1600 due to the appropriation of church lands (Cohn, 1987, p. 172). In historic Denmark, monastery resources were diverted, e.g., the monastery at Husum
     was converted into a palace (Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, 2017). For Denmark, we only examine monasteries in the Schleswig-Holstein region.
been dispersed among several authorities became concentrated in the state. Officialdom pene-
trated more pervasively than before in towns, villages and families. Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was
swept away.”

2.4     Implications of religious competition for the broader economy
During the Reformation, secular lords paid significantly less to church elites for the provision of
legitimacy, especially in Protestant territories. Secular authorities retained greater political power,
acquired new land, and gained control of wealth expropriated from the Catholic Church. Many
of the resources acquired from the Catholic Church were not reallocated toward Protestant church
purposes, but were retained by secular lords, as shown above. The change in the market for
church-derived political legitimacy suggests the following hypotheses regarding resource reallo-
cation during the Reformation.
      The allocation of human capital — Enriched and empowered lords across Germany, and par-
ticularly in Protestant regions, demanded more labor for their own aggrandizement and for the
administration of their territory. An ordinance from Württemberg from 1546 notes that “Men
[we]re needed to serve in preaching offices, governments, temporal posts, [and] administrative
offices” (Strauss, 1988). In addition, in Protestant regions, the church sector demanded signif-
icantly less labor owing to the lower cost salvation production function in Protestant theology.
This freed labor for uses other than salvation. There was a supply-side effect of the Reformation
as well: Ocker (2010, p. 62) writes, “The new faith rebutted the most compelling reason to become
a monk or a nun—to save one’s soul and the souls of others. This rebuttal coincided with, and
surely abetted, widespread attrition in monasteries.”
      Hypotheses: Our analysis leads to the following hypotheses regarding the allocation of human
capital. We expect a shift in occupations from the church sector to the secular sector during the
Reformation, particularly in regions that became Protestant. We also expect a shift toward occupa-
tions supporting the aims of secular lords—for example, administrative and military positions—
following the Reformation, particularly in regions that became Protestant.
      Human capital investments — Forward looking students should have perceived the sectoral
shift in labor demand and adjusted their human capital investments accordingly, away from
church-sector specific theology study, and toward studies in more general fields.28
      Hypotheses: Our framework leads to the following hypotheses regarding human capital invest-
ments. We expect a shift in degrees granted from theology toward secular subjects (arts, law and
medicine) during the Reformation, particularly in universities that became Protestant. The em-
powering of secular lords suggests a shift specifically toward degrees that led to jobs in public
  28 Reflecting their increased demand for skilled labor, secular princes provided support for investments in university

education. It is important to note, however, that university degrees initially fell following 1517, as students left the
universities to follow preachers and join the new religious movements. University attendance increased again with the
institutionalization of the Reformation and formal support provided by princes (Seifert, 1996).



                                                          17
administration—law and the arts—during the Reformation, particularly in regions that became
Protestant.
      Fixed capital investments — The increase in power and resources controlled by secular lords
during the Reformation, particularly in Protestant regions, should also have been reflected in fixed
investments. Construction activity—reflecting the allocation of land and physical, financial, and
human capital—can be seen as a summary statistic that characterizes the allocation of resources
in early modern Europe. In our context, empowered and enriched secular rulers used their new
wealth to construct palaces that provided consumption value and signaled their power, and built
new administrative buildings from which their expanded authority was projected.
      Hypotheses: Our framework leads to the following hypotheses regarding fixed investments. We
expect new construction activity to shift toward secular purposes during the Reformation, partic-
ularly in Protestant regions. And, reflecting the enhanced powers of secular lords, one would
expect that the shift in construction to reflect the aims and desires of secular lords, e.g., the con-
struction of palaces, military, and administrative structures. The historical evidence also suggests
that secular construction should have increased with some lag, reflecting the insecurity of secular
lords’ property rights claims to newly appropriated assets prior to the mid-16th century. Finally,
prior research (Ekelund et al., 2006) suggests that the heightened intensity of religious competi-
tion in Catholic border regions could lead resource allocation in these regions to resemble those
in Protestant territories. We thus expect that the most pronounced differences in construction be-
tween Protestant and Catholic regions should be found between Protestant regions and Catholic
regions away from borders.
      We test these each of these hypotheses in our empirical work below.


3     The reallocation of resources

3.1     Data sources
Our analysis is focused on two sets of data: (i) German university graduates’ degrees and careers,
which provide evidence on the consequences of the Reformation for the allocation of skilled labor
and investments in human capital; and, (ii) construction activity across Germany over time, pro-
viding evidence on the allocation of land, labor, and capital in fixed investments. In this section,
we describe the sources from which these data are drawn, in turn. We also discuss our assignment
of towns, territories, and universities to religious denominations.

University graduates: degrees and careers — Our main source of information on German univer-
sity graduates is the Repertorium Academicum Germanicum (Schwinges and Hesse, 2015), a research
program (and online database) developed by historians at the Universities of Berne and Giessen,
collecting individual-level information on the universe of recipients of academic degrees from
German universities through the year 1550. The German universities are: Basel, Erfurt, Frank-


                                                 18
furt an der Oder, Freiburg, Greifswald, Heidelberg, Ingolstadt, Köln, Leipzig, Mainz, Marburg,
Rostock, Trier, Tübingen, Wittenberg, and Würzburg.29
    Schwinges and Hesse (2015), which we refer to as “RAG” henceforth, collect information on
each degree recipient’s degree subject(s) and year(s) from university registry sources. The degrees
granted include bachelor’s degrees, licenses, master’s degrees, and doctorate degrees. To mea-
sure post-1550 human capital investments, in particular after the Schmalkaldic War (1546) and
the Peace of Augsburg (1555), we hand collect data on university degrees granted by the German
universities included in the RAG dataset between 1540 and 1600, consulting Bauch (1897); Erler
(1895, 1897, 1909); Eulenburg (1904); Kleineidam (1983); Leinweber (1991); Rüegg (1996); Stein-
meyer (1912).30 We thus have two datasets on university degrees: one covering the years through
1600 at the university×year level, and one covering the years through 1550 at the individual level.
In our empirical analysis below, we will present results based on both datasets.
    Degrees were granted by one of the four traditional faculties that universities of the time fea-
tured: arts, law, medicine, and theology. We classify degrees in arts, law, and medicine as “secu-
lar” to distinguish them from more church sector-specific training in theology. We will also focus
more narrowly on arts and law degrees, which were more likely to lead to careers in the service of
territorial lords. Evidence on career paths associated with degrees in different fields is provided
in Section 3.3, below.
    In addition to information on degrees received, the RAG database contains information on ca-
reers for 5,102 of 14,704 students receiving degrees between 1470 and 1550. Unfortunately, we are
unable to extend the coverage to individuals receiving degrees after 1550, so we rely on a single
careers dataset at the individual level, covering the years through 1550. The RAG provides over
400 different occupational titles in its database. For example, the top five occupations in terms of
frequency are: Professor, Kanoniker (Canon), Domherr (Canon, typically receiving a stipend), Dekan
(Deacon), and Kleriker (Priest). Other occupations include judges, bakers, guild masters, may-
ors, city councillors, teachers, headmasters, and goldsmiths. Many of the occupation titles are
archaic; we thus rely on the Thesaurus Professionum Forschungsstelle für Personalschriften (Marburg,
2015), which categorizes historic occupations into seven one-digit categories with subcategories.
In our empirical analysis, we divide the occupations into two broad categories: “church” (in-
cluding priests, monks, etc.) and “secular” (including professors, judges, mayors, etc.). We also
examine the specific subset of secular occupations that were administrative.
    Below, we study the heterogeneous effects of the Reformation on degrees received and occupa-
tions selected into depending on the religious denomination of the university at which an individ-
  29 Note that we do not consider in our analysis universities attended by Germans outside of the borders of modern
Germany, such as Louvain or Prague; nor do we include several small universities opened after 1550, such as Jena.
Basel joined the Swiss Confederation only during the period of our study.
  30 Online Appendix Figure A1 presents the overall pattern of degrees in the RAG data, and in our own data collection,

and these line up closely. As an additional check, we collect data from 1540–1550 to directly compare our data collection
to the RAG data using a decade of overlap: we again find that our data and the RAG data closely match. The numbers
of degrees granted by level and by individual subject can be seen in Table A2 in the Online Appendix.


                                                           19
ual studied. We rely on Sehling (1902-2013), Spitz (1981), Grendler (2004), Naragon (2006) to iden-
tify the universities that adopted Protestantism: Basel, Erfurt, Frankfurt an der Oder, Greifswald,
Heidelberg, Leipzig, Marburg, Rostock, Tübingen, and Wittenberg. The adoption of Protestantism
occurred in a wave between 1520 and 1550, and the choice was nearly always permanent.31

Construction events — We hand-code several thousand unique, major construction “events” at
the town level, described in the Deutsches Städtebuch. Each town’s entry in the Deutsches Städtebuch
includes a section (section 5) titled, “Die Stadt als Siedlung” (“The City as Settlement”) within
which exists a subcategory (5b) titled, “Markante Gebaude” (“Notable/Important Construction”).
      We code each construction event by location, start date, and sector.32 We assign the finely
detailed construction events to “church construction” (e.g., churches or monasteries) and “secu-
lar construction” (e.g., town halls, bridges, malls, palaces, or schools) and examine these broad
categories in much of our analysis.33 We also specifically study secular administrative buildings
and palace construction as indicators of fixed investments for purposes favored by secular lords.
Construction events are linked to Protestant or Catholic regions based on the town of the event:
as we did in the analysis of monastery closure, we assign towns to territorial lords following the
“Euratlas” mapping provided by Nüssli (2008) and use information on the religion of territorial
lords from Cantoni (2012).

3.2     Occupational choice
We begin our analysis of the allocation of highly-skilled labor by examining the occupational
choices of university graduates. Our conceptual framework and historical evidence above sug-
gested that the Reformation should have immediately reduced the demand for skilled labor in
the religious sector and increased the demand for skilled labor for secular purposes, with effects
being concentrated in Protestant territories. We compare the rates at which university graduates
took jobs in the church sector and the secular sector across time and depending on the religious
denomination of the university from which they graduated.
      In Figure 4, we present the shares of first jobs by sector—church and secular—by year, sep-
arately for graduates of universities that would adopt Protestantism and for those that would
remain Catholic. One can see that in both types of universities, shares of jobs in the church and
  31 Note that one university, the University of Erfurt, became Lutheran in 1521 and returned to Catholicism in 1530s.

We thus treat Erfurt as a Catholic university. In Online Appendix Figure A2 we show the time series of the number of
German universities as well as the number that adopted Protestantism.
  32 Not all construction events are associated with a precise year. For the purposes of our research here, we limit the

analysis to those construction events with clearly-specified first years (i.e., “construction starts”). Note, too, that any
potential differences in the original collection of data across volumes of the Deutsches Städtebuch will be accounted for
in panel regressions with fixed effects.
  33 As noted above, we make a sharp distinction between the “church” or religious sector and the secular sector, when

in practice there was certainly a grey area between the two. We do believe that our coding is generally accurate; for
example, schools served both religious and secular purposes, but as Strauss (1988, p. 193) notes, post-Reformation
compulsory schooling laws “placed the supervision of all educational institutions firmly in the hands of princes and
magistrates, who were the owners and wielders of the instruments of public power.”


                                                            20
                                                    Protestant Universities                                               Catholic Universities

                                        .7                                                                    .7




                                        .6                                                                    .6
                  Share of First Jobs




                                                                                        Share of First Jobs
                                        .5                                                                    .5




                                        .4                                                                    .4




                                        .3                                                                    .3


                                             1475       1500      1525         1550                                1475      1500      1525         1550

                                                        Church           Secular                                             Church           Secular




         Figure 4: Careers among Eventually-Protestant and Catholic University Graduates
Shares of first job by sector by (eventual) university denomination. Figure shows the share of first jobs in secular and
religious economic sectors (which are exhaustive and mutually exclusive) among individuals with occupations listed
in the Repertorium Academicum Germanicum, by an individual’s year of first university degree attainment and by the
degree-granting university’s eventual denomination (smoothed using an 11-year moving average). Occupations are
classified into economic sectors using the Thesaurus Professionum (Marburg University, 2015). Vertical line marks 1517,
when Martin Luther circulated his 95 Theses.




secular sectors converged on an even 50-50 split at the time of the Reformation. While there is an
overall trend toward secular occupations observed prior to the Reformation in both universities
that would adopt Protestantism and those that would remain Catholic, it is important to note that
there is not a differential pre-Reformation trend depending on eventual religious denomination.
    After the Reformation, the patterns of occupational sorting look distinctly different across
university denominations, with a very clear break in trend toward first jobs in the secular sec-
tor among graduates of Protestant universities, and a slower, smoother continuation of the pre-
existing trend toward secular first jobs among graduates of Catholic universities. Thus, we see in
the raw data a shift toward secular sector first jobs after the Reformation, specifically among grad-
uates of Protestant universities, as predicted. It is important to emphasize that Figure 4 reveals
a post-1517 reduction in religious employment overall, not only a decline in monastic jobs, which
mechanically resulted from monastery closure, and which could have been offset by increases in
other religious occupations.
    We next more formally test for differences in the likelihood that university graduates would
take first jobs in the church sector (rather than the secular sector), comparing graduates from


                                                                                   21
universities that remained Catholic and graduates from universities that adopted Protestantism,
decade by decade. Specifically, we estimate the following flexible difference in differences model:

                                                         1540
                            churchiut = αu + δt +        ∑       β τ ( protu × decadeτ ) + eiut ,      (1)
                                                       τ =1480

where churchiut is an indicator capturing whether student i graduating from university u in decade
t took a first occupation in the church sector.34 The αu terms are a full set of university fixed ef-
fects; δt are a full set of decade fixed effects, and the explanatory variables of interest are the inter-
actions between decade fixed effects and an “eventually Protestant university” dummy variable
(the omitted reference decade is 1510–1519, just prior to the Reformation). We estimate standard
errors allowing for clustering at the university×decade level.
   In addition to the more flexible decade-by-decade model, we estimate a more aggregated
difference-in-differences model with three time periods: first, the three decades from 1480–1509;
next, the omitted reference decade from 1510–1519; finally, the three decades following the omitted
decade, from 1520–1549. In this specification, the interaction between the “eventually Protestant
university” dummy variable and the 1480–1519 time period dummy allows for a formal test of
differential pre-Reformation trends between graduates of universities that would become Protes-
tant and those that would remain Catholic. The interaction between the “eventually Protestant
university” dummy variable and the post-Reformation (1520–1549) dummy variable allows us to
identify the differential shift in occupations among graduates from Protestant universities in the
Reformation era. That model is as follows:

                                                          3
                              churchiut = αu + δt +      ∑ βτ ( protu × periodτ ) + eiut ,             (2)
                                                         τ =1

where the only change relative to equation 1 is that instead of seven decade dummies interacted
with the “eventually Protestant university” dummy variable, we now have three time periods
(1480–1509, 1510–1519, and 1520–1549).
   Figure 5, panel A, presents all of our estimates from equations 1 and 2 graphically. We plot dots
indicating the decade-by-decade “eventually Protestant university” interaction estimates (and
bars indicating their 90% confidence intervals). These estimates show the difference between
Protestant and Catholic university graduates’ likelihood of having a first job in the church sec-
tor in a particular decade, relative to the difference in 1510–1519. One can see that prior to 1510,
the difference in first jobs between Protestant and Catholic university graduates was small, and
was not strongly trending. Then, beginning in 1520, Protestant university graduates became sig-
nificantly less likely than Catholic university graduates to have first jobs in the church sector. Each
Protestant×decade interaction is negative from 1520, and two of the three are statistically signifi-
cantly less than zero.
 34 The   subscript t indicates the first year of the decade from 1480 through 1540, inclusive.


                                                              22
     Figure 5, panel A, also shows the estimated coefficients on the interactions between the more
aggregated time period dummy variables and the “eventually Protestant university” dummy from
estimating the pooled specification. The point estimates are drawn in as horizontal lines, and
their 90% confidence intervals are depicted as boxes. One can see in the figure that the prior to
the Reformation there were small, statistically insignificant differences in occupational sectors be-
tween graduates of universities that would eventually be Protestant and those that would remain
Catholic. There was no differential pre-Reformation trend. One also can see a statistically signifi-
cant fall in the likelihood of Protestant university graduates having a first job in the church sector
during the Reformation era of around 12.6 percentage points. This represents a large decline rela-
tive to the pre-Reformation mean of around 57% of students taking a job in the church sector, and
supports the prediction of our conceptual framework.
     While we document an unambiguous reallocation of upper tail human capital across sectors,
an important question about the patterns seen in Figure 5 is whether the decline in church-sector
employment among university graduates was offset by increases in the employment of non-
university graduates in the religious sector in Protestant territories.35 However, abundant his-
torical evidence indicates that religious sector employment sharply declined across the board in
Protestant regions. For example, McLaughlin (2003, p. 70) observes:

          The Protestant preachers in German cities represented only a small fraction of the num-
          ber of Catholic priests found there during the later Middle Ages. . . . The abolition of
          religious orders and the suppression of non-parochial shrines and pilgrimage churches
          released their attendant clergy. The elimination of minor orders—subdeacons, acolytes,
          exorcists, doorkeeper—contributed to the decline, as did the dismantling of the higher
          ranks of bishop and archbishop. The numerous clergy who had staffed episcopal
          courts and offices disappeared as well. In fact, the enormous bureaucratic structure,
          developed in the Catholic Church during its long history, simply disappeared.

     In addition to changes in the sector of employment, a second prediction arising from our con-
ceptual framework is that within the secular sector, university graduates should specifically have
sorted into secular occupations in the service of territorial lords in the Reformation era, partic-
ularly in Protestant regions. We use administrative occupations as a proxy for occupations in
the service of secular lords. For illustration, the five most common administrative occupations
in our data are procurator (Prokurator), notary (Notar), city councillor (Ratsherr), councillor (Rat),
and public notary (Öffentlicher Notar).36 To test whether there was a differential shift toward ad-
ministrative occupations among graduates of Protestant universities during the Reformation, we
  35 Itis important to note, however, that educational standards for Protestant clergy were relatively high—if anything
higher than for Catholic clergy. Still, only a minority of priests had obtained a degree from a university. The requirement
that simple priests would have to attend or obtain a degree from a university was enforced only later, in the 17th century
(Kaufmann, 2003, pp. 125–30).
  36 Note that because education and health occupations (e.g., professors and doctors) were less clearly linked to the

service of territorial lords, we do not include them in our proxy. We do include the very small number of military


                                                            23
                                   A. First Job: Church                                         B. First Job: Administrative
              .2




                                                                                .2
              .1




                                                                                .1
   Point estimate / C.I.




                                                                     Point estimate / C.I.
                 0




                                                                                   0
      -.1




                                                                        -.1
              -.2




                                                                                -.2
              -.3




                                                                                -.3
                     1480 1490 1500 1510 1520 1530 1540 1550                           1480 1490 1500 1510 1520 1530 1540 1550


                       Figure 5: Effects of the Reformation on Careers (Difference in Differences Estimates)
Regression estimates of sorting into occupational sectors over time and by university denomination. Panel A presents
the differential probability that graduates from eventually-Protestant universities take a first job in church occupations,
relative to graduates from universities that remain Catholic. Panel B presents the differential probability that graduates
from eventually-Protestant universities take a first job in administrative occupations, relative to graduates from univer-
sities that remain Catholic. Regressions are estimated using OLS at the student level, for 2,385 students, and include
university and decade fixed effects. Decadal regression coefficients of interest are interactions between an “eventually
Protestant university” dummy variable and decade fixed effects and are estimated relative to the omitted interaction
with the 1510–1519 decade. In the aggregate specification, coefficients of interest are interactions between an “eventu-
ally Protestant university” dummy variable and a 1480–1509 dummy (Panel A: β = 0.02, p = 0.56; Panel B: β = −0.01,
p = 0.56), and between an “eventually Protestant university” dummy variable and a 1520–1549 dummy (Panel A:
β = −0.11, p = 0.03; Panel B: β = 0.05, p = 0.13), estimated relative to the omitted interaction with the 1510–1519
decade. Coefficient estimates on the decade interactions are plotted as dots with their 90% confidence intervals indi-
cated with vertical lines. Coefficient estimates on the aggregate interactions are shown with horizontal lines, and their
90% confidence intervals are indicated as boxes. Standard errors are clustered at the university×decade level.




estimate regressions analogous to those presented in Figure 5, panel A, but now considering as
the outcome variable a dummy indicating that an individual’s career was administrative. That is,
we estimate equations 1 and 2, but substitute adminiut for churchiut .
      One can see in Figure 5, panel B, suggestive evidence consistent with our conceptual frame-
work’s prediction. While there was essentially no difference in the probability of (eventually)
Protestant or Catholic university graduates taking administrative jobs before the Reformation, a
gap emerged in the first decades of the Reformation.37 This gap should be interpreted cautiously,
occupations in our classification of careers in the service of territorial lords (this is inconsequential for our findings).
For concision, we use the label “administrative” for the slightly broader set of occupations.
  37 Kim and Pfaff (2012) show that Protestant university graduates also affected the political economy of Germany by




                                                                24
                   Table 3: The Association Between Fields of Study and Occupations

                                                                            % with            % with
        Type of university graduate             No. of individuals        church job      administration job
        At least one theology degree                     524                  90%                  34%
        No theology degree                              2,648                 54%                  25%
        Statistical significance                                             < 1%                 < 1%
        At least one arts or law degree                 3,027                 58%                  27%
        No arts or law degree                            145                  92%                  11%
        Statistical significance                                             < 1%                 < 1%
       Table examines the relationship between field of study and occupational sector among individuals earning
       degrees between 1480 and 1550, inclusive, and who have at least one occupation recorded in the Repertorium
       Academicum Germanicum dataset. Careers in the church and administrative sectors are determined using the
       Thesaurus Professionum (Marburg University, 2015).



as only one of the three decade interactions is significantly different from zero, and over the en-
tire Reformation era, we find a marginally statistically insignificant effect (p = 0.126). Still, the
estimated 5 percentage point increase in the likelihood of Protestant university graduates sorting
into administrative positions is economically large relative to the baseline rate of administrative
employment: prior to the Reformation, only around 10% of students took jobs in administration.

3.3    Investments in church-specific versus more general human capital
An implication of the reduced employment prospects in the church sector is that forward-looking
students should invest less in human capital that specifically has a high payoff in the church sector.
In addition, increased demand for labor by secular lords should lead students to invest in human
capital that is associated with administrative career paths.
      While highly-skilled individuals entered church employment from a range of educational
backgrounds, there was a particular human capital investment that was essentially church specific:
the study of theology. As can be seen in Table 3, while 54% of students in the RAG database with-
out a theology degree had some church sector employment in their careers, this number jumps
to 90% among individuals with a theology degree (the difference in proportions is highly statisti-
cally significant).38 Thus, one would expect a shift away from the study of theology in Protestant
regions during the Reformation.
      There was no human capital investment that was specific to careers in administration; how-
ever, one can see in Table 3 that individuals with degrees in law or the arts were more more than
shaping the spread of the Reformation itself; this would have tended to reinforce the processes we document.
  38 Note that we include in Table 3 university students with a first job that was not readily classified by sector and

hence are not included in our regression analysis of first job outcomes. Restricting our analysis of associations between
degrees and career paths to individuals included in our regression analysis does not affect our findings.


                                                           25
twice as likely to take administration jobs than individuals without these degrees (e.g., individuals
who only studied theology or medicine—note that some individuals would have studied in mul-
tiple fields). One might therefore also expect a shift toward the study of arts and law in Protestant
regions during the Reformation.
    We thus examine whether there was not only a shift in the occupations of the highly skilled
during the Reformation, but also a shift in the type of human capital they acquired. We begin, in
Figure 6, by presenting the shares of students investing in church-specific human capital (study-
ing theology) and in more general, secular human capital over time, by the denomination of the
university attended. One can see in the figure that, indeed, following the Reformation, partic-
ularly among students at Protestant universities, there was a striking shift away from the study
of theology. Prior to the Reformation, around 10% of degrees were awarded in theology, and, if
anything, universities that would become Protestant granted a slightly higher share of theology
degrees than universities that would remain Catholic. After the Reformation, the share of theol-
ogy degrees granted fell below 2% in Protestant universities; in Catholic universities, the share of
theology degrees granted fell in the middle of the 16th century, but by 1600 the share had returned
to the level observed prior to the Reformation.39
    We next formally test for the statistical significance of this divergence in human capital invest-
ments, estimating models analogous to those from our analysis of university graduates’ careers,
but now considering as our outcome the subject of an individual’s degree. Specifically, we esti-
mate:

                                                    1540
                        theologyiut = αu + δt +      ∑         β τ ( protu × decadeτ ) + eiut ,              (3)
                                                   τ =1480

where theologyiut is an indicator capturing whether student i graduating from university u in
decade t earned a theology degree. As in equation 1, the αu terms are a full set of university
fixed effects; δt are a full set of decade fixed effects, and the explanatory variables of interest are
the interactions between decade fixed effects and an “eventually Protestant university” dummy
variable (and the omitted reference decade is 1510–1519, just prior to the Reformation). As was
done above, standard errors will be estimated allowing for clustering at the university×decade
level.
    In addition to the more flexible decade-by-decade estimates, we again estimate a more aggre-
gated difference-in-differences model with three time periods, analogous to equation 2. Specifi-
cally, we estimate:

                                                      3
                         theologyiut = αu + δt +     ∑ βτ ( protu × periodτ ) + eiut ,                       (4)
                                                    τ =1
  39 The increase in theology degrees in Catholic regions coincides with the Counter-Reformation. Note that these
patterns appear within degree levels as well: both examining only bachelor’s degrees, or examining only advanced
degrees.


                                                          26
                           Protestant Universities                                                               Catholic Universities
              1                                                 .2                                1                                                 .2


                                                                .175                                                                                .175


             .95                                                .15                              .95                                                .15


                                                                .125                                                                                .125




                                                                       Theology




                                                                                                                                                           Theology
   Secular




                                                                                       Secular
              .9                                                .1                                .9                                                .1


                                                                .075                                                                                .075


             .85                                                .05                              .85                                                .05


                                                                .025                                                                                .025


              .8                                                0                                 .8                                                0
                   1475   1500     1525    1550   1575   1600                                          1475   1500     1525    1550   1575   1600

                                 Secular     Theology                                                                Secular     Theology




                      Figure 6: Degrees Granted in Eventually-Protestant and Catholic Universities
Shares of theology and secular degrees granted by (eventual) university denomination (smoothed using an 11-year
moving average). Theology and secular degree categories are exhaustive and mutually exclusive. The secular degree
category includes degrees in the arts, law, and medicine. Data come from the Repertorium Academicum Germanicum
for degrees granted through 1550 and own data collection (consulting Bauch, 1897; Erler, 1895, 1897, 1909; Eulenburg,
1904; Kleineidam, 1983; Leinweber, 1991; Rüegg, 1996; Steinmeyer, 1912) for degrees granted from 1550 through 1600.
Vertical line marks 1517, when Martin Luther circulated his 95 Theses.




where the only change relative to equation 3 is that instead of seven decade dummies interacted
with the “eventually Protestant university” dummy variable, we now have three time periods:
(1480–1509, 1510–1519, and 1520–1549). As was the case in the analysis of careers, the interaction
between the “eventually Protestant university” dummy variable and the 1480–1519 time period
dummy allows for a formal test of pre-Reformation trends. The interaction between the “eventu-
ally Protestant university” dummy variable and the post-Reformation (1520–1549) dummy vari-
able allows us to identify the differential shift in degrees among graduates from Protestant uni-
versities in the Reformation era.
       Figure 7 panel A, presents all of our estimates from equations 3 and 4 graphically, in a man-
ner analogous to our analysis of careers. One can see in the figure that during the Reformation,
there was an economically and statistically significant decline in the likelihood of Protestant uni-
versity graduates receiving a degree in theology. The coefficient on the more aggregated post-
Reformation interaction shows around a 4.5 percentage point decline in theology degrees—very
large relative to the pre-Reformation mean share of theology degrees of around 6%—and statisti-
cally significant at the 5% level as well. Prior to the Reformation there was no significant differ-


                                                                                  27
                                             A. Degree: Theology                                           B. Degree: Law and/or Arts
                          .05




                                                                                           .05
               Point estimate / C.I.




                                                                                Point estimate / C.I.
                                0




                                                                                                 0
                -.05




                                                                                 -.05
                          -.1




                                                                                           -.1




                                 1480 1490 1500 1510 1520 1530 1540 1550                          1480 1490 1500 1510 1520 1530 1540 1550



 Figure 7: Effects of the Reformation on University Degrees (Difference in Differences Estimates)
Regression estimates of human capital investments across fields over time and by university denomination. Panel A
presents the differential probability that graduates from eventually-Protestant universities earned a degree in theology,
relative to graduates from universities that remain Catholic. Panel B presents the differential probability that graduates
from eventually-Protestant universities earned degrees in law or the arts, relative to graduates from universities that
remain Catholic. Regressions are estimated using OLS at the student level, for 9,901 students, and include university
and decade fixed effects. Decadal regression coefficients of interest are interactions between an “eventually Protes-
tant university” dummy variable and decade fixed effects and are estimated relative to the omitted interaction with
the 1510–1519 decade. In the aggregate specification, coefficients of interest are interactions between an “eventually
Protestant university” dummy variable and a 1480–1509 dummy (Panel A: β = 0.01, p = 0.66; Panel B: β = −0.00,
p = 0.89), and between an “eventually Protestant university” dummy variable and a 1520–1549 dummy (Panel A:
β = −0.05, p = 0.03; Panel B: β = 0.02, p = 0.09), estimated relative to the omitted interaction with the 1510–1519
decade. Coefficient estimates on the decade interactions are plotted as dots with their 90% confidence intervals indi-
cated with vertical lines. Coefficient estimates on the aggregate interactions are shown with horizontal lines, and their
90% confidence intervals are indicated as boxes. Standard errors are clustered at the university×decade level.




                                                                           28
ence between graduates of Catholic and (eventually) Protestant universities in the likelihood of
an individual receiving a theology degree: individual decade-level interactions are insignificantly
different from zero, and the coefficient on the more aggregated pre-Reformation interaction is tiny.
There is, admittedly, some evidence of a differential decline in the likelihood of theology study in
(eventually) Protestant universities from 1480–1509, but this was reversed in the last decade be-
fore the Reformation, suggesting that pre-Reformation trends do not drive the post-Reformation
patterns we observe.
      We next test whether there was a differential shift toward degrees that were more likely to lead
to administrative occupations among graduates of Protestant universities during the Reformation.
To do so, we estimate regressions analogous to those presented in Figure 7, panel A, but now con-
sidering as the outcome variable a dummy indicating that an individual’s degree was in law or
the arts. That is, we estimate equations 3 and 4, but substitute law or artsiut for theologyiut . One
can see in Figure 7, panel B, evidence consistent with our prediction. While there was essentially
no difference in the probability of (eventually) Protestant or Catholic university graduates earn-
ing degrees in law or the arts before the Reformation (and no differential trend), a gap emerged
between Protestant and Catholic university graduates’ degrees in the first decades of the Refor-
mation. The coefficient on the more aggregated post-Reformation interaction shows around a 2
percentage point increase in the likelihood of a Protestant university graduate earning a degree in
law or the arts after 1520 (marginally statistically significant, with p = 0.09).

3.4     Construction activity
We view construction activity as approximating a summary statistic for the allocation of economic
resources due to the requirements of land and financial, human, and physical capital. Our highly
disaggregated data on construction activity allow us to test a rich set of hypotheses that arise from
our conceptual framework.

Construction activity across territories around the time of the Reformation — Our conceptual
framework and historical evidence lead us to expect a shift in resources—and thus construction
activity—toward secular purposes during the Reformation, particularly toward uses favored by
secular lords, and in territories that adopted Protestantism. Because lords’ expropriation of church
resources was not consolidated in the initial decades of the Reformation, we expect reallocation
reflected in construction starts to be particularly pronounced beginning in the 1550s. We also
expect to observe differences between Protestant and Catholic territories reflecting variation in
the intensity of religious competition in Catholic areas—which prior research suggests was more
intense in the border regions of Catholic territories (Ekelund et al., 2006).
      We begin our analysis of construction activity across church and secular sectors by showing, in
Figure 8, new construction events per town per year by sector (church and secular are exhaustive
and mutually exclusive categories of construction). We show the time series of construction sep-


                                                   29
                                                            Protestant Territories                                                                          Catholic Territories

        Construction Starts per Town    .01                                                                                             .01




                                                                                                        Construction Starts per Town
                                       .008                                                                                            .008




                                       .006                                                                                            .006




                                       .004                                                                                            .004




                                       .002                                                                                            .002


                                              1475   1500       1525     1550        1575      1600                                           1475   1500      1525     1550       1575       1600

                                                      Church Building           Secular Building                                                      Church Building          Secular Building




  Figure 8: Religious and Secular Construction in Eventually-Protestant and Catholic Germany
Construction starts per town×year disaggregated by sector for towns in (eventually) Protestant and (remaining)
Catholic territories (smoothed using an 11-year moving average). Town-level construction data come from the Deutsches
Städtebuch. Assignment of towns to religious denominations is done by matching each town to its territorial lord iden-
tified in the Euratlas for 1500, and using the territorial lord’s religion as coded by Cantoni (2012). Vertical line marks
1517, when Martin Luther circulated his 95 Theses.




arately for towns whose territorial lords eventually adopted Protestantism and for towns whose
lords remained Catholic. Note that the likelihood of a major construction event is small for a given
town×year observation: on average, German towns had one to two major construction events per
century in the early-modern era.
    Several clear facts emerge from Figure 8. First, in both territories adopting Protestantism and
those that remained Catholic, church-sector construction predominated prior to the Reformation.
Second, in both “eventually Protestant” and “always Catholic” towns, secular construction in-
creased and church construction decreased just after Luther posted his 95 theses in 1517. Third,
the shift in resources was much greater and more sustained in regions that adopted Protestantism:
by the end of the 16th century, rates of new secular construction were nearly double rates of new
church construction in Protestant towns. In Catholic towns, in contrast, church and secular con-
struction were roughly equal at the end of the 16th century.
    We next more formally examine the Reformation-era differences in construction between Catholic
and Protestant regions using a regression framework. We aggregate our construction event data to
territory×decade-level units in order to more precisely estimate differences in a context in which
the vast majority of towns have zero construction events in a given year. In addition, we examine
counts of construction events by sector (rather than a sector’s share of events) due to the presence


                                                                                                   30
of cells with zero total construction.
   We estimate the following “flexible” difference in differences model separately for the church
sector and the secular sector:

                                                      1590
                      construction jt = α j + δt +    ∑        β τ ( prot j × decadeτ ) + e jt ,        (5)
                                                     τ =1480

where construction jt is a count of the construction events in territory j, in decade t; α j is a set of
territory fixed effects; δt is a set of decade fixed effects; and the explanatory variables of interest are
the interactions between an “eventually Protestant territory” dummy variable and decade fixed
effects (with 1510–1519 the omitted reference decade). Standard errors are estimated allowing for
clustering at the territory level.
   In addition, we estimate models with four more aggregate time periods that we interact with
the “eventually Protestant territory” dummy. First, the three decades from 1480–1509; next, the
omitted reference decade from 1510–1519; third, the three decades of political instability follow-
ing the omitted decade, from 1520–1549; finally, the post-Schmalkaldic War era decades from
1550–1599. In this specification, the interaction between the “eventually Protestant territory”
dummy variable and the 1480–1519 time period dummy allows for a formal test of differential
pre-Reformation trends in construction activity between territories that would become Protestant
and those that would remain Catholic. The interaction between the “eventually Protestant terri-
tory” dummy variable and the first post-Reformation (1520–1549) dummy allows us to identify
the differential shift in construction in Protestant territories in the early Reformation era. And,
the interaction with the second post-Reformation (1550–1599) dummy variable allows us to iden-
tify the differential shift in construction in Protestant territories after territorial lords’ seizures of
church property were consolidated and after political stability was established. This more aggre-
gated difference in differences model, again estimated separately for construction in the church
and in the secular sector, is as follows:

                                                        4
                       construction jt = α j + δt +    ∑ βτ ( prot j × periodτ ) + ejt ,                (6)
                                                      τ =1

where the only change relative to equation 5 is that instead of twelve decade dummies inter-
acted with the “eventually Protestant territory” dummy variable, we now have four time periods:
(1480–1509, 1510–1519, 1520–1549, and 1550–1599).
   In the left-hand frame of Figure 9, panel A, we present all of our estimates from equations 5
and 6 for the church sector. One can see in the decade-level interaction estimates that prior to
the Reformation, (eventually) Protestant territories saw somewhat fewer church sector construc-
tion events than (remaining) Catholic territories. The gap between them was closing in the early
16th century, then opens widely in the Reformation era, with Protestant territories experiencing
statistically significantly less church sector construction than Catholic territories.


                                                      31
    When we examine the more aggregate interactions, these patterns are reinforced: prior to 1510,
there was less church sector construction in territories that would adopt Protestantism, but not
significantly so, and if anything the trend was toward eliminating the difference just before the
Reformation. Then, after the Reformation, both before and after the Schmalkaldic War, there was
statistically significantly less church sector construction in Protestant than Catholic regions.
    Next, in the left-hand frame of Figure 9, panel B, we present all of our estimates from equa-
tions 5 and 6 for the secular sector. This is nearly an inverted image of panel A (note that this is
not mechanical, as we do not study construction shares). The decade-level interaction estimates
show that prior to the Reformation, (eventually) Protestant territories saw somewhat more secu-
lar sector construction events than (remaining) Catholic territories; this difference was statistically
significant for the decades from 1490–1509, indicating a move toward less secular construction in
(eventually) Protestant territories just prior to the Reformation, in the 1510–1519 decade. One can
see that in the Reformation era, there is again greater secular sector construction in Protestant ter-
ritories than in Catholic ones, and that this gap is particularly pronounced in the decades after the
Schmalkaldic War (1550–1599).
    Examining the aggregated interactions, one first sees a statistically significant pre-1510 inter-
action. It is worth discussing this in some detail: first, this result does not imply that the post-1520
patterns we observe were merely the continuation of a pre-Reformation trend. Just the opposite:
just prior to the Reformation—moving from the 1480–1509 interaction to the omitted 1510–1519
decade—shows a negative pre-Reformation trend in secular construction in (eventually) Protestant
territories relative to Catholic ones. Rather, the major concern raised by the significant pre-1510
interaction is that the post-Reformation results simply reflect a reversion to the pre-Reformation
mean. The interaction for 1520–1549 of similar magnitude to the aggregated pre-Reformation in-
teraction does not alleviate this concern. However, observing an interaction for 1550–1599 that
is nearly twice as large as the other two suggests that the post-Reformation increase in secular
sector construction in Protestant territories far exceeds mean reversion. We will further consider
concerns about pre-Reformation differences in construction between (eventually) Protestant and
Catholic regions in the analyses presented in the right-hand frames of Figure 9.
    Finally, in the left-hand frame of Figure 9, panel C, we present all of our estimates from equa-
tions 5 and 6, but examining construction that specifically reflected the interests of secular lords:
namely, new palaces and administrative buildings.40 One can see that the patterns qualitatively
match those in the left-hand frame of Figure 9, panel B: somewhat greater construction of palaces
and administrative buildings in (eventually) Protestant territories prior to the Reformation (in this
case not statistically significantly so); a negative differential trend in palace and administrative
construction in the last decade before the Reformation in (eventually) Protestant territories; a re-
version to earlier differences in the 1520–1549 period; finally, a much larger, statistically significant
  40 These estimates simply use counts of palaces and administrative buildings—a subset of secular construction—as

outcomes in equations 5 and 6.



                                                       32
                                                                            A. Church Construction
                                                              I. Baseline                                                II. Control for Pretreatment Outcomes
                                            2                                                                      2




                    Point estimate / C.I.




                                                                                           Point estimate / C.I.
                                            0                                                                      0



                                            -2                                                                     -2



                                            -4                                                                     -4
                                                 1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600                                     1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600

                                                                            B. Secular Construction
                                                              I. Baseline                                                II. Control for Pretreatment Outcomes
                                            6                                                                      6
                    Point estimate / C.I.




                                                                                           Point estimate / C.I.
                                            4                                                                      4


                                            2                                                                      2


                                            0                                                                      0


                                            -2                                                                     -2
                                                 1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600                                     1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600

                                                        C. Palace, Administrative, and Military Construction
                                                              I. Baseline                                                II. Control for Pretreatment Outcomes
                                            4                                                                      4
                    Point estimate / C.I.




                                                                                           Point estimate / C.I.




                                            2                                                                      2



                                            0                                                                      0



                                            -2                                                                     -2
                                                 1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600                                     1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600


     Figure 9: Effects of the Reformation on Construction (Difference in Differences Estimates)
Regression estimates of construction events in a territory×decade by sector, over time and by territorial religious denomination.
Panel A presents differential counts of church sector construction events in eventually-Protestant territories, relative to territories
that remain Catholic. Panel B presents differential counts of secular sector construction events in eventually-Protestant territories,
relative to territories that remain Catholic. Panel C presents differential counts of palace or administrative building construction
events in eventually-Protestant territories, relative to territories that remain Catholic. Regressions are estimated using OLS at the
territory×decade and include territory and decade fixed effects. The right-hand frames include interactions between the stock of a
territory’s construction in 1470 and a full set of decade dummies, as well as interactions between each territory’s level of construction
in each pre-Reformation decade and a full set of decade dummies. Decadal regression coefficients of interest are interactions between
an “eventually Protestant territory” dummy variable and decade fixed effects and are estimated relative to the omitted interaction
with the 1510–1519 decade. In the aggregate specification, coefficients of interest are interactions between an “eventually Protestant
territory” dummy variable and: (i) a 1480–1509 dummy (Panel A: β = −0.75, p = 0.20; Panel B: β = 0.96, p = 0.01; Panel C: β = 0.55,
p = 0.11); (ii) a 1520–1549 dummy (Panel A, left: β = −1.48, p = 0.11; Panel A, right: β = −0.21, p = 0.33; Panel B, left: β = 0.81,
p = 0.28; Panel B, right: β = 0.32, p = 0.58; Panel C, left: β = 0.52, p = 0.42; Panel C, right: β = 0.08, p = 0.84); and, (iii) and a
1550–1599 dummy (Panel A, left: β = −1.67, p = 0.05; Panel A, right: β = −0.65, p = 0.33; Panel B, left: β = 2.06, p = 0.07; Panel
B, right: β = 1.51, p = 0.02; Panel C, left: β = 1.47, p = 0.06; Panel C, right: β = 0.72, p = 0.05), estimated relative to the omitted
interaction with the 1510–1519 decade. Coefficient estimates on the decade interactions are plotted as dots with their 90% confidence
intervals indicated with vertical lines. Coefficient estimates on the aggregate interactions are shown with horizontal lines, and their
90% confidence intervals are indicated as boxes. Standard errors are clustered at the territory level.


                                                                                      33
difference after 1550.
   The left-hand frames of Figure 9 thus broadly confirm the predictions of our conceptual frame-
work: following the Reformation, resources were differentially shifted away from church pur-
poses in Protestant territories (panel A). Political power and control of resources shifted toward
secular lords, a process which was consolidated after the Schmalkaldic War; this is reflected in
the significant increase in secular construction, and specifically the construction of palaces and
administrative buildings, after 1550 (panels B and C).
   Still, the left-hand frames of Figure 9, panels A through C, raise several questions. First, one
might be concerned with the pre-Reformation differences in construction levels between Catholic
and (eventually) Protestant territories. Although there was not a trend toward the Reformation-
era patterns of construction activity just before 1520, it seems possible that some of the difference
between denominations in construction post-1520 reflects mean reversion to pre-Reformation dif-
ferences (or other unobserved territory differences associated with differential pre-Reformation
construction patterns). To address this concern, we next introduce controls that allow pre-Reformation
construction levels in a territory to affect post-Reformation outcomes very flexibly.
   We first allow for different construction patterns during the Reformation depending on the
stock of construction just prior to our analysis, including interactions between the total construc-
tion observed in a territory our data up to the 1470s and a full set of decade dummy variables. We
also allow pre-Reformation construction flows to affect Reformation-era construction, including
interactions between each territory’s level of construction in each pre-Reformation decade and a
full set of decade dummies. This absorbs all of the pre-Reformation differences in construction
in our analyses, and some of the post-Reformation variation, but makes our post-Reformation
comparisons close to ceteris paribus.
   In the right-hand frames of Figure 9, panels A–C, we replicate the analyses from the left-hand
frames, but including these very flexible controls for pre-Reformation differences in territories’
construction. As noted, by design, there are no pre-Reformation differences in either construc-
tion levels or trends between (eventually) Protestant and Catholic territories. Reassuringly, the
Reformation-era patterns of reallocation observed in the left-hand frames are qualitatively pre-
served even including this very demanding set of controls. Most strikingly, secular construction
exhibits a statistically significant differential increase in Protestant regions during the 1550–1599
period. The 1.5 additional secular construction events per territory×decade and 0.75 palaces or
administrative buildings in Protestant regions between 1550 and 1599 represent a large increase
relative to pre-Reformation means of 2.2 and 1.4, respectively, and even relative to total construc-
tion, which averaged 4.7 events per territory×decade prior to 1520.
   Up to now, our analysis has focused on the “extensive margin” of religious competition: com-
paring Protestant territories—where religious competition produced successful entry—with Catholic
territories. However, historical evidence suggests that within Catholic regions, religious competi-
tion was more intense along borders with Protestant territories (Ekelund et al., 2006); that is, there


                                                 34
                                                       A. Catholic Border Towns: High Competition
                                                            Church Construction                                                    Secular Construction
                                               3                                                                      3

                                               2                                                                      2



                       Point estimate / C.I.




                                                                                              Point estimate / C.I.
                                               1                                                                      1

                                               0                                                                      0

                                               -1                                                                     -1

                                               -2                                                                     -2

                                               -3                                                                     -3
                                                    1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600                                     1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600



                                               B. Catholic Towns Not on Border: Low Competition
                                                            Church Construction                                                    Secular Construction
                                               3                                                                      3

                                               2                                                                      2
                       Point estimate / C.I.




                                                                                              Point estimate / C.I.
                                               1                                                                      1

                                               0                                                                      0

                                               -1                                                                     -1

                                               -2                                                                     -2

                                               -3                                                                     -3
                                                    1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600                                     1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600



     Figure 10: Heterogeneous Effects of the Reformation: Intensity of Religious Competition
Regression estimates of construction events in a territory×decade by sector, over time, by territorial religious denomi-
nation, and by intensity of religious competition. The left-hand frame of Panel A presents differential counts of church
sector construction events in eventually-Protestant regions, relative to regions that remain Catholic and that are on the
border with Protestant territories. The right-hand frame of Panel A presents differential counts of secular sector con-
struction events in eventually-Protestant regions, relative to regions that remain Catholic and that are on the border with
Protestant territories. Panel B presents analogous analyses, but presenting differential counts of construction events in
eventually-Protestant regions, relative to regions that remain Catholic and that are not on the border with Protestant
territories. Catholic regions are defined at the town level based on the religious denomination of the nearest town
(Protestant nearest town implies border region, Catholic nearest town implies non-border regions, and a nearest town
with religion unknown is excluded from the analysis). Regressions are estimated using OLS at the territory×decade
and include territory and decade fixed effects. The right-hand frames include interactions between the stock of a ter-
ritory’s construction in 1470 and a full set of decade dummies, as well as interactions between each territory’s level
of construction in each pre-Reformation decade and a full set of decade dummies. Decadal regression coefficients of
interest are interactions between an “eventually Protestant territory” dummy variable and decade fixed effects and are
estimated relative to the omitted interaction with the 1510–1519 decade. In the aggregate specification, coefficients of
interest are interactions between an “eventually Protestant territory” dummy variable and: (i) a 1520–1549 dummy
(Panel A, left: β = −0.01, p = 0.95; Panel A, right: β = 0.54, p = 0.08; Panel B, left: β = −0.03, p = 0.92; Panel B, right:
β = 0.62, p = 0.07) and (ii) a 1550–1599 dummy (Panel A, left: β = −0.20, p = 0.22; Panel A, right: β = 0.13, p = 0.70;
Panel B, left: β = −.02, p = 0.96; Panel B, right: β = 1.25, p = 0.02), estimated relative to the omitted interaction with
the 1510–1519 decade. Coefficient estimates on the decade interactions are plotted as dots with their 90% confidence
intervals indicated with vertical lines. Coefficient estimates on the aggregate interactions are shown with horizontal
lines, and their 90% confidence intervals are indicated as boxes. Standard errors are clustered at the territory level.




                                                                                         35
was an “intensive margin” of religious competition as well. To the extent that the resource re-
allocation we observe following the Reformation was ultimately driven by religious competition
affecting the bargain between religious and secular elites, one would expect that the differences
between Protestant and Catholic regions seen in Figure 9 should have primarily been driven by
differences between Protestant territories and Catholic regions far from Protestant lands (i.e., those
Catholic regions experiencing less religious competition).
    To examine this hypothesis, we conduct empirical exercises analogous to those presented in
the right-hand frames of Figure 9, panels A and B, but comparing Protestant territories to a split
sample of Catholic regions. The first, “high competition,” subsample comprises the set of Catholic
towns whose nearest town is known to have had a Protestant territorial lord. The second, “low
competition,” subsample comprises the set of Catholic towns whose nearest town is known to
have had a Catholic territorial lord. Note that we restrict this analysis to towns (whether Protestant
or Catholic) that do not border territories whose lord and religion are unknown to us. Hence this
analysis does not precisely aggregate to the results in Figure 9.
    In Figure 10, panel A, one can see that comparing Protestant regions’ construction patterns
with those in “high competition” Catholic regions, there is only a small difference in Reformation
era construction activity, with secular construction being slightly higher in the 1520–1549 period in
Protestant regions. In Figure 10, panel B, one can see that Reformation era construction for secular
purposes was far greater in Protestant regions than in “low competition” Catholic regions far from
Protestant territories (particularly after 1550). These results suggest that religious competition
was indeed important both on the “extensive margin” of successful entry and on the “intensive
margin” of more contestable religious markets.
    Another question about the pattern of reallocation we observe in Figure 9 is whether our re-
sults are explained by the mis-classification of construction events. Two types of mis-classification
are of particular concern: first, while we assign construction for social welfare purposes to the “sec-
ular” category, hospitals and schools were often attached to churches and were staffed by church
personnel, making their assignment ambiguous. Second, military construction, which makes up
a component of our secular category as well as a component of our count of events reflecting the
interests of secular lords, may have served religious purposes in an era of religious conflict.
    To more closely examine the types of construction events that drive the observed reallocation,
Figure 11 presents evidence on secular construction by specific purpose, in Protestant territories.
One can see in the figure that the overall pattern of secularization in Protestant regions is not
driven by the ambiguous social welfare or military construction events. Rather, the increased
construction in the secular sector is driven by palaces and administrative buildings, precisely the
categories that reflect the increased power and wealth of secular authorities.41
  41 We also consider the possibility that while the count of church building in Protestant territories shrank after the
Reformation, perhaps church building sizes increased. We collect data on church sizes from the 124-volume series
Denkmaltopographie Bundesrepublik Deutschland (Dellwing, 1988/2011) and its various predecessor series (a full set of
references is provided in the online appendix) which provides us with information on the area of 14% of the new church


                                                          36
                                               250
              Cumulative Construction Starts




                                               200


                                               150


                                               100


                                               50


                                                0
                                                     1475   1500      1525          1550       1575    1600

                                                                   Administrative          Palaces
                                                                   Economic                Military
                                                                   Welfare                 Other


           Figure 11: Secular Construction by Purpose in Eventually-Protestant Germany
Cumulative number of new secular sector construction events, disaggregated by specific purpose, for towns in (eventu-
ally) Protestant territories. Secular sector construction events are disaggregated the into mutually exclusive and exhaus-
tive sub-sectors. The “Administrative” sub-sector includes courts, town halls, and customs houses. The “Economic”
sub-sector comprises private sector construction, such as mills, restaurants, and breweries. The “Welfare” sub-sector
includes schools and hospitals. The “Palaces” sub-sector includes castles and hunting lodges. The “Military” sub-sector
includes barracks and arsenals. Town-level construction data come from the Deutsches Städtebuch. Assignment of towns
to religious denominations is done by matching each town to its territorial lord identified in the Euratlas for 1500, and
using the territorial lord’s religion as coded by Cantoni (2012). Vertical line marks 1517, when Martin Luther circulated
his 95 Theses.




                                                                          37
Interpretation of cause and effect — An overarching question regarding our analysis is whether
the reallocation we observe reflects a causal effect of the Reformation or merely the effects of unob-
served differences across territories. Perhaps territories that became Protestant were already eco-
nomically or culturally different prior to the Reformation, with this underlying difference driving
both the Reformation and the reallocation of resources we document. Evidence presented thus far
supports a causal interpretation: territories and universities that would become Protestant exhibit
no significant differences in human and physical capital investment trends prior to the Reforma-
tion. We observe no indication that these territories would have diverged had the Reformation
not occurred.
    One might remain concerned about time-varying, territory-specific unobservables that drove
both the adoption of Protestantism and resource reallocation. For example, a large literature doc-
uments a wave of urban support for the Reformation across Germany and that cities (as opposed
to towns) were the locations where reformist ideas and constituencies developed (Ozment, 1975;
Hamm, 1994).42 This suggests a possible alternative theory: just at the time of the Reformation, ur-
ban areas may have experienced socioeconomic change that drove both the Reformation and the
economic change we observe. However, our findings are not driven by large cities. In Figure 12,
one can see a pattern of reallocation from church to secular construction in both small Protestant
towns and large Protestant cities.
    A final concern could be that economic shocks hit particular regions, shifting both the likeli-
hood of the adoption Protestantism and the incentives for reallocating resources toward secular
purposes. To explore this possibility, we narrow our focus to three territories where the timing of
religious change was unrelated to local economic conditions. To be precise, we study three set-
tings in which the timing of religious change was driven by the exogenous timing of ruler change.
We examine evidence on the change of rulers and religion in the Electorate of Brandenburg, the
Duchy of Saxony, and the Duchy of Württemberg.43 In these three territories, an unobserved
territory-by-time economic shock does not explain the timing of the adoption of Protestantism,
but we observe the same pattern of resource reallocation coinciding with religious change that we
observe throughout Germany.
    Electorate of Brandenburg — The Electorate of Brandenburg at the time of the Reformation was
ruled by Joachim I (Nestor), who, with his brother Albert, personified the corrupt practices that
Luther criticized in his theses. In particular, Joachim I and his Hohenzollern family purchased
the archbishopric of Mainz for Albert using loans guaranteed by future sales of indulgences. A
buildings we observe in eventually-Protestant territories between 1470 and 1600. We find that church areas increased
slightly, but statistically insignificantly from the pre-Reformation era to the post-Reformation era: from around 450
square meters to around 495 in the sample of churches for which we have data (see Online Appendix Table A3).
   42 As Brady (2009, p. 161) observes, “cities became the nurseries and schoolhouses of religious change, it is hardly

going too far to say that the Protestant reformation was, at least in its youth, ‘an urban event’.” This is also consistent
with the Tawney hypothesis (Tawney, 1926).
   43 Note that these territories are not unusual in the intensity of monastery closure or the timing of the adoption of the

Reformation, as can be seen in Table 2.



                                                            38
                                                    Protestant Towns                                                           Protestant Cities
                                     .008                                                                     .03
               Construction Starts




                                                                                        Construction Starts
                                     .006
                                                                                                              .02
                                     .004
                                                                                                              .01
                                     .002

                                       0                                                                       0
                                            1475   1500   1525    1550   1575   1600                                1475     1500   1525   1550   1575   1600


                                                      Catholic Towns                                                            Catholic Cities
                                     .008                                                                     .03
               Construction Starts




                                                                                        Construction Starts




                                     .006
                                                                                                              .02
                                     .004
                                                                                                              .01
                                     .002

                                       0                                                                       0
                                            1475   1500   1525    1550   1575   1600                                1475     1500   1525   1550   1575   1600


                                                                 Church Building                                           Secular Building


                                       Figure 12: Heterogeneous Effects of the Reformation: Town Size
Construction starts per city×year or town×year disaggregated by sector for cities and towns in (eventually) Protestant
and (remaining) Catholic territories (smoothed using an 11-year moving average). Town-level construction data come
from the Deutsches Städtebuch. Assignment of towns to religious denominations is done by matching each town to its
territorial lord identified in the Euratlas for 1500, and using the territorial lord’s religion as coded by Cantoni (2012).
“Cities” for the purpose of this figure are the subset of towns in the dataset with population data available in Bairoch et
al. (1988); “towns” for the purpose of this figure are the complementary subset. Vertical line marks 1517, when Martin
Luther circulated his 95 Theses.




                                                                                   39
staunch Catholic, Joachim I had his son, Joachim II (Hector) sign an inheritance contract in which
Joachim II promised to remain Catholic. One can see in the top panel of Figure 13 that during
the period of Catholic rule (until the death of Joachim I, in 1535), the Electorate of Brandenburg
experienced very few monastery closures and saw very little increase in secular construction.
   However, after the death of Joachim I in 1535, Joachim II reneged on his pledge to remain
Catholic. In the top panel of Figure 13, one can see that shortly after Joachim II took power, the
political shock produced a sharp increase in monastery closure, and, as measured by construction
activity, a shift of resources toward secular and away from church uses.
   Duchy of Saxony — The Duchy of Saxony was ruled in the early 16th century by Duke Georg,
an ardent Catholic. In 1539, Georg’s last remaining (Catholic) son, Frederick died. Knowing that
his Protestant brother Heinrich was in line to inherit the Duchy if he died, Georg attempted to
secure the inheritance for the Catholic Ferdinand (who would eventually become Holy Roman
Emperor). Georg initiated the legal process necessary to transfer his inheritance to Ferdinand;
however, before this could be completed, Georg himself died in 1539, leading to the accession of
Heinrich and the conversion of the Duchy to Lutheranism.
   In the middle panel of Figure 13, one can see some monastery closure and some shift in con-
struction away from the church sector during the Reformation era even under the Catholic Georg.
However, at precisely the moment when the Protestant Heinrich took power (marked by a ver-
tical red line), monastery closure sharply accelerated, and resources were allocated differentially
toward secular and away from church uses.
   Duchy of Württemberg — In 1519, Duke Ulrich was exiled from the Duchy of Württemberg after
killing the husband of his mistress. Control of the Duchy was given to the Catholic future emperor
Ferdinand. In 1523, Ulrich adopted the Protestant faith and attempted to retake the Duchy on the
back of the Peasants’ Revolt, but this attempt failed. One can see in the bottom panel of Figure 13
that in the first decade after the Reformation, under the Catholic Frederick, there is almost no
monastery closure in the Duchy of Württemberg, and very little shifting of construction toward
secular purposes.
   But in 1534, supported by his friend, the Protestant Philip of Hesse, the Duchy was restored
to Ulrich. Immediately thereafter, Ulrich expropriated many of the Duchy’s monasteries; by 1535,
one-third of the Duchy’s farmland was transferred from the monasteries into Ulrich’s possession
(Ocker, 2010, pp. 55–56). One can see in the botton panel of Figure 13 that exactly at this time
secular construction begins to rise and overtakes religious construction in the Duchy.




                                                40
                                                                 Brandenburg




                                                                                                        Monastery Closures (Share)
                                              3                                                    .8




                        Construction Starts
                                                                                                   .6
                                              2
                                                                                                   .4
                                              1
                                                                                                   .2

                                              0                                                    0
                                                  1475   1500     1525        1550   1575   1600


                                                                Duchy of Saxony




                                                                                                        Monastery Closures (Share)
                                              4                                                    1
                        Construction Starts




                                                                                                   .8
                                              3
                                                                                                   .6
                                              2
                                                                                                   .4
                                              1
                                                                                                   .2

                                              0                                                    0
                                                  1475   1500     1525        1550   1575   1600


                                                                 Wurttemberg




                                                                                                        Monastery Closures (Share)
                                              4
                                                                                                   .6
                        Construction Starts




                                              3
                                                                                                   .4
                                              2

                                                                                                   .2
                                              1

                                              0                                                    0
                                                  1475   1500     1525        1550   1575   1600


                                                                Church Construction
                                                                Secular Construction
                                                                Monastery Closures

                             Figure 13: Effects of Reformation: Territorial Case Studies
Monastery closure and construction in three territories: Brandenburg, Ducal Saxony, and Württemberg. Each figure
shows the fraction of monasteries closed and the number of construction events in the church and secular sectors
(construction events are shown as 11-year moving averages). The posting of Luther’s theses in 1517 is marked in all
figures, as are the dates of each change in territorial lord leading to the adoption of Protestantism: 1535 for Electorate
of Brandenburg, 1539 for the Duchy of Saxony, and 1534 for the Duchy of Württemberg.




                                                                         41
4   Conclusion
We find that the introduction of religious competition during the Protestant Reformation had an
unintended consequence: a significant reallocation of economic resources from religious uses to
secular ones. We argue that to understand how economic secularization results from the rise of a
religious movement, one must consider the interaction of religious and political elites in a market
for religiously derived political legitimacy. Considering this market, one indeed expects that the
introduction of religious competition will shift political and economic power from religious elites
to secular rulers, producing the secularization we observe.
    Our analysis brings rich empirical evidence to some of the major intellectual debates in the
social sciences. First, we reinforce Tawney’s (1926) emphasis on important pre-conditions for the
Reformation: specifically, the relative independence of secular rulers from religious institutions,
and conflict between secular and religious elites over Europe’s growing wealth play a crucial role
in our conceptual framework. However, we also provide evidence that the Reformation marked
a decisive break from existing patterns of resource allocation: far from being a continuation of
pre-existing trends, the Reformation played a causal role in reshaping Europe’s political economy.
We identify a massive resource reallocation resulting from the Reformation, but provide a very
different mechanism for long-run economic consequences from the cultural channel emphasized
by Weber (1904/05).
    Our findings also provide the beginnings of an empirical bridge between the Reformation and
consequences for long-run growth studied by numerous scholars (Weber, 1904/05; Becker and
Woessmann, 2009; Kuran, 2011; Rubin, 2017). Several extensions of this bridge are plausible. First,
the shifting of power to secular lords and the weakening of religious elites—particularly in Protes-
tant regions—may have significantly shaped policy choices and legal institutions; this mechanism
has been emphasized with respect to corporate law and usury restrictions (Kuran, 2011; Rubin,
2017). Both allocational and institutional secularization strengthened territorial rulers and might
have contributed to the development of early modern states of greater state capacity (Besley and
Persson, 2009, 2010; Gennaioli and Voth, 2015). Finally, both the reallocation of resources (partic-
ularly upper tail human capital) and the weakening of religious elites, might have set in motion
a process of cultural and intellectual change that culminated in the enlightenment, the scientific
revolution, and modern economic growth (Mokyr, 2005, 2017). While these links extend beyond
the scope of our study, we believe they deserve further attention.




                                                42
References
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano, “Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  December 2015, 53 (4), 898–944.

Allen, Robert C., “Craftsmen’s relative wages & Laborers’ relative wages.,” http://gpih.
  ucdavis.edu/Datafilelist.htm , 2012.

Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir, “Heterogeneity in Human Capital Invest-
  ments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers,” Annual Review of Economics, 2012,
  4 (1), 185–223.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Shock: Learning from Labor-
 Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade,” Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8, 205–240.

Bairoch, Paul, Jean Batou, and Pierre Chèvre, La population des villes européennes, 800-1850: Banque
  de données et analyse sommaire des résultats, Geneva: Droz, 1988.

Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary, “Religion and Economic Growth across Countries,”
  American Sociological Review, October 2003, pp. 760–781.

Bauch, Gustav, Das älteste Decanatsbuch der philosophischen Facultät an der Universität zu Frankfurt
  a.O, Breslau: Marcus in Komm., 1897.

Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann, “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of
  Protestant Economic History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2009, 124 (2), 531–596.

   and , “Not the Opium of the People: Income and Secularization in a Panel of Prussian Coun-
  ties,” American Economic Review, May 2013, 103 (3), 539–544.

  , Markus Nagler, and Ludger Woessmann, “Education and religious participation: City-level
  evidence from Germany’s secularization period 1890–1930,” 2017. Forthcoming, Journal of Eco-
  nomic Growth.

  , Steven Pfaff, and Jared Rubin, “Causes and Consequences of the Protestant Reformation,”
  forthcoming, Explorations in Economic History, 2016, pp. –.

Berman, Harold, Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition, Cambridge,
  Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983.

Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation,
  and Politics,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1218–44.

   and    , “State Capacity, Conflict, and Development,” Econometrica, January 2010, 78 (1), 1–34.

Brady, Thomas A., German Histories in the Age of Reformations, 1400-1650, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press, 2009.

Cameron, Euan, The European Reformation, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.

Cantoni, Davide, “Adopting a New Religion: The Case of Protestantism in 16th Century Ger-
  many,” Economic Journal, May 2012, 122 (560), 502–531.

                                                  43
  , “The Economic Effects of the Protestant Reformation: Testing the Weber Hypothesis in the
  German Lands,” Journal of the European Economic Association, August 2015, 13 (4), 561–598.

   and Noam Yuchtman, “Medieval Universities, Legal Institutions, and the Commercial Revolu-
  tion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2014, 129 (2), 823–887.

Chaney, Eric, “Tolerance, Religious Competition and the Rise and Fall of Muslim Science,”
 November 2008. Unpublished, Harvard University.

  , “Revolt on the Nile: Economic shocks, religion, and political power,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (5),
  2033–2053.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, “Housing Booms and Busts,
 Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance,” November 2016. Unpublished, North-
 western University.

  , , and , “The Masking of Declining Manufacturing Employment by the Housing Bubble,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, May 2016, 30 (2), 179–200.

Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, “Klöster, Stifte und Konvente in Schleswig-
 Holstein    und    Hamburg,”      https://www.klosterprojekt.uni-kiel.de/Uebersicht/
 ordensniederlassungen.html , 2017.

Cohn, Henry J., “Anticlericalism in the German Peasants’ War 1525,” Past and Present, May 1979,
  83, 3–31.

  , “Church Property in the German Protestant Principalities,” in “Politics and Society in Reforma-
  tion Europe – Essays for Sir Geoffrey Elton on his Sixty-Fifth Birthday,” Hampshire: Macmillan,
  1987.

Curuk, Malik and Sjak Smulders, “Malthus Meets Luther: The Economics Behind the German
 Reformation,” July 2016. CESifo Working Paper 6010.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, “Sectoral job creation and destruction responses to oil
 price changes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2001, 48, 465–512.

Dellwing, H., Denkmaltopographie Bundesrepublik Deutschland, Schwann, 1988/2011.

Dittmar, Jeremiah and Ralf Meisenzahl, “State Capacity and Public Goods: Institutional Change,
  Human Capital, and Growth in Early Modern Germany,” Centre for Economic Performance Paper
  Series, March 2016, 1418.

  and Skipper Seabold, “Media, Markets, and Radical Ideas: Evidence from the Protestant Ref-
  ormation,” 2016. LSE working paper.

Durkheim, Émile, De la division du travail social: Étude sur l’organisation des sociétés supérieures, F.
 Alcan, 1893.

Ekelund, Robert B., Robert F. Hébert, and Robert D. Tollison, The Marketplace of Christianity,
  Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006.



                                                     44
Erler, Georg, Die Matrikel der Universität Leipzig, Band 1: Die Immatrikulationen von 1410–1599,
  Leipzig: Giesecke & Devrient, 1895.

  , Die Matrikel der Universität Leipzig, Band 2: Die Promotionen von 1410–1599, Leipzig: Giesecke &
  Devrient, 1897.

  , Die iüngere Matrikel der Universität Leipzig, Band 1: Die Immatrikulationen vom Wintersemester
  1559 bis zum Sommersemester 1634, Leipzig: Giesecke & Devrient, 1909.

Eulenburg, Franz, Die Frequenz der deutschen Universitäten von ihrer Gründung bis zur Gegenwart.,
  Leipzig: Teubner, 1904.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Hans-Joachim Voth, “State Capacity and Military Conflict,” Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 2015, 82, 1409–1448.

Grendler, Paul F., “The Universities of the Renaissance and Reformation,” Renaissance Quarterly,
 Spring 2004, 57 (1), 1–42.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?,”
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2006, 20 (2), 23–48.

Hamm, Berndt, “The Urban Reformation in the Holy Roman Empire,” in Thomas A. Brady,
 Heiko A. Oberman, and James D. Tracy, eds., Handbook of European history, 1400-1600 : Late
 Middle Ages, Renaissance and Reformation, v. 2: Visions, Programs and Outcomes, Leiden: Brill,
 1994.

Iannaccone, Laurence R., “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture, 1998, 36 (3), 1465–1495.

Iyer, Sriya, “The New Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic Literature, June 2016, 54 (2),
  395–441.

Jürgensmeier, Friedhelm and Regina Elisabeth Schwerdtfeger, Orden und Klöster im Zeitalter von
   Reformation und katholischer Reform, 1500-1700, Münster: Aschendorff, 3 vols., 2005–2008.

Kaufmann, Thomas, “The Clergy and the Theological Culture of the Age: The Education of
 Lutheran Pastors in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries,” in C. Scott Dixon and Luise
 Schorn-Schütte, eds., The Protestant Clergy of Early Modern Europe, New York, NY: Palgrave
 Macmillan, 2003.

Kim, Hyojoung and Steven Pfaff, “Structure and Dynamics of Religious Insurgency: Students
  and the Spread of the Reformation,” American Sociological Review, 2012, 77, 188–215.

Kleineidam, Erich, Universitas studii Erffordensis: Überblick über die Geschichte der Universität Er-
  furt, Band 3: 1521–1632, Die Zeit der Reformation und Gegenreformation, Leipzig: St.-Benno-Verlag,
  1983.

Kuran, Timur, The Long Divergence: How Islamic Law Held Back the Middle East, Princeton, N.J.:
 Princeton University Press, 2011.

Leinweber, Josef, Verzeichnis der Studierenden in Fulda von 1574 bis 1805, Frankfurt am Main:
  Knecht, 1991.

                                                  45
Marburg, Universität, “Thesaurus Professionum Forschungsstelle für Personalschriften,” http:
 //www.online.uni-marburg.de/fpmr/thepro/cs.php , 2015.

Martin, David, On Secularization: Towards a Revised General Theory, Aldershot: Ashgate, 2005.

McCleary, Rachel M. and Robert J. Barro, “Religion and Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
 tives, Spring 2006, 20 (2), 49–72.

McLaughlin, R. Emmet, “The Making of the Protestant Pastor: The Theological Foundations of a
 Clerical Estate,” in C. Scott Dixon and Luise Schorn-Schütte, eds., The Protestant Clergy of Early
 Modern Europe, New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

McLeod, Hugh, Religion and the People of Western Europe 1789–1990, Oxford, New York: Oxford
 University Press, 1981.

Mills, C. Wright, The Sociological Imagination, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959.

Mokyr, Joel, “The Intellectual Origins of Modern Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic History,
 2005, 65 (2), 285–351.

  , The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain, 1700-1850, New Haven: Yale Univer-
  sity Press, 2009.

  , A Culture of Growth, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2017.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “The Allocation of Talent: Implica-
 tions for Growth,” The Quaterly Journal of Economics, May 1991, 106 (2), 503–530.

Naragon, Steve, “Brief Descriptions of 18th Century German Universities,” http://users.
 manchester.edu/FacStaff/SSNaragon/Kant/universities/UnivBriefHistories.htm , 2006.

Norris, Pippa and Ronald Inglehart, Sacred and Secular: Religion and Politics Worldwide, Cam-
 bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast, Violence and Social Orders: A
 Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
 versity Press, 2009.

Nunn, Nathan, “The Importance of History for Economic Development,” Annual Review of Eco-
 nomics, September 2009, 1 (1), 65–92.

Nüssli, Christos, “Periodical Historical Atlas of Europe,” www.euratlas.com , 2008.

Ocker, Christopher, Church Robbers and Reformers in Germany, 1525–1547: Confiscation and Religious
 Purpose in the Holy Roman Empire, Leiden: Brill, 2006.

  , “The birth of an Empire of Two Churches: church property, theologians, and the League of
  Schmalkalden,” Austrian History Yearbook, 2010, 41, 48–67.

Ozment, Steven E., The Reformation in the Cities: The Appeal of Protestantism to Sixteenth Century
 Germany and Switzerland, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1975.



                                                 46
Pettegree, Andrew, The Reformation: Critical Concepts in Historical Studies, London: Routledge,
  2004.

Rubin, Jared, “Printing and Protestants: An Empirical Test of the Role of Printing in the Reforma-
 tion,” Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2014, 96 (2), 270–286.

  , Rulers, Religion, and Riches: Why the West Got Rich and the Middle East Did Not, Cambridge, UK
  and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2017.

Rüegg, Walter, Geschichte der Universität in Europa, Band 2: Von der Reformation zur Französischen
  Revolution, Munich: C.H. Beck, 1996.

Saint-Simon, Henri de, Selected Writings on Science, Industry, and Social Organization, New York:
  Holmes and Meier, 1975.

Schliephake, F.W.T., Geschichte von Nassau von den ältesten Zeiten bis auf die Gegenwart, Wiesbaden:
  Kreidels Verlag, 1884.

Schwinges, Rainer Christoph and Christian Hesse, “Repertorium Academicum Germanicum,”
  http://www.rag-online.org , 2015.

Sehling, Emil, Die evanglischen Kirchenverordnungen des XVI. Jahrhunderts, Leipzig: O.R. Reisland,
  1902-2013.

Seifert, Arno, “Das höhere Schulwesen: Universitäten und Gymnasien,” in Nothker Hammer-
  stein, ed., Handbuch der deuschen Bildungsgeschichte, Vol. 1, Munich: C.H. Beck, 1996.

Spitz, Lewis, “The Impact of the Reformation on the Universities,” in Leif Grane, ed., Universities
  in the Reformation: Lectures from the University of Copenhagen Symposium, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1981.

Squicciarini, Mara P. and Nico Voigtländer, “Human Capital and Industrialization: Evidence
  from the Age of Enlightenment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2015, 130 (4), 1825–
  1883.

Steinmeyer, Elias von, Die Matrikel der Universität Altdorf (1576-1809), Würzburg: Stürtz, 1912.

Strauss, Gerald, “The Social Function of Schools in the Lutheran Reformation in Germany,” His-
  tory of Education Quarterly, Summer 1988, 28 (2), 191–206.

Tawney, Richard H., Religion and the Rise of Capitalism, London: J. Murray, 1926.

Weber, Max, “Die protestantische Ethik und der ‘Geist’ des Kapitalismus,” Archiv für Sozialwis-
 senschaften und Sozialpolitik, 1904/05, 20-21, 17–84; 1–110. English Translation: The Protestant
 Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, London: Allen & Unwin, 1930.

  , Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology, Vol. 1, Univ of California Press, 1978.

Whaley, Joachim, Germany and the Holy Roman Empire: Volume I: Maximilian I to the Peace of West-
 phalia, 1493-1648, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.

Wolgast, Eike, Die Einführung der Reformation und das Schicksal der Klöster im Reich und in Europa,
 Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus, 2014.


                                                   47
        Supplementary Appendix – For Online Publication
Additional references
The Denkmaltopographie Bundesrepublik Deutschland cited in the main text (Dellwing 1988/2011)
was preceded by separate series of volumes listing and describing all historical buildings in the
single states of Germany. We looked up sizes of church buildings in these volumes as well, to
extend and complement the analysis based on the Denkmaltopographie Bundesrepublik Deutschland.

Die Kunstdenkmäler des Grossherzogtums Baden, 15 volumes, Tübingen: Mohr, 1887–1913.

Die Kunstdenkmäler von Bayern, 112 volumes, München: Oldenbourg, 1892–1972.

Berlin und seine Bauten, 3 volumes, Berlin: Ernst, 1877–1896.

Die Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Brandenburg, 6 volumes, Berlin: Dt. Kunstverlag, 1907–1921.

Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler des Herzogthums Braunschweig, 5 volumes, Wolfenbüttel: Zwissler, 1896–
1910.

Die Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Hannover, 26 volumes, Hannover: Provinzialverwaltung, 1899–
1939.

Kunstdenkmäler im Großherzogthum Hessen, 5 volumes, Darmstadt: Bergstraesser, 1885–1898.

Die Baudenkmäler des Regierungsbezirks Wiesbaden, 6 volumes, Frankfurt am Main: Keller, 1902–
1921.

Die Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler in den Hohenzollern’schen Landen, Stuttgart: Neff, 1896.

Kunst- und Geschichts-Denkmäler des Großherzogthums Mecklenburg-Schwerin, 5 volumes, Schwerin:
Bärensprung, 1896–1902.

Kunst- und Geschichts-Denkmäler des Freistaates Mecklenburg-Strelitz, 2 volumes, Neubrandenburg:
Brünslow, 1921–1934.

Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler des Herzogtums Oldenburg, 5 volumes, Oldenburg, 1896–1909.

Die Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Ostpreußen, 9 volumes, Königsberg, 1891–1899.

Die Baudenkmale in der Pfalz, Ludwigshafen, 1884–1897.

Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Pommern, 24 volumes, Stettin, 1881–1909.




                                                 48
Die Kunstdenkmäler der Rheinprovinz, 20 volumes, Düsseldorf, 1891–1937.

Die Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Sachsen, 33 volumes, Leipzig, 1838–1850.

Denkmalverzeichnis Sachsen-Anhalt, 33 volumes, Halle a. d. Saale, 1879–1923.

Verzeichniss der Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Schlesien, 6 volumes, Breslau, 1886–1902.

Die Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Schleswig-Holstein, 6 volumes, Kiel, 1887–1925.

Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler Thüringens, 24 volumes, 1888–1928.

Die Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler von Westfalen, 38 volumes, Münster, 1881–1913.

Die Bau- und Kunstdenkmäler der Provinz Westpreußen, 14 volumes, Danzig, 1884–1919.

Die Kunst- und Altertums-Denkmale im Königreich Württemberg, 4 volumes, 1893–1928.




                                                 49
Appendix figures and tables


                                Secular Degrees                                           Theology Degrees
                                                                             60
                 400




                                                                             40
                 300
       Degrees




                                                                   Degrees
                                                                             20
                 200




                 100                                                         0
                       1475   1500   1525   1550   1575   1600                    1475   1500   1525   1550   1575   1600

                              Degrees        Moving Average                              Degrees        Moving Average




Figure A1: Number of theology and secular degrees granted (yearly data and 11-year moving
average). Theology and secular (arts, law, and medicine) degree categories are exhaustive and
mutually exclusive. Data come from the Repertorium Academicum Germanicum for degrees granted
through 1550 and own data collection (consulting Bauch, 1897; Erler, 1895, 1897, 1909; Eulenburg,
1904; Kleineidam, 1983; Leinweber, 1991; Rüegg, 1996; Steinmeyer, 1912) for degrees granted from
1550 through 1600.




                                                              50
                                   20




                                   15
             Active Universities




                                   10




                                   5




                                   0
                                        1375   1400   1425   1450     1475   1500   1525     1550    1575     1600

                                                      Active Universities           Protestant Universities



Figure A2: Number of German universities (total and Protestant only) within our sample. Adop-
tion of Protestantism is coded based on Sehling (1902-2013), Spitz (1981), Grendler (2004), and
Naragon (2006).




                                                                       51
         Table A1: Territories and assignment to (eventual) religion

Territory                    Protestant      Territory                  Protestant
Anhalt                              1537     Lorraine                           —
Baden                               1555     Mainz                              —
Bavaria-Landshut                      —      Mecklenburg                      1549
Bavaria-Munich                        —      Nassau                           1542
Bohemia                               —      Palatinate                       1546
Brandenburg                         1539     Passau                             —
Brunswick-Calenberg                 1584     Poland                             —
Brunswick-Lüneburg                 1529     Pomerania                        1534
Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel             1568     Ruppin                           1539
Burgundian Netherlands                —      Salzburg                           —
Cleves-Mark                           —      Saxony (Ducal)                   1539
Cologne                               —      Saxony (Electorate)              1527
Denmark                             1536     Small States of the HRE              .
East Frisia                         1535     Swiss Confederacy                    .
Guelders                              —      Trier                              —
Habsburg Monarchy                     —      Upper Palatinate                 1546
Hesse                               1526     Württemberg                     1534
Jülich-Berg                          —
  Table lists territories present in the Euratlas (Nüssli, 2008) for 1500, and their
  assignment to the territorial lord’s (eventual) religion through the dates of
  introduction of the Reformation as in Cantoni (2012). Note: Cities matched
  by the Euratlas digital maps to “Small States of the HRE” and to the “Swiss
  Confederacy” are discarded in our analysis. Territories, and their names, re-
  flect borders as of 1500: Bavaria-Landshut and Bavaria-Munich, e.g., merge
  after the War of the Succession of Landshut (1503–1505).




                                        52
           Table A2: Degrees awarded by level and subject

Subject                Bachelor’s   License   Master’s   Doctor   Total
Arts                     17608       4163      15179      450     37400
Law                       1210        892         1       896      2999
Medicine                   239        211         7       486       943
Theology                  2085        767        38       898      3788
Across subject total     21142       6033      15225      2730    45130
  Data come from the Repertorium Academicum Germanicum.




                                    53
              Table A3: The Size of Church Construction Projects in Protestant Territories

                                                Pre: 1470-1517            Post: 1518-1600            p-value
                                           n      Mean      SD        n     Mean       SD        diff. in means
                                          (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)             (7)
All New Church Construction
    Indicator: Church Size Recorded      125       0.18     0.38      88     0.08     0.27            0.03
Where Church Size is Recorded
    Church Size in Square Meters          22      453.24   302.43     7     494.93   196.42           0.68
  This table presents summary statistics on physical sizes of new churches built in German territories that ulti-
  mately adopted Protestantism. We study new church construction in cities and towns recorded over the period
  1470–1600 in the Deutsches Städtebuch. We obtain data on church sizes by finding each new church in the 124-
  volume series Denkmaltopographie Bundesrepublik Deutschland (Dellwing, 1988/2011), which provides a record of
  cultural monuments in Germany. The first row provides summary statistics for the binary outcome indicat-
  ing whether a given church construction event mentioned in the Deutsches Städtebuch is recorded with original
  floor dimensions in the Denkmaltopographie Bundesrepublik Deutschland (1 = ‘yes’, 0 = ‘no’). The second row pro-
  vides summary statistics on church sizes for construction events on which the Denkmaltopographie Bundesrepublik
  Deutschland provides information on the original size of church buildings. Church sizes are measured in square
  meters, calculated as the sum of the church nave area and church choir area, using data on floor plan widths and
  lengths.




                                                    54
