                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  EMIGRATION DURING THE FRENCH REVOLUTION:
                 CONSEQUENCES IN THE SHORT AND LONGUE DURÉE

                                         Raphaël Franck
                                      Stelios Michalopoulos

                                       Working Paper 23936
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23936


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017




We would like to thank Sascha Becker, Davide Cantoni, Guillaume Daudin, Melissa Dell, Oded
Galor, Paola Giuliano, Moshe Hazan, Ruixue Jia, Oren Levintal, Omer Moav, Ben Olken, Elias
Papaioannou, Gerard Roland, Nico Voigtlaender, David Weil, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya as well
as seminar participants at Brown, Harvard, Harvard Kennedy School of Government, Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, NBER Summer Institute Political Economy & Income Distribution and
Macroeconomics Workshop, Northwestern Kellogg, Paris-1, Princeton, Insead, NUS, Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Sciences-Po, Tel Aviv, IDC Herzliya, Toronto, Warwick,
and conference participants at the European Public Choice Society Meeting, the Israeli Economic
Association conference, and the Warwick/Princeton conference for valuable suggestions. We
thank Bernard Bodinier, Martin Fiszbein, and Nico Voigtlaender for sharing their data. We would
also like to thank Nicholas Reynolds for superlative research assistance. All errors are our own
responsibility. Stelios Michalopoulos and Raphael Franck have no relevant financial support to
disclose in relationship to this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Raphaël Franck and Stelios Michalopoulos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Emigration during the French Revolution: Consequences in the Short and Longue Durée
Raphaël Franck and Stelios Michalopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 23936
October 2017
JEL No. N10,O10,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

During the French Revolution, more than 100,000 individuals, predominantly supporters of the
Old Regime, fled France. As a result, some areas experienced a significant change in the
composition of the local elites whereas in others the pre-revolutionary social structure remained
virtually intact. In this study, we trace the consequences of the émigrés' flight on economic
performance at the local level. We instrument emigration intensity with local temperature shocks
during an inflection point of the Revolution, the summer of 1792, marked by the abolition of the
constitutional monarchy and bouts of local violence. Our findings suggest that émigrés have a
non monotonic effect on comparative development. During the 19th century, there is a significant
negative impact on income per capita, which becomes positive from the second half of the 20th
century onward. This pattern can be partially attributed to the reduction in the share of the landed
elites in high-emigration regions. We show that the resulting fragmentation of agricultural
holdings reduced labor productivity, depressing overall income levels in the short run; however, it
facilitated the rise in human capital investments, eventually leading to a reversal in the pattern of
regional comparative development.


Raphaël Franck
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Department of Economics
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem 91905
Israel
raphael.franck@mail.huji.ac.il

Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu
1       Introduction

Tracing the origins and consequences of major political upheavals occupies an increasing part of
the research agenda among economists and political scientists. The Age of Revolution in Europe
and the Americas, in particular, has received much attention as these major political disruptions
are thought to have shaped the economic and political trajectories of the Western world toward
industrialization and democracy. This broad consensus concerning their paramount importance,
nevertheless, goes in tandem with a lively debate regarding the exact nature of their consequences.
The voluminous literature on the economic legacy of the French Revolution attests to this.
        On the one hand, there is a line of research that highlights its pivotal role in ushering the
French economy into the modern era. This perspective, which begins with 19th century thinkers
of di¤erent persuasions such as Thiers (1823–1827), Guizot (1829-1832), and Marx (1843 [1970])
and is continued during the 20th and 21st centuries by broadly left-leaning scholars (e.g., Jaurès
(1901-1903), Mathiez (1922-1924), Soboul (1962), Hobsbawm (1990), Garrioch (2002), Jones
(2002), and Heller (2006)), views the 1789 French Revolution as the outcome of the long rise
of the bourgeoisie, whose industrial and commercial interests prevailed over those of the landed
aristocracy. These authors, in making their case, stress the bene…ts from the weakening of
the Old Regime as manifested in the abolition of the feudal system, the consolidation of private
property, the simpli…cation of the legal system, and the reduction of traditional controls and …scal
hindrances to commerce and industry. However, the scholars, who argue that the reforms brought
about by the French Revolution were conducive to economic growth (e.g., Crouzet (2003)), are
aware of France’s lackluster economic performance during the 19th century vis-à-vis England
and Germany, and attribute it to the political upheavals that characterized the country and the
violence of the Revolution and Napoleonic Wars.
        On the other hand, mostly liberal or conservative intellectuals (e.g., Taine (1876-1893),
Cobban (1962), Furet (1978), Schama (1989)) emphasize that France remained largely agricul-
tural vis-à-vis England and Germany until 1914. They argue that the French Revolution was
not motivated by di¤erences of economic interests between the nobility and the bourgeoisie, but
was rather a political revolution with social and economic repercussions (Taylor (1967), Aftalion
(1990)).1 They consider that the French Revolution was actually “anticapitalist”contributing to
the persistent agricultural character of France during the 19th century. Besides the cost of war
and civil con‡ict, these studies emphasize the development of an ine¢ cient bureaucracy and the
adverse impact of changes in land holdings on agriculture.
        In this study we attempt to shed some light on the short- and long-run economic conse-
    1
   Maza (2003) in fact argues that there was no genuine French bourgeoisie in 1789 as none of the politicians
deemed to represent the bourgeoisie expressed any consciousness of belonging to such a group.



                                                     1
quences of the French Revolution across départements (the administrative divisions of the French
territory). Speci…cally, we exploit local variation in the weakening of the Old Regime, re‡ected in
the di¤erent emigration rates across départements. During the Revolution, more than 100; 000 in-
dividuals emigrated to various European countries and the United States (Greer (1951)). Among
the émigrés, nobles, clergy members, and wealthy landowners were disproportionately repre-
sented.
       While the …rst émigrés left as early as 1789, the majority actually ‡ed France, during and
after the summer of 1792 (Taine (1876-1893), Duc de Castries (1966), Bouloiseau (1972), Boisnard
(1992), Tackett (2015)), when the Revolution took a radical turn which French historian Georges
Lefebvre has called the “Second Revolution” (Lefebvre (1962)). During that summer, following
the arrest of King Louis XVI on August 10 and the “September Massacres” in Paris (Caron
(1935), Bluche (1992)), the hitherto uneasy coexistence of the monarchy and the revolutionaries
came to an abrupt end with the proclamation of the Republic on September 21, 1792. Four
months later, King Louis XVI was guillotined.
       Our identi…cation strategy exploits local variation in temperature shocks at this in‡ection
point of the French Revolution (i.e., the summer of 1792) to get plausibly exogenous variation in
the rate of emigration across départements. The logic of our instrument rests on a well-developed
argument in the literature on the outbreak of con‡ict that links variations in economic conditions
to the opportunity cost of engaging in violence. To the extent that temperature shocks decrease
agricultural output (which we show to be the case in our historical context), an increase in the
price of wheat (the main staple for the French in the 18th century)2 would intensify unrest among
the poorer strata of the population, thereby magnifying emigration among the wealthy supporters
of the moribund monarchy. Consistent with this argument, we show that, in August and Sep-
tember 1792, there were more peasant riots in départements that experienced larger temperature
shocks.3 It is worth pointing out that the temperature shocks in the summer of 1792 are mild
compared to other years during the Revolution, thereby suggesting that ordinary income ‡uctua-
tions at critical junctures may have a persistent e¤ect on subsequent development. Importantly,
temperature shocks during the other years of the Revolution predict neither emigration rates nor
subsequent economic performance.
       Our …ndings suggest that émigrés have a nonmonotonic impact on comparative economic
performance unfolding over the subsequent 200 years. Namely, high-emigration départements
have signi…cantly lower GDP per capita during the 19th century but the pattern reverses over
the 20th century. Regarding magnitudes, an increase of half a percentage point in the share of
   2
    On the importance of wheat and bread in France in the 18th century, see, for example, Kaplan (1984) and
Kaplan (1996). See also Persson (1999) on grain markets during this period.
  3
    Along the same lines, Grosfeld, Sakalli, and Zhuravskaya (2017) …nd that anti-Jewish pogroms in eastern
Europe between 1800 and 1927 occurred when poor harvests coincided with institutional and political uncertainty.


                                                       2
émigrés in the population of a département (which is the mean emigration rate) decreased GDP
per capita by 12:7% in 1860 but increased it by 8:8% in 2010.
       Pinning down the exact mechanism(s) via which emigration shaped local economic per-
formance is challenging. Thanks to the detailed French historical censuses, we attempt to shed
some light on this issue. A signi…cant fraction of the émigrés were landowners so their exodus is
likely to have in‡uenced the composition of local landholdings. Using the agricultural census of
1862, we show that high-emigration départements have fewer large landowners and more small
ones. Indeed, the size of the average farm in France in 1862 was 23:12 acres, smaller than the
average farm of 115 acres in England in 1851 and the average farm of 336:17 acres in the United
States in 1860 (Shaw-Taylor (2005), Fiszbein (2016)).4 This legacy of fragmented landholdings
has remained largely in place in France to this day. Furthermore we show that, during the 19th
century, this reduction in the preponderance of large private estates and the development of a
small peasantry had a negative impact on agricultural productivity by limiting the adoption of
scale-intensive mechanization methods. Moreover, we …nd that the share of rich individuals in
the population of high-emigration départements during the 19th century was signi…cantly smaller
compared to regions where few émigrés left. This absence of a critical mass of su¢ ciently wealthy
individuals in the era of capital-intensive modes of production may also explain the slow pace of
industrialization in the high-emigration départements during the 19th century.
       Interestingly, as early as the middle of the 19th century, these agriculturally lagging dé-
partements register slightly higher literacy rates than their richer, agriculturally more productive
peers. This modest educational edge widens during the early 20th century, after the French state
instituted free and mandatory schooling, eventually translating to higher incomes per capita in
the later part of the 20th century. This …nding highlights that historical legacies may crucially
interact with state-level policies and is consistent with recent studies in developing countries
which show that increases in agricultural productivity reduce school attendance by increasing
the opportunity cost of schooling (see, e.g., Shah and Steinberg (2015)). By establishing a causal
link between the rate of structural transformation across regions in France and the intensity of
emigration, we shed new light on an intensely debated topic, that is, the economic legacy of the
1789 Revolution within France.5
   4
     In Appendix Table D.1, we distinguish between French départements and US counties which were above and
below the median value of grain production in 1862 and in 1860, respectively. We also provide descriptive statistics
excluding French farms below …ve hectares and US farms below nine acres so as to focus on farmers who were
presumably above subsistence levels. This robustness check is motivated by the fact that the 1860 US census does
not record plots less than three acres. Across all di¤erent metrics, French farms are signi…cantly smaller than the
US ones.
   5
     To be sure, violence during the French Revolution was rampant and multifaceted. Besides the violence of the
crowds which our identi…cation strategy leverages, where groups of people vandalized shops and killed civilians and
politicians (e.g., Jacques de Flesselle, Jean-Bertrand Féraud), Gueni¤ey (2011) discusses the top-down planned
annihilation of local populations exempli…ed by the civil war in the Vendée département, the use of the judicial



                                                         3
       Related Literature. Our study relates to the literature on the economic consequences
of revolutions and con‡ict. The latter is voluminous (see, e.g., Blattman and Miguel (2010)
for a thorough review) and usually focuses on the impact of these events on the cumulable
factors of production. Recent studies have shifted their attention to the institutional legacies of
con‡ict. In this respect, our work is closely related to Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson, and Robinson
(2011). The latter explores the impact of institutional reform caused by the French occupation
of German territories. Consistent with the view that barriers to labor mobility, trade and entry
restrictions were limiting growth in Europe, they …nd that French-occupied territories within
Germany eventually experienced faster urbanization rates during the 19th century. In our case, by
focusing on départements within France where the de-jure institutional discontinuities exploited
by Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson, and Robinson (2011) are largely absent,6 we examine whether,
conditional on the nationwide consequences of the radical institutional framework brought forward
by the French Revolution, the local weakening of the Old Regime, re‡ected in the di¤erential
rates of emigration across départements, in‡uenced local development over a signi…cantly longer
horizon. Thus, our study is also closely related to Dell (2012) on the Mexican Revolution. She
…nds that land redistribution was more intense across municipalities where insurgent activity was
higher as a result of droughts on the eve of the Revolution, leading to lower economic performance
today. The latter was due to the fact that the Mexican state maintained ultimate control over
the redistributed land known as ejidos.
       By looking at the impact of emigration across départements, our study also contributes to
a growing literature that investigates the economic consequences of disruptions in the societal
makeup of a region. Nunn (2008) and Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), for example, explore the
consequences of the slave trade for African countries and groups, whereas Acemoglu, Hassan, and
Robinson (2011) focus on the impact of the mass execution of Jews during the Holocaust on the
subsequent development of Russian cities.
       Finally, our research is related to studies by Galor and Zeira (1993) and Galor and Moav
(2004), which argue for a nonmonotonic role of equality in the process of development. When
growth is driven by physical capital accumulation, a larger share of su¢ ciently wealthy families
would be bene…cial to local growth during the 19th century. However, areas with more evenly
distributed wealth would experience faster human capital accumulation, translating into better
economic outcomes during the 20th and 21st centuries. Consistent with this argument, we show
that the preponderance of small landowners in the high-emigration départements goes in tandem
system to assassinate political opponents during the Reign of Terror, and the war launched against foreign countries.
Unlike the violence of the crowds, these other types of violence do not seem to have responded to climate-induced
temporary income shocks.
    6
      See, for example, Soboul (1968) for a discussion regarding the application of the Code Civil and the persistence
of local institutions within France during the 19th century.



                                                          4
with an earlier takeo¤ in human capital accumulation in these regions.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the historical
background on emigration and land redistribution during the French Revolution. In Section 3
we describe the data and our empirical methodology. In Section 4 we present our main …ndings
and in Section 5 we discuss some of the potential mechanisms that can account for the observed
pattern. In Section 6 we conclude.


2     Historical Background

In 1789, on the eve of the Revolution, France was the largest economy in Europe, with approxi-
mately 25 million inhabitants and lower wages compared to England (see Labrousse (1933) and
Toutain (1987)). Politically, it was a monarchy where King Louis XVI’s subjects were divided
into three orders: the nobility comprising between 150; 000 and 300; 000 members, the clergy
around 100; 000 members, and the Third Estate (artisans, bankers, lawyers, salesmen, peasants,
etc.) made up the rest. This political structure was to end with the Revolution. In Appendix
A:1 we brie‡y discuss its proximate and ultimate causes.

2.1    Emigration during the French Revolution

The April 8, 1792, law de…ned as émigrés all the individuals absent from the département in
which they possessed property, and, as a result of the July 27, 1792, law, their property could be
seized by the French state. The share of émigrés in the population of each département is our key
independent variable. The data were compiled by Greer (1951) from several original governmental
accounts. The sources are mostly o¢ cial publications such as the Liste Générale, par Ordre
Alphabétique, des Emigrés de toute la République (1792-1800) (General List in Alphabetical Order
of Emigrés throughout the Republic), local lists of émigrés, as well as the list of individuals who
received compensation after 1825 for the property they lost during the Revolution.7 Greer (1951)
lists a total of 129; 091 individuals as émigrés.
       The revolutionaries were quick to portray all the émigrés as members of the aristocracy who
had prospered on the poverty of French peasants and described them as the living manifestation
of the hostility to the Revolution. Emigrés were both chastised for abandoning the fatherland
to avoid danger in times of political instability and condemned for joining forces with “foreign
tyrants” against the nation to restore a hated political regime. Revolutionaries thus passed a
series of laws against émigrés, depriving them of their state-funded pensions in 1790, legislating
that emigration was a crime in 1791, and eventually con…scating their property in 1792. In doing
    7
      France. Ministère des Finances. Etats Detaillés des Liquidations faites par la Commission d’Indemnité, a
l’époque du 31 décembre 1826 en Execution de la Loi du 27 avril 1825, Paris, De l’Imprimerie Royale, 1827.



                                                      5
so, some of the revolutionaries were hoping to redistribute land and create a more egalitarian
society, but were disappointed not to see immediate consequences of their policies (e.g., Jones
(1988),Vivier (1998)).
       The data collected by Greer (1951) on the émigrés during the Revolution paint a more
nuanced picture than the rhetoric of the revolutionaries, in terms of both the number of émigrés
and their social composition. According to Greer (1951), the median département lost 0:31%
of its 1801 population (the …rst year for which we have reliable population data). Panel A
of Figure 1 displays the intensity of émigrés as a share of the population throughout France,
showing substantial spatial variation. Panel A of Table 1 lists the départements with the highest
and lowest emigration rates. Moreover, a substantial fraction of émigrés (but not all of them)
belonged to the local elites, as can be seen in Panel B of Table 1 for the 69 départements for which
such information is available. They were mainly aristocrats and clergymen, as well as wealthy
urban dwellers and rural landowners from the Third Estate whose property was con…scated and
sold (some even lost the property of the Church that they had acquired in the early stage of
the Revolution).8 As Panel C of Table 1 shows, the shares of the di¤erent types of émigrés are
strongly correlated. Some of the commoners who left France were servants of aristocrats and
followed their employers abroad. Others were landless peasants or artisans either ‡eeing for their
lives or searching for a better life (see Duc de Castries (1966)).
       Revolutionary violence not only took several forms, but also its geographic and social
incidence was markedly di¤erent across French regions and social groups. The civil war was
mostly con…ned to the southeast and west of France, and was particularly intense in the Vendée
département. The Reign of Terror, which entailed the use of the judicial system to assassinate
political opponents, was more intense in Paris, Lyon and Marseille (i.e., the three main French
cities), as well as in the west of France (Greer (1935), Gueni¤ey (2011)).9 As such, unlike
the civil war and the judicial Terror, which were spatially concentrated, emigration was for
the contemporaries of the Revolution a spectacular consequence of revolutionary violence that,
at the time, seemed to a¤ect all of France. Moreover, while France under the monarchy had
experienced civil war in the 16th and 17th centuries and while public executions were common
during the 18th century (e.g., Bée (1983), Bastien (2006)), emigration was a speci…c consequence
of the Revolution because it implied the precipitous decline of a previously conspicuous social
   8
     On average, nobles were richer than peasants, and anecdotal evidence suggests that they possessed more land
prior to 1789. Of course, there were exceptions, and the living conditions of some nobles, for instance, those in
Brittany (Nassiet (1993)), were not really di¤erent from those of the peasants. This can explain why before 1789,
political antagonism also existed within each of the three orders, for example, between minor and great nobles
(Furet (1978)). It may also help to rationalize why, during the Revolution, some commoners were favorable to
a constitutional monarchy (e.g., Jean-Joseph Mounier) while some aristocrats supported the radical turn of the
Revolution (e.g., Louis-Michel Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau).
   9
     Greer (1935) reports that there were less than 10 executions in 27 départements during the Terror.



                                                       6
and political group.10 In this respect, emigration also di¤ered from the violence stemming from
the civil war and the judicial Terror, which disproportionately a¤ected peasants and workers.11

2.2    The Intensi…cation of Emigration during the “Second Revolution”

During the summer of 1792, major political upheavals and widespread violence, starting with the
imprisonment of Louis XVI and his family in early August and culminating with the proclamation
of the republic a few weeks later, signi…ed the unraveling of the House of Bourbon and the
abolition of the monarchy. In Appendix A:2 we provide details on the unfolding of these events.
Many historical anecdotes describe how emigration accelerated during and immediately after the
summer of 1792 (e.g., Taine (1876-1893), Bouloiseau (1972), Tackett (2015)).12 For instance,
reform-minded aristocrats who had played a political role in the …rst years of the Revolution,
such as the Marquis de Lafayette and the Duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, left France in
August 1792. In fact, Tackett (2015) (p. 215) writes that in September 1792, “conditions had
become so frightening that many wealthier families began ‡eeing Paris (...). Others, however,
seem to have concluded that the countryside was even more dangerous than Paris.”An additional
historical piece of evidence pointing to the intensi…cation of the emigration in the fall of 1792 is
the reaction of the British government: it introduced the Aliens Act in the House of Lords on
December 19, 1792, in an attempt to regulate the uncontrolled in‡ux of French nationals, which
created signi…cant anxiety in governmental circles that feared the presence of revolutionary spies
and saboteurs.
       Several local historians (listed in Marko¤ (1996)) explicitly link emigration to local episodes
of violence during the summer of 1792. For instance, in Var, a high-emigration département, local
violence took the form of several days of rioting in Toulon, between July 28, 1792, and September
10th, 1792, where local revolutionaries targeted aristocrats, military o¢ cers, and wheat traders
whom they considered hostile to the Revolution (Havard (1911-1913)). Members of these groups
‡ed France for Italy. In Ariège a band of peasants led by a local revolutionary began to ransack
and burn castles in late August 1792 (Arnaud (1904)). As a result, many aristocrats, bourgeois,
and refractory priests sought refuge in Spain.
  10
     Many Protestants left France after the revocation of the Edit de Nantes in 1685 by King Louis XIV (Scoville
(1953)). However, French Protestants did not hold the political clout of the aristocrats who emigrated, and their
exodus did not coincide with a massive political and economic transformation akin to that of the French Revolution.
  11
     Greer (1935) estimates (Table 8, pp. 165-166) that peasants and workers made up a combined 59:25% of the
total 16; 594 death sentences during the Terror while the nobles were only 8:25%, clergymen 6:5%, members from
the upper middle class 14% and members from the lower middle class 10:5% (no status was given to the remaining
1:5% of individuals sentenced to death). Note that the seemingly low o¢ cial number of victims obscures the fact
that many more people were killed without a trial during the Terror.
  12
     Arguably, some émigrés had ‡ed France before the summer of 1792. For instance, the Count of Artois, who
would become King Charles X (r. 1824-1830), left in 1789, and Jean-Joseph Mounier, one of the royalist leaders
of the Amis de la Constitution Monarchique (Friends of the Monarchic Constitution), ‡ed in 1790. A few also left
in the post-Thermidorian period in 1794-1795.


                                                        7
2.3    Emigration and Land Redistribution during the Revolution

The sale of the biens nationaux is considered by some historians as “the most important event
of the French Revolution” (Lecarpentier (1908), Bodinier and Teyssier (2000)). Their claim is
based on the fact that a signi…cant amount of land was seized and sold by the government under
the name of biens nationaux (national goods) during this period. This land belonged to the
Church, the émigrés, and the counterrevolutionaries. The property of the Church was …rst seized
by the French revolutionaries to pay o¤ the debts of the French state on November 2, 1789. The
property of the émigrés and counterrevolutionaries was also con…scated for that purpose three
years later. It is not clear, however, whether the French state recovered much from those sales
due to its in‡ationary policies.13 In addition, during the French Revolution, property rights were
granted on the villages’commons: some of the common land was sold to private individuals while
some of it was seized by the municipalities and, later on, leased to peasants (Vivier (1998)).
       Land redistribution may have been consequential for the French départements for at least
two reasons. First, the amount of land which was seized and sold by the government during the
Revolution was signi…cant; Bodinier (1999) estimates that 10% of land changed hands. Second,
even though émigrés were invited to return to France in 1802 by Napoléon Bonaparte, he forbade
émigrés from reclaiming their landed property. The loss of their property was made permanent
in 1814 when it was rea¢ rmed by Louis XVIII (Louis XVI’s brother). Emigrés (and their
descendants) were to be compensated by the April 27, 1825, law, which came to be known as
the “milliard des émigrés” since these reparations amounted to nearly one billion French francs
(nearly 10% of the French GDP in 1825 (Maddison (2001))), but not all émigrés eventually
received compensation for their losses. Overall, some of the émigrés were able to reconstitute
part of their landed estate, whereas others were only able to live a gentry life with modest means,
and some became destitute.14
       Nevertheless, there is no consensus as to who ultimately bene…ted from the sale of the
biens nationaux. Schama (1989) suggests that the redistribution of land was not from the landed
elite to peasants, but rather a transfer of property within the landed classes. The members of the
groups which were gaining economically before the Revolution and who managed to evade violence
  13
     For an overview of the successive laws pertaining to the sale of the biens nationaux, see Bodinier and Teyssier
(2000). For a speci…c analysis of the economic consequences of the sale of the Church property, see Finley, Franck,
and Johnson (2017). On macroeconomic policies during the French Revolution, see, for example, Sargent and Velde
(1995).
  14
     Aristocrats like the Marquis de Dreux-Brézé in Sarthe and Barral de Montferrat in Isère emerged …nancially
unscathed from the Revolution (Schama (1989)). The Marquis de Lafayette seemed to have lost a large share of
his property and led a more modest life (Furet and Ozouf (1988)). Mme Lalanne, born Dudevant de Villeneuve,
solicited her admission to the poor house in Bordeaux (Gironde) that she had founded before the Revolution
(Boisnard (1992)). It must be noted that there is no evidence that the émigrés engaged in industrial and service
activities after their return; their ideological stance was certainly not conducive to such endeavors (Baldensperger
(1924)).



                                                         8
by adopting a revolutionary stance (among them, many relatively wealthy urban bourgeois and
small farmers) emerged richer since they bought the landed properties of the Church and the
‡eeing landed gentry at a low price (see, e.g., Marion (1908), Cobb (1972), Sutherland (2003)).
Others argue that the sale of the biens nationaux was detrimental to the living conditions of
peasants during the 19th century because it created a small peasantry of subsistence, thereby
consolidating the agrarian structure of France and delaying economic modernization (Loutchisky
(1897), Lefebvre (1924)). Finally, some contend that the redistribution of land was bene…cial to
French peasants: they became small-scale agrarian capitalists focused on market production (Ado
(1987 [2012])). McPhee (1999), for example, provides anecdotal evidence on small landowners
who engaged in wine production in Herault.
      Crucially, local monographs on the sale of the biens nationaux suggest that the eventual
extent of land redistribution and its bene…ciaries crucially depended on the extent of local em-
igration during the French Revolution. This is, in itself, partly to be expected since the biens
nationaux comprised the émigrés’ properties. Below, we provide examples revealing the inti-
mate relationship between the change in ownership structure, as a result of the sale of the biens
nationaux in four départements, and the share of émigrés in the local population.
      First, in Cher, which was the third lowest emigration département (0:11% of the popula-
tion), Marion (1908) documents that there was very little land parcelization and redistribution,
or if there was any, it bene…ted individuals who were already well o¤. For instance, in Ivoy-le-Pré
(9886 ha, 2; 438 inhabitants), not a single plot of land owned by an émigré was sold, while a
large domain was transferred from the abbey of Laurois to a major secular landowner, the local
fermier-général (a private tax collector under the Old Regime). Similarly, in Menetou-Râtel
(2; 801 ha, 1; 195 inhabitants), only 25 properties were sold, and 13 out of the 17 buyers were
already major or medium-size landowners.
      Second, in Gironde, which was a close-to-median intensity emigration département (0:24%
of the population), Marion (1908) shows that the properties owned by the Church and the
émigrés were parcelized into several smaller land lots in many rural communes, thereby enabling
individuals who were previously landless to acquire some property. For instance, in Lugon-et-
l’Île-du-Carnay (1094 ha, 947 inhabitants), some well-known merchants and notaries bought land,
but most of the buyers of biens nationaux were landless farmers and artisans (i.e., blacksmiths,
carpenters, coopers, masons, and shoemakers), who acquired small land plots.
      Third, in Nord, an above-median intensity emigration département ( 0:35% of the popu-
lation), Lefebvre (1924) provides information for 15 villages in the district of Avesnes, which we
report in Table 2. The statistics reveal that large properties were parcelized, and there was a
substantial transfer of property from nobles to peasants and urban bourgeois. Moreover, part of



                                                9
the land, often commons, whose property was in dispute was acquired by the state, that is, either
the central government or the local towns.
      Finally, in Ille-et-Vilaine, a relatively high-emigration area (0:42% of the département’s
population), many aristocrats lost a signi…cant part of their properties. The castle and the
domain of the Vaurouault family near Saint-Malo, for example, were sold as biens nationaux in
1793. The family bought back the castle at the beginning of the 19th century but permanently
lost the domain to small peasants (Boisnard (1992)). Another famous local aristocratic family
that lost some of its land was that of François-René de Chateaubriand, the romantic writer and
heir to one of the oldest baronies in Britanny. This unfortunate turn of events for François-René
de Chateaubriand’s family might explain why he was adamant later in his political career that
émigrés should be compensated (Chateaubriand (1847), pp. 517-533).
      It is against this background that we interpret the share of émigrés in each département
as a proxy for the weakening of the local landed elites of the Old Regime and the extent of land
redistribution. Below, we establish the empirical validity of these claims and trace the economic
consequences of land parcelization over time.


3     Data and Empirical Methodology
3.1   Measures of Income, Workforce, and Human Capital

To capture the short- and medium-run e¤ects of emigration on income per capita at the départe-
ment level prior to World War II, we use data on GDP per capita as reconstructed by Combes,
Lafourcade, Thisse, and Toutain (2011) and Caruana-Galizia (2013) for 1860, 1901 and 1930.
For the post-World War II period, data on income per capita at the département level are not
available before 1995, so we use data from the French National Institute of Statistics (INSEE,
Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques) for 1995, 2000, and 2010. We also
construct the value added per worker in the agricultural, industrial, and service sectors combining
the data of Combes, Lafourcade, Thisse, and Toutain (2011), who assess the value added in each
of these three sectors in 1860, 1930, 1982, and 1990, with the occupational data from the gov-
ernmental surveys carried out from the 19th century onward (Statistique Générale de la France
and INSEE). The descriptive statistics in Table D.2 indicate that the shares of the workforce in
the industrial and service sectors grew, respectively, from 21:6% and 15:3% in 1860 to 30:1% and
24:8% in 1930, indicating that slightly less than half of the working French population was still
engaged in agriculture before WWII. However, by 1990, the share of the agricultural workforce
had declined considerably, with the industrial and service sectors employing 30:7% and 60:0% of
the workforce, respectively.
      We also explore the e¤ect of emigration during the French Revolution on the evolution of


                                                10
human capital from the 19th century until today. For the period before World War II, we take
advantage of the data on the literacy of French army conscripts (France - Ministère de la Guerre
(1839-1937)).15 The data enable us to compute the average share of illiterate conscripts, that is,
those who could neither read nor write, by decade between the 1840s and 1930s. Our statistics
in Table D.3 show the overall relatively high levels of literacy in France. Speci…cally, 26:7% of
French army conscripts in the 1840s, 16:0% in the 1870s, and 5:1% in the 1930s could neither read
nor write. Our post Word War II measures of human capital rely on the successive population
censuses carried out in 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999, and 2010. They allow us to compute the
‡ow of men between the ages of 16 and 24 in each département who completed high school or
had a college degree or both.

3.2    Emigrés and Temperature Shocks in the Summer of 1792

The observed relationship between emigration and regional development may re‡ect omitted vari-
ables which could explain both emigration and subsequent economic performance. For instance,
if emigration was proportional to the pool of “potential” émigrés, then high-emigration départe-
ments would be those with initially many nobles and many wealthy landowners. In other words,
since we do not have département-level data before and after the Revolution on the relative size
of each order (i.e., the nobility, the clergy, and the Third Estate) observed emigration rates may
be mechanically linked to the initial regional stock of the old elite and the extent of land con-
centration prior to 1789, thereby biasing our estimates. Moreover, despite the thorough e¤orts
to accurately reconstruct the numbers, (Greer (1951), p.17) acknowledges that his “statistics,
cannot pretend to absolute exactitude. They include an irregular margin of error. In a few places
it may infringe as much as …fty per cent (e.g., in Var), in others it narrows to insigni…cance
(e.g., in Basses-Alpes).”16 Another limitation of Greer (1951)’s data is that they do not provide
a yearly breakdown on the timing of emigration for each département but only for the 1789-1799
period as a whole.
       To overcome these important measurement issues, we leverage the spatial variation in the
temperature shocks in the summer of 1792 as a source of variation for the share of émigrés in the
population of each département. Our identi…cation strategy is motivated by a strand of literature
documenting the e¤ect of climate on human activity and the outbreak of violence. The logic
is that abnormal weather conditions cause a temporary decline in agricultural output, that is,
a transitory negative income shock for farming-based economies. Such a shock decreases the
  15
     These data are not subject to selection bias because every Frenchman had to report for military service.
However, changes in conscription rules meant that not every man eventually served during the 19th century
(Crépin (2009)).
  16
     Higonnet (1981) suggests, for example, that there were about 25; 000 noble émigrés instead of 16; 431, as
estimated by Greer (1951).



                                                     11
opportunity cost of violence which in our historical context can be measured by the intensity
of emigration rates across départements. For instance, in Orne in the west of France, a high-
emigration and high-temperature shock département in the summer of 1792, the villagers of Rai
and Corsei ransacked the Castle of Rai on September 23, 1792, demanding that the lord of the
manor abandon his feudal rights.17
        It is not clear when the emigration ‡ows, triggered by the events of the summer of 1792,
stopped. It is possible that emigration in some départements took place over several months
because violence continued after the summer of 1792. In this respect, two groups of regions stand
out. First, the départements of Deux-Sèvres, Loire-Inférieure, Maine-et-Loire, Morbihan, and
Vendée were the locus of the civil war in the west of France (e.g., Tilly (1964), Martin (1987)),
and second, the départements of Bouches-du-Rhône, Calvados, Gironde, and Var participated in
the Federalist Revolt in 1793 (see, e.g., Johnson (1986)). The common characteristic of these
territories was that they experienced high-temperature shocks in the summer of 1792 which
triggered a period of prolonged emigration and unrest.
        In what follows, we explore the e¤ects of the di¤erential pattern of emigration during the
Revolution, which we show to be partly shaped by transitory local weather shocks in the summer
of 1792, on the long-term process of development across French départements. Our conjecture is
that emigration is likely to have had both medium- and long-run repercussions via the channels
of land redistribution and the curtailing of the upper tail of the local wealth distribution. In
this respect, it stands to reason that any direct economic impact of the summer shocks of 1792
beyond their e¤ect on emigration rates is unlikely to be quantitatively relevant several decades
after the event.
        Note. In Appendix B, we o¤er two complementary pieces of evidence regarding the impact
of temperature shocks on economic conditions and local violence. First, in Appendix B:1 we show
that larger temperature shocks translate into spikes in local wheat prices using data collected by
Labrousse, Romano, and Dreyfus (1970) for the 1797-1800 period which covers the latter part
of the Revolution (see Figure A.3 and columns (1)-(5) of Table D.5). Second, in Appendix B:2
we use the dataset on peasant revolts assembled by Marko¤ (1996) to quantitatively establish
that abnormal temperatures in the summer of 1792 are systematically related to the incidence
of peasant revolts during the “Second Revolution” (see Figure A.1 and columns (6)-(7) of Table
D.5).
  17
    The lord of the manor was Louis-Sébastien Desdouits du Ray, a commoner who had been ennobled thanks to
the fortune he had made when working in the Compagnie des Indes (du Motey (1893), pp. 108-109). His children
emigrated, and years later, in 1826, he and his wife were compensated as ascendants of émigrés under the April 27,
1825, law for the property losses incurred during the French Revolution (France - Ministère des Finances. Etats
Détaillés des Liquidations faites par la Commission d’Indemnité, à l’époque du 1er avril 1826 en Exécution de la
Loi du 27 avril 1825, Paris, De l’Imprimerie Royale, 1826. Vol. 2, pp.2-3).



                                                       12
3.3    Temperature Shocks Construction

Our temperature data come from the European Seasonal Temperature and Precipitation Re-
construction Project, which was developed by paleoclimatologists at the University of Berne
(Luterbacher, Dietrich, Xoplaki, Grosjean, and Wanner (2004), Luterbacher, Dietrich, Xoplaki,
Grosjean, and Wanner (2006), Pauling, Luterbacher, Casty, and Wanner (2006)). These are
season-speci…c reconstructions for the 1500-1900 period, at a resolution of 0:5 by 0:5 decimal
degrees. These data are assembled using a multiplicity of indirect proxies such as tree rings,
ice cores, corals, ocean and lake sediments, as well as historical documentary records. As such,
measurement error may be nontrivial. Moreover, climatic records are interpolated over relatively
large areas, resulting in two cells per département on average.18 According to the authors, the
quality and breadth of the underlying sources improve over time, particularly from the end of
the 18th century onward.
       We follow Hidalgo, Naidu, Nichter, and Richardson (2010) and Franck (2016) and employ
two alternative measures of temperature shocks for the summer of 1792. First, we use the squared
deviation of temperature:

                                                                               2
                                                         xd;t;s         xd;s
                                         Zd;t;s =                                  ;
                                                                  d;s

where the temperature xd;t;s in département d in year t of season s is standardized by the mean
xd;s and the standard deviation         d;s    of temperature in each département d in season s, where
both the mean and standard deviation are computed over a baseline period. The baseline period
which we use to compute xd;s and              d;s   comprises all the summer temperatures in the 25 years
before 1792 (i.e., from 1767 until 1791). As we discuss below, we consider several robustness
checks to this baseline speci…cation.
       Second, we de…ne the absolute deviation of temperature as:

                                                         xd;t;s         xd;s
                                              Zd;t;s =                         ;
                                                                  d;s

       Panel B of Figure 1 maps the spatial distribution of the mean temperature in the summer
of 1792, while Panel C of Figure 1 portrays the squared deviation of temperature. In Panel D
we present these temperature shocks after partialing out the time-invariant geographic controls
described below. The observed spatial variation in temperature shocks of Panel D is our source
of identi…cation.
  18
    Départements were designed in 1790 to be of relatively small size so that it would take at most one day of
horse travel to reach the département ’s administrative center from any location in the département. On average,
the département ’s area is 6; 000 km2 , which is approximately the size of the US state of Delaware.




                                                          13
        It is important to note that the summer of 1792 was comparable to the other summers
during the Revolution. The descriptive statistics in Table D.4 indeed show that the summer of
1792 is at the median of the summer temperature distribution for the 1788-1799 period, with an
average temperature of 17:97, standard deviation 1:36, and a minimum (maximum) temperature
of 13:69 (21:82). The temperature in the summer of 1792 was therefore less unusual than the
summers of 1788 and 1789 which led to the outbreak of the Revolution. In fact, the descriptive
statistics in Table D.4 show that the average temperature shock in the summer of 1792 was milder
than any other summer temperature shock during the 1788-1799 period.

3.4     Confounding Characteristics of Each Département
3.4.1    Geographic Characteristics

In the empirical analysis below, we control for the département’s area, land suitability for agri-
culture, elevation, longitude and latitude. These geographic characteristics may in‡uence both a
region’s emigration rate as well as its agricultural comparative advantage and hence the pace of
industrialization and, ultimately, economic growth. Controlling for longitude and latitude also
enables us to account for the location of industries before (and after) the Revolution that were
mostly situated in the east and north of France. Moreover, given the importance of temperature
shocks in 1792 for our identi…cation strategy (see below), we control for the average temperature
in the summer of 1792. In addition, we take into account the distance from each département’s
main administrative center (chef-lieu) to the coast, the border, and the three largest urban cen-
ters (before the French Revolution and to this day), Paris, Lyon, and Marseille. These variables
capture the potential confounding e¤ects of the geographic location of the départements, which
may have a¤ected emigration intensity and local development via the proximity to trade routes.

3.4.2    Prerevolutionary Characteristics

Di¤erences in local pre-1789 development outcomes may have jointly a¤ected emigration during
the Revolution and the subsequent evolution of income per capita. To account for these poten-
tially confounding factors, we add the following proxies. First, to capture prerevolutionary levels
of human capital, particularly the upper end of the distribution, we use an indicator for the
presence of a university in 1700 in the département (Bosker, Buringh, and van Zanden (2013)).
Second, we compute the share of the population that subscribed to the Quarto edition of the En-
cyclopédie in the mid-18th century (Darnton (1973), Squicciarini and Voigtländer (2015)) which
also captures the di¤usion of the ideas of the Enlightenment within France. Third, we construct
the number of mechanical mills in 1789 used in textile production (Bonin and Langlois (1997)).
This variable not only accounts for early industrialization but also for prerevolutionary agita-



                                                14
tion as a substantial number of riots in France in 1788 and 1789 occurred in textile-producing
regions that su¤ered from the increased competition from English manufacturers after the sig-
nature of the Eden Treaty in 1786 (which lowered tari¤s between England and France (Mathiez
(1922-1924))).19 Finally, we add a dummy for the départements which Vivier (1998) singles out
as having few commons just before the outbreak of the Revolution and hence more established
private property rights over land.

3.5      Empirical Model

The e¤ect of emigration during the French Revolution on economic development is estimated
using 2SLS. The second stage provides a cross-sectional estimate of the relationship between the
share of émigrés in the population in each département during the Revolution and measures of
GDP per capita, human capital, and additional economic outcomes at di¤erent points in time:

                                       Yd;t =        + Ed + X0d :! + "d;t ;

where Yd;t represents some proxy of economic performance in département d in year t, Ed is the
log of the share of émigrés in the population of département d, Xd0 is a vector of geographical and
prerevolutionary characteristics of département d, and "d;t is an i.i.d. error term for département
d in year t.
         In the …rst stage, Ed ; the log of the share of émigrés in the population of département d
during the French Revolution is instrumented by Zd;1792 , the squared (or absolute) deviation of
temperature in the summer of 1792:


                                     Ed =    0   +    1 Zd;1792   + X0d :! +   d;

where X0d is a vector of geographical and prerevolutionary traits of département d described
above.


4        Results
4.1      First Stage: Temperature Shocks in the Summer of 1792 and Emigration

The …rst-stage results are reported in Table 3 where the instrument is the squared (absolute) stan-
dardized deviation from average temperature in the summer of 1792 in columns (1)-(3) (columns
(4)-(6)). In all speci…cations and irrespective of the inclusion of geographic and historical con-
trols, the estimates reveal that the squared and absolute temperature deviations in the summer
    19
    On the Eden Treaty, see, for example, Henderson (1957), and on the consequences of the disruption to interna-
tional trade caused by the revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, see, for example, Heckscher (1922), Crouzet (1964)
and Juhász (2015).


                                                          15
of 1792 are positively and signi…cantly correlated at the 1% level with variations in the share of
émigrés across French départements. This e¤ect is also quantitatively large. In column (3) of
Table 3, the beta coe¢ cient equals to 0:549. Put di¤erently, a one-standard-deviation increase
in the squared deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792 (0:067) increases the share of
émigrés in the population by 0:42% (relative to a sample mean of 0:47% and a standard deviation
of 0:64%). Moreover, the F-statistic of the …rst stage is equal to 16:88 in the speci…cation where
the instrumental variable is the squared deviation of temperature in 1792 (column (3)) and 11:32
in the speci…cation where the instrumental variable is the absolute deviation of temperature in
1792 (column (6)), suggesting that these instruments are not weak. Figure 2 graphs the …rst-
stage relationship between the squared deviation from average temperature in the summer of 1792
and the share of émigrés, conditional on geographic characteristics (Panel A) and conditional on
geographic and pre-1789 historical characteristics (Panel B).
      Note. In Appendix B:3, we provide a series of robustness checks on the uncovered link
between temperature shocks in the summer of 1792 and variation in the share of émigrés. These
robustness checks have a dual goal. The …rst is to highlight that consistent with the historical
narrative, the temperature shock of the summer of 1792 is the only signi…cant determinant of
emigration among all the temperature shocks during the revolutionary period. Speci…cally, we
show that emigration rates are not explained by (i) temperature shocks in the other three seasons
of 1792 (Table D.6); (ii) summer temperature deviations between 1788 and 1800 (Table D.7); or
(iii) rainfall shocks in the summer of 1792 (Table D.8). We also show that (iv) Conley-corrected
standard errors at various distance thresholds provide similar …rst-stage results (Table D.9); (v)
and alternative time windows to standardize the temperature shocks (Table D.10) do not change
the patterns found.
      Second, in an attempt to strengthen our identi…cation assumption, namely that the weather
shock in the summer of 1792 is uncorrelated with preexisting social and economic traits, we
gathered salient pre-revolutionary covariates at the département level and tested whether these
features predict the 1792 temperature deviation. Such covariates include (i) episodes of violence
immediately before (and after) the Revolution; (ii) complaints of the French population in 1789
as expressed in the cahiers de doléances; (iii) human capital before the Revolution proxied by
the share of brides and grooms that were able to sign their wedding contracts; (iv) the share of
the clergy that was hostile to the Revolution, and (v) the number of famous aristocratic families.
All in all, the results in Table D.11 are reassuring. None of these potentially important variables
correlates with our instrument, thus suggesting that it is a plausible source of identi…cation for
the impact of emigration on regional economic performance in the short and longue durée.




                                                16
4.2     The E¤ect of the Emigrés on the Economy in the Medium and Long Run

In this subsection, we explore the impact of emigration during the Revolution on several economic
outcomes over time, namely income per capita, sectoral labor productivity, and the composition
of the workforce.

4.2.1     Emigrés and the Evolution of Income per Capita

The relationship between emigration and income per capita up to World War II is presented in
Table 4, where the instrument is the squared deviation from standardized temperature in the
summer of 1792. Table D.12 in Appendix D replicates Table 4 using the absolute deviation
from standardized temperature in the summer of 1792: As shown in columns (1), (5), and (9) in
Panel A of Table 4, the unconditional OLS relationship between emigration and GDP per capita
is negative in 1860 and 1901, and turns positive in 1930 but is insigni…cant. The relationship
between emigration and income per capita in 1860 strengthens and becomes signi…cant when
we account for geographical factors in column (2). The 2SLS estimates in columns (3)-(4), (7)-
(8), and (11)-(12) in Panel A of Table 4 reveal that there is a negative and signi…cant e¤ect
of emigration on income per capita in 1860 and 1901 as well as a negative but insigni…cant
e¤ect in 1930, whether we only account for geographic controls or include both geographic and
prehistorical controls. A half-percentage-point increase in the share of émigrés in a département
decreases GDP per capita by 12:8% in 1860 and 18:8% in 1901.20 In both Tables 4 and D.12, the
coe¢ cient estimates associated with the share of émigrés in the 2SLS regressions are signi…cantly
larger than the corresponding OLS ones. Besides measurement error in the share of émigrés
resulting in attenuation bias in the OLS coe¢ cients, an additional and perhaps more pertinent
explanation for the downward bias of the OLS coe¢ cient arises from the fact that the unobserved
initial presence of wealthy landowners and priests in the population of a given département (the
stock) and their measured share in the département’s population (the ‡ow) are mechanically
linked.
        An alternative way to assess the negative but eventually vanishing impact of emigration
on local economic development during the 19th and early 20th centuries can be seen in Figure
D.4 where we take advantage of the data from Bonneuil (1997) on fertility and infant mortality
between 1811 and 1901. The fertility rate is computed as the Coale fertility index (Coale (1969))
for each département, while the infant mortality rate is computed as the share of children who
  20
     Few of our geographic and historical controls are signi…cant in the 2SLS regressions reported in columns
(8) and (12). Longitude is positively correlated with income per capita in 1860 and 1901, probably re‡ecting
the fact that départements in the east of France were more industrialized. A lack of commons in the 1780s
is also positively correlated with income per capita, which could be expected since commons were detrimental to
agricultural productivity. Finally, distance to the coast has a negative impact on income, as landlocked départements
could not pro…t from maritime trade.



                                                         17
died before their …rst birthday. In Figure D.4 we report the coe¢ cients associated with the share
of émigrés in 2SLS regressions (available upon request) where the dependent variable is the Coale
fertility index (Panel A) and infant mortality (Panel B). A high share of émigrés has a positive
and signi…cant e¤ect on fertility and infant mortality until the 1880s, and no signi…cant impact
afterward.
       The relationship between emigration and income per capita in the long run is presented in
Panel B of Table 4. As shown in columns (1), (5) and (9) unconditionally, emigration during the
Revolution has an insigni…cant positive association with income per capita across départements in
1995, 2000, and 2010. This relationship becomes signi…cantly positive once geographical features
are accounted for in columns (2), (6), and (10). Finally, the 2SLS estimates in columns (3)-(4),
(7)-(8), and (11)-(12) in Panel B of Table 4 suggest that emigration had a positive e¤ect in the
long run. A half-percentage-point increase in emigration increases GDP per capita in 1995 by
8:7%, in 2000 by 9:8%, and in 2010 by 8:8%.21 Similar results are reported in Table D.12 in
Appendix D.
       Our 2SLS estimates in Tables 4 and D.12 indicate that there was a reversal of the e¤ect of
emigration on income per capita: départements with more emigration were poorer until World
War I but became richer by the turn of the 21st century. We illustrate this reversal by plotting
in Figure 3 the coe¢ cients associated with the share of émigrés in the 2SLS regressions reported
in columns (4), (8), and (12) of Panels A and B in Tables 4 and D.12.
       Robustness checks. This reversal in the impact of emigration on economic performance
is driven neither by a speci…c group of départements nor by outlier départements with “too few”
or “too many” émigrés. In Figure 4, we plot the coe¢ cients from 2SLS regressions on GDP per
capita in 1860 and 2010 where we remove one “nuts 1” region at a time.22 In Figure 5, we plot
the coe¢ cients from 2SLS regressions on GDP per capita in 1860 and 2010, where we remove the
top and bottom 1%, 5%, 10% and 20% départements in the distribution of the share of émigrés.
Under all these alternative permutations, the coe¢ cient associated with the share of émigrés in
the 2SLS regressions remains consistently signi…cant: negative in 1860 and positive in 2010.
       This pattern is also evident in the reduced-form estimates reported in Table D.7 in Appen-
dix D. Panels A and B of Figure 6 graph the reduced-form relationships between the temperature
shock in the summer of 1792 and GDP per capita in 1860 and 2010, respectively. Moreover, the
reduced-form regressions in Table D.7 in Appendix D show that no temperature shock in the
  21
     In the 2SLS regressions, three covariates have a systematic signi…cant e¤ect on GDP per capita in 1995, 2000,
and 2010. Speci…cally, the distance of each département from Paris and Lyon is negatively correlated with income,
indicating the importance of these two major urban centers on spatial development. Furthermore we …nd that the
département ’s area is positively correlated with income, suggesting the presence of scale e¤ects.
  22
     The nomenclature of territorial units for statistics (or “nuts”) is a standard for referencing administrative
divisions within European Union countries. Here we use the …rst level of “nuts” for France.



                                                       18
summers between 1788 and 1800, other than that of 1792, can explain this reversal. We also
show that the sign and statistical signi…cance in the reduced-form relationship between tempera-
ture shocks in 1792 and GDP per capita in 1860 and 2010 is robust to using baselines other than
the 25 years preceding 1792, that is, using the 50 years before 1792 (1743-1791) or the 1751-1800,
1751-1775, and 1776-1800 periods in Table D.10 in Appendix D.
        Finally, in Table D.13, we examine the impact of the social status of émigrés on GDP
per capita in 1860 and 2010 by distinguishing between rich émigrés (aristocrats, priests, and
upper middle class) and poor émigrés (lower middle class, workers, and peasants). Even though
statistics on these social groups of émigrés are only available for 69 out of 86 départements, the
2SLS regression results in Table D.13 are qualitatively similar to those in Table 4 insofar as the
shares of rich and poor émigrés have a negative and signi…cant e¤ect on GDP per capita in 1860
and a positive and signi…cant impact on GDP per capita in 2010.

4.2.2    Emigrés, Labor Productivity, and the Workforce

This subsection explores the e¤ect of emigration on labor productivity in the di¤erent sectors of
the economy. In Panel A of Table 5, we examine the impact of emigration on the value added
per worker in the agricultural, industrial, and service sectors in 1860, 1930, 1982, and 1990,
respectively. The 2SLS regressions in columns (1)-(3) show that emigration had a signi…cantly
negative impact on productivity in all three sectors in 1860. The estimates in columns (4)-(6)
reveal that there was still a negative e¤ect of emigration on agricultural productivity in 1930.
However, in columns (7)-(12), the e¤ect of the share of émigrés on productivity in each sector in
1982 and 1990 is positive and signi…cant.
        The negative e¤ect of the share of émigrés on agricultural productivity in the mid-19th
century can be partially accounted for by the limited mechanization in agriculture in 1862 in high-
emigration départements. Speci…cally, in Table 6 we …nd that, out of the 15 di¤erent categories of
agricultural instruments per worker in the agricultural sector, emigration is negatively correlated
with 13 of these inputs, and this e¤ect is signi…cant for the quantity of fertilizer and the number
of scari…ers, grubbers, searchers, seeders, and tedders. It is also signi…cantly and negatively
correlated with the …rst principal component of all these agricultural tools per worker in the
agricultural sector. These results are in line with the view that French agriculture remained
relatively backward as a result of the French Revolution.23
        In Panel B of Table 5, we examine the impact of emigration on the share of the workforce
employed in the agricultural, industrial, and service sectors. The 2SLS regressions in columns
  23
    In regressions available upon request, which are motivated by the study of Rosenthal (1988) on irrigation in
the aftermath of the Revolution, we analyze the impact of emigration during the Revolution on the area drained
in each department as well as the number of pipe factories in each département in 1856 using the information in
Barral (1858). We …nd that emigration had an insigni…cant impact on both variables.


                                                      19
(1)-(3) show that emigration had a positive but insigni…cant impact on the share of the workforce
in the agricultural sector in 1860, a positive and signi…cant e¤ect at the 10% level on the share
of the workforce in the service sector, but a negative and signi…cant e¤ect at the 1% level on the
share of the workforce in the industrial sector. This last result suggests that emigration during
the French Revolution delayed the structural transformation of France toward the industrial era,
in line with the analysis of Cobban (1962). Moreover, the regressions in columns (4)-(6) show
that in 1930, emigration still had an insigni…cant e¤ect on the share of the workforce in the
agricultural sector, a negative and signi…cant e¤ect at the 10% level on the share of the workforce
in the industrial sector, and a positive and signi…cant e¤ect at the 5% level on the share of the
workforce in the service sector. Finally, the regressions in columns (7)-(9) show that in 2010,
emigration had a negative and signi…cant e¤ect at the 1% level on the share of the workforce in
the agricultural sector as well as a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on the shares of the workforce
in the industrial sector at the 5% level and in the service sector at the 1% level.
       All in all, the evidence in Tables 5 and 6 sheds some light on the sources of the nega-
tive impact of emigration on incomes during the 19th century shown in Table 4. It suggests
that emigration during the French Revolution disproportionately and inversely a¤ected agricul-
tural productivity up until World War II and slowed down the structural transformation toward
industry during the 19th century. Nevertheless, since the second half of the 20th century, high-
emigration départements have been hosting a more productive workforce in the industrial and
service sectors.24


5     Mechanisms

In this section we explore some potential channels which may account for the negative e¤ect of
emigration during the Revolution on the standards of living in the 19th century and its positive
e¤ect toward the end of the 20th century. First, we investigate how the absence of émigrés seems
to have had an impact on the size and the composition of the local elites during the 19th century.
Second, we analyze the impact of émigrés on the landownership structure. Finally, we examine
their e¤ect on the evolution of human capital across départements over time.

5.1    Emigration during the Revolution and the Economic Elites of the 19th
       Century

Here we investigate how emigration during the Revolution in‡uenced the size and composition of
local elites during the 19th century. The 2SLS estimates in Table 7 focus on electors in the 1839
  24
     In Table D.14, we examine the impact of emigration during the Revolution on the population in each départe-
ment (Panel A) as well as in the chef-lieu (i.e., administrative center) of each département (Panel B). We …nd that
emigration during the Revolution has no impact on population density until World War II.


                                                        20
elections under the regime of the July monarchy (1830-1848). At that time, the voting franchise
was restricted to men above the age of 25 who could pay 200 francs worth of direct annual taxes.
This was a signi…cant amount considering that the average daily wage of bakers in Paris in 1840
was equal to four francs (Chevallier (1887), p.46).
       The 2SLS estimates in column (1) of Table 7 show that émigrés had a negative e¤ect
on the share of electors in the population in 1839. The presence of a smaller economic elite in
high-émigrés areas suggests that the local elites were severely weakened by emigration during
the Revolution, leaving these départements with fewer wealthy individuals who could potentially
fund the costly investments of industrialization. This …nding is in line with the evidence in Table
5, that départements with a large share of émigrés were characterized by both lower productivity
and lower employment in the industrial sector.25
       Moreover, the estimates in Table 7 suggest that emigration had a negative e¤ect on the
share of landowners among the electors (column (2)), a positive but insigni…cant e¤ect on the
share of businessmen and professionals (i.e., doctors and lawyers) (columns (3)-(4)), as well as a
positive and signi…cant e¤ect on the share of civil servants (column (5)). The …nding in column
(2) highlights the relative paucity of su¢ ciently wealthy landowners that may explain the lower
agricultural productivity in 1860 in high-emigration départements. We come back to this issue
in the next section where we discuss in detail how the composition of agricultural landholdings
shaped local development.
       The estimate in column (5) of Table 7 shows that in 1839, electors in high-emigration
départements were disproportionately drawn from the pool of civil servants. At …rst, this pat-
tern may seem puzzling, but it is in line with the analysis of Tocqueville (1856) on how the
French Revolution contributed to the growth of the French administration and the central state.
The increased presence of civil servants in high-emigration départements is corroborated by the
estimates in Table D.16, where we show that emigration had a positive and signi…cant e¤ect
on the workforce share of civil servants in 1851 and 1866 as well as a positive but insigni…cant
one in 1881. All in all, the evidence suggests that there were relatively more civil servants, and
presumably, a more powerful administrative machine, in the départements where the Revolution
had been more intense, as proxied by the share of émigrés in the population.
  25
    In Table D.15, we examine the impact of emigration on local …nancial development. We proxy the latter by
the total value of loans (in French francs) granted by local savings banks and by the number of contracts sealed
by notaries in each département, keeping in mind that notaries had, by the second half of the 19th century, lost
their central role as …nancial intermediaries which they had held prior to the Revolution (Ho¤man, Postel-Vinay,
and Rosenthal (2000)). We …nd that emigration is negatively correlated with both measures during the 19th
century (the e¤ect is, however, only signi…cant on the number of contracts sealed by notaries in 1861). Overall,
the results suggest that the negative e¤ect of émigrés on GDP per capita only weakly stemmed from …nancial
underdevelopment.




                                                      21
5.2    Emigration during the Revolution and the Composition of Agricultural
       Holdings

We have already established that in départements with a higher share of émigrés, labor agricul-
tural productivity was signi…cantly lower and fewer rich landowners voted in the elections held
in 1839. In this section, we further examine the impact of emigration on the size of agricultural
landholdings.
       In the agricultural census of 1862, landholdings are categorized in brackets according to
their size. The largest landholdings are those in the category above 40 hectares. Given the
historical account and the evidence on the composition of the elites, one would expect to …nd
that high-emigration départements have a dearth of large holdings. This is shown to be the
case in column (1) in Panel A of Table 8 where the dependent variable is the share of farms
above 40 hectares: a one-percentage-point increase in the share of émigrés in the population
decreases the share of farms above 40 hectares in 1862 by 1:54%. It is instructive to link this
…nding with the work of David (1975) (pp.221-231) on the adoption of the mechanical reaper
for harvesting wheat in 1854-1857 in the United States. He …nds that the mechanical reaper
was only economically viable for farms larger than roughly 20 hectares. In 1862 only 13% of
farms were above 20 hectares in the median French département, while 52:9% and 58:5% of farms
were above that threshold in the United States in 1860 and England in 1851 (Grigg (1992)),
respectively. Moreover, as we show in column (2), French départements that experienced a
larger exodus during the Revolution had systematically fewer farms above this scale-e¢ cient size.
Namely, we …nd that a one-percentage-point increase in the share of émigrés in the population
decreased the share of farms above 20 hectares in 1862 by 0:87%. This absence of su¢ ciently
large landholdings echoes the …ndings in Table 6 regarding the delayed mechanization of French
agriculture in high-emigration départements.
       In columns (3)-(5) in Panel A of Table 8, our dependent variables are the ratio of the number
of farms of 40 hectares and above to the number of farms below 10 hectares in 1862 and the ratio
of the number of farms of 50 hectares and above to the number of farms below 10 hectares in 1929
and 2000. These variables are meant to capture the relative abundance of large- to small-sized
farms within a département. Over the last 150 years, regions in France where emigration was
more intense during the 1789 Revolution consistently feature an agricultural landscape dominated
by small- to medium-sized farmers and a scarcity of large ones.26 The demise of large landed
elites and the creation of a small peasantry mainly working for subsistence, at least until World
War II, was part of the legacy of the émigrés’ ‡ight during the French Revolution. Panels C
and D of Figure 6 plot the residuals of the reduced-form regressions between the summer of 1792
  26
    Additional results available upon request show that the share of émigrés had a positive but insigni…cant e¤ect
on the total number of farms and total number of farms per inhabitant in 1862.


                                                       22
temperature shock and the ratio of farms above 40 hectares to farms below 10 hectares in 1862
and between the summer of 1792 temperature shock and the share of farms above 20 hectares in
1862.
        It is interesting to compare the results in Panel A of Table 8 to those of Finley, Franck,
and Johnson (2017), who …nd that the auctions of Church land during the Revolution are pos-
itively correlated with land concentration during the mid-19th century (and hence, with higher
investments in agriculture). Their rationale is that the auctions of Church property, which took
place in the early stages of the Revolution before the summer of 1792, mainly entailed a transfer
of land from the Church to members of the wealthier sections of the local society. In our context,
the extent to which the local elite might eventually have been able to bene…t from the Church
property would depend on the extent of emigration during the Revolution. In other words, if
our conjecture is right, one would expect to …nd that the negative impact of emigration on land
concentration to be magni…ed in areas where more Church land was auctioned. This is what we
…nd in Panel B of Table 8, where we run reduced-form regressions on the 67 départements for
which we have information on the share of the Church property sold during the Revolution (Bo-
dinier and Teyssier (2000)). Speci…cally, we control for the latter and add the interaction term
between the share of Church land sold in each département and the temperature shocks in the
summer of 1792. In all the regressions, we …nd, in line with Finley, Franck, and Johnson (2017),
that the share of the Church property sold in each département is positively correlated with the
presence of large estates, and more importantly for our analysis, that the interaction term is
negative and highly signi…cant. The direct e¤ect of temperature shocks also remains precisely
estimated, suggesting that emigration did lead to a decline in the share of large landowners even
in the absence of Church land redistribution. Its impact, nevertheless, was signi…cantly stronger
precisely where more Church land was sold.
        One may naturally wonder why market forces did not “correct”this ine¢ cient size of small
landholdings over time. In other words, why did this lopsided ownership structure in agriculture
survive when one would expect consolidation to take place? Although a thorough exploration
of this subject would take us beyond the con…nes of the current study, we venture a tentative
explanation below.
        First of all, it must be noted that there was no deliberate, o¢ cial policy designed speci…cally
to perpetuate the fragmentation of landownership status quo during the 19th century (Agulhon,
Désert, and Specklin (1976)). Nevertheless, the existence of the octrois might help to explain why
the tendency toward consolidation might have been less pronounced. The octrois were the local
taxes levied on almost all goods entering towns (e.g., meat, wine, fruits, vegetables, coal, etc.)
and, de facto, functioned as internal trade barriers within France (before and after 1789, as they



                                                   23
were only …nally abolished in 1943). These octrois favored small local farmers whose production
would be exempt from paying them. Throughout the 19th century, the central government
progressively reined in the ability of towns to levy octrois, and on December 29, 1897, the French
Parliament passed a law which came into e¤ect on January 1, 1901, dictating a substantial
decrease in octrois rates. This law, which was the outcome of the lobbying from “progressives”
who sought to improve citizens’ health by promoting the consumption of wine as opposed to
liquor, bene…ted large wine producers in the south, who were able to produce cheap wine in large
quantities. The law thus crowded out small wine producers who successfully lobbied for costly
anti-competitive legislation which was adopted in 1905 to reduce fraud and adulteration in the
wine market and which, de facto, protected small producers of local wine (Franck, Johnson, and
Nye (2014)). This example suggests that local demand for barriers to entry would be stronger in
regions dominated by small landowners since competition from large farmers would be damaging
to their revenues. In fact this is what we …nd in Table D.17: départements with a larger share
of émigrés had in 1875 more French towns (“communes”) which were protected by octrois taxes,
and the magnitude of these taxes for various products were also likely to be signi…cantly higher.
       Another potential explanation for the negative impact of emigration on agricultural pro-
ductivity may stem from the positive e¤ect of emigration on the share of commons in each
département in 1863, as can be seen in column (6) in Panel A of Table 8. A one-percentage-point
increase in the share of émigrés in the population increases by 1:72% the share of commons in
1863 . As discussed by Vivier (1998), there is ample anecdotal evidence that the central state
and the local governments seized the commons during the Revolution in places where there were
more émigrés. In turn, the local governments leased those lands to farmers for a limited number
of years. Such leases in agriculture may have had a negative e¤ect on agricultural productivity
by limiting investments in machinery and promoting intensive production methods which would
be damaging for land productivity in the long run.27
       The evidence in this section provides a possible foray into understanding why local incomes
were depressed during the 19th century in regions that émigrés left in large numbers. Can the
same economic forces, re‡ected in the distribution of agricultural landholdings, help to explain
the takeo¤ of these initially lagging regions? This is what we ask below.
  27
    French towns (“communes”) could lend their land under ordinary leases or grant longtime leases. The “ordi-
nary” leases were limited to 9 years in 1791 for all communes, but exceptions could be granted by the national
administration. The 9-year limit was soon extended to 18 years. Moreover, in 1859, the law was changed so that
the ordinary leases of the communes were a minimum of 9 years and a maximum of 27. Furthermore, communes
had the right to deliver lifelong leases on commons.




                                                     24
5.3     Emigration during the Revolution and Human Capital Accumulation

This section examines whether the positive e¤ect of emigration on the standards of living in the
long run can be explained by its impact on the evolution of human capital accumulation of each
département before and after World War II.

5.3.1    The E¤ect of Emigrés on Human Capital Accumulation

For the period before World War II, our empirical analysis focuses on the decadal averages between
the 1840s and the 1930s of the share of illiterate French army conscripts, that is, 20-year-old men
who reported for military service in the département where their father lived and who could
neither read nor write. In the 2SLS regressions reported in Table 9, we …nd that emigration has a
negative e¤ect on the share of illiterate conscripts throughout the period. This e¤ect is signi…cant
at the 10% level in the 1840s and 1870s, and barely insigni…cant during the 1850s (p-value=0.12),
1860s (p-value=0.23), 1880s (p-value=0.17), and 1890s (p-value=0.27). The negative e¤ect of
emigration on illiteracy is consistently signi…cant for the generations of conscripts in the 1900s,
1910s, and 1930s, that is, for the 20-year-old men who would have bene…ted from the adoption
of the 1881-1882 laws on free and mandatory schooling until age 13. This pattern suggests that
in high-emigration areas throughout the 19th century, and despite their limited means, parents
attempted to invest relatively more in the human capital of their children compared to the more
a- uent, low emigration départements. This tendency toward higher literacy rates becomes more
evident after 1881-1882 when schooling becomes free and mandatory until the age of 13. Below
we discuss how this pattern may be attributed to the relatively low returns to agricultural labor
compared to the other sectors of the economy.
        Since World War II, départements which experienced large emigration waves during the
French Revolution have maintained their human capital advantage already apparent at the turn
of the 20th century. This can be seen in Panels A and B of Figure D.5, where we plot the
coe¢ cients associated with the share of émigrés in 2SLS regressions. In Panel A the dependent
variable is the share of men ages 16-24 with only a high-school degree in 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990,
1999 and 2010, whereas in Panel B the dependent variable is the share of men ages 16-24 with
a college degree in the respective years. The share of émigrés has a positive and signi…cant
e¤ect on the share of males age 16-24 with only a high school degree for 1975, 1982, and 1990.
Nevertheless, the share of émigrés has a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on the share of men aged
16-24 with a college degree consistently between 1968 and 2010. These results suggest that since
World War II, human capital accumulation has been more intense overall in high-emigration
regions; although it seems as though there has been a slow convergence over the last two decades
in terms of high school completion rates, the relatively earlier transition to widespread literacy


                                                25
in high-émigrés areas has conferred upon them an educational edge re‡ected in a greater ‡ow of
college graduates to this day.

5.3.2    The Opportunity Cost of Education and Child Labor

Naturally, to understand why literacy rates di¤er across regions over time, one needs to tease
out the forces that shape the demand and supply of schooling locally. This is not an easy task.
However, one element that makes the case of France easier to analyze is the fact that primary
schooling became free and mandatory until the age of 13 after the adoption of the 1881-1882 laws.
Although this would imply that the supply of schooling over time should become more uniform
across regions, we …nd that high-emigration départements experience systematic under provision
of primary schools per school-aged (5-15 years of age) population until WWI. This is shown in
Panel A of Table D.18. A similar pattern is found in Panel B where the dependent variable
is the total public spending per pupil between 1876 and 1901. Panel C of Table D.18 actually
suggests that the limited supply of schooling re‡ected an overall under provision of public goods
in high-emigration départements which also had a less dense transportation network up until at
least World War I. Moreover, given the role of the Church in the provision of schooling in France
before and after the Revolution (see Appendix A:3 for a discussion), it is worth pointing out
that Table D.19 shows that the temperature shocks in the summer of 1792 are not correlated
with variables that Franck and Johnson (2016) show to be good proxies for religiosity in France
before World War I. This lack of correlation between our instrument and the number of religious
communities in each département devoted to education, charity, and solely to religious purposes
in 1856 (from the 1856 French census), as well as the share of representatives in the lower house
of Parliament who voted against the separation of Church and State in 1905 (Franck (2010)),
suggests that the Church’s ability to provide education in the 19th century was uncorrelated with
emigration during the Revolution.
        In light of these observations, the fact that literacy became more widespread in the high-
emigration regions which received overall fewer public goods (including public primary schools)
is all the more striking. But what may rationalize this pattern? We o¤er two complementary
pieces of evidence.
        First, a potential explanation for the rise in literacy across high-emigration areas from the
late 19th century onward may be partly attributed to the observation that one of the factors that
in‡uence human capital investments is the relative return of working in agriculture versus services
and industry. To the extent that literacy is arguably more complementary to non agricultural
occupations, a larger gap in labor productivity in favor of services and industry might act as
a catalyst for human capital accumulation. We already noted in Panel A of Table 5 that the



                                                  26
emigration wave during the Revolution had a negative impact on labor productivity in all sectors
of the economy until World War II. But what happened to the relative sectoral returns? In Panel
C of Table 5, we run 2SLS regressions where the dependent variable is the ratio of the value added
per worker in the non agricultural sector (i.e., industry and services) vis-à-vis the agricultural one
in 1860, 1930, 1982, and 1990. Emigration had a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on this ratio at the
1% level in 1860 and 1930 in columns (1) and (2), suggesting the relative desirability of the non-
agricultural sector of the local economy in high-emigration départements. In columns (3) and (4),
the e¤ect of emigration on the relative labor productivities in 1982 and 1990 is insigni…cant. This
would be expected, as a supply response regarding human capital accumulation would eventually
lower the di¤erential wages between the agricultural and non agricultural sectors.
       A second explanation for the early rise of literacy in the high-emigration areas can be traced
to the opportunity cost of acquiring education. Besides the direct monetary cost of attending
school, a relevant but often underappreciated part of the decision on whether to acquire schooling
would be the forgone wages that a child would bring home. In the case of 19th-century France,
this outside option would be tightly linked to productivity in agriculture.28 Taking into account
both the depressed labor productivity in the agricultural sector of high-émigrés areas until World
War II and the decline in the monetary costs of primary schooling after 1881, it is plausible to
expect individuals in high-émigrés départements to eventually accumulate human capital at a
faster pace instead of working in the agricultural sector.
       We examine the conjecture that children and teenagers would be less likely to work in
the agricultural sector by using data from the 1929 agricultural survey. This survey provides
information at the département level on the number of individuals below the age of 15 working
in agriculture. The 2SLS regression results reported in Table 10 show that in high-emigration
départements in 1929, individuals below the age of 15 were systematically less likely to work in
the agricultural sector, and presumably more likely to stay in school. The pattern is the same
whether the baseline is the overall workforce in agriculture, the number of daily agricultural
workers, the total number of daily agricultural workers (including foreign workers) below the age
of 15, or the total number of French and foreign daily agricultural workers above the age of 15.
       In an e¤ort to provide some historical background to the uncovered relationship between
returns to agriculture and the relative delay in human capital accumulation in low-emigration
areas during the 19th century, we turn to the parliamentary debates which preceded the adoption
of mandatory schooling laws in France. In this respect, it is interesting to examine the debates
held in 1881-1882 when laws on mandatory schooling until age 13 were …rst adopted, but also
  28
   The adverse e¤ect of higher agricultural productivity on human capital accumulation has been recently docu-
mented by Shah and Steinberg (2015) in the context of India.




                                                     27
in 1936 when mandatory schooling was extended until the age of 14.29 Politicians who voiced
concerns regarding the implementation of the mandatory schooling laws in 1881-1882, such as
Jean-Edmond Laroche-Joubert who supported them or Ferdinand Boyer who opposed them,
thought that parents would refuse to send their children to school because they would be deprived
of the wages that their children would earn by working on nearby large farms (Journal O¢ ciel,
Debats, Chambre des députés 18-21 décembre 1880, pp. 36-75).30 Laroche-Joubert represented
in the lower house of Parliament the Charente département, a low-emigration area with a high
ratio of large to small farms, while Boyer represented in the lower house of Parliament the
Gard département, also a low-emigration place with a median ratio of large to small farms. In
1936, the same type of argument was made by Henri Connevot, who represented Creuse, a low-
emigration département with a high ratio of large to small farms in the upper house of Parliament.
Speci…cally, Connevot was in favor of the law but expressed his concerns that "in our rural areas,
very often, thirteen-year old children, as soon as they pass the primary school certi…cate, are sent
away to work by their parents, both boys and girls, to earn 100 francs per month the …rst year
and 150 francs per month the second year. These are therefore three thousands francs which are
lost by needy families. It will therefore be very di¢ cult to enforce the law, or it will be necessary
to grant allowances to those families." (Journal O¢ ciel, Débats Parlementaires, Sénat, 28 juillet
1936, p 903. Translation is ours.)


       Emigration, Landownership and Comparative Development Weaving together
the evidence so far, one may wonder whether the time-varying impact of émigrés on comparative
development may be quantitatively explained by the persistent di¤erences in the composition of
agricultural landholdings brought about by the emigration during the Revolution. In other words,
can the relative increase in the number of small landowners account for the inverse relationship
between emigration rates and agricultural productivity in the medium run, as well as higher
human capital accumulation and better economic performance after World War II?
       We examine this hypothesis in Table 11 where we assess the change in the magnitudes
of our baseline …ndings regarding the value added per worker in agriculture in 1860 (Table 5)
and GDP per capita in 2010 (Table 4) when we account for the ratio of farms above 40 ha to
farms below 10 ha in 1862, which re‡ects the degree of concentration in landownership. First,
the association between the ratio of large to small farms and economic performance changes sign
  29
     In 1881-1882, as well as in 1936, most of the politicians who supported mandatory schooling laws did so because
they thought that the development of a state-funded secular system would consolidate the Republican regime by
weakening the Catholic Church. Conversely, the opposition to the mandatory schooling laws was motivated by the
defense of the Catholic school system (see Franck and Johnson (2016) and the references therein).
  30
     Jules Ferry, who was the prime minister when the June 16, 1881, law was adopted and minister of education
when the March 28, 1882, law was passed, conceded that the implementation of mandatory schooling might be
problematic. (Journal O¢ ciel, Chambre des Députés, 20 décembre 1880, p. 112).


                                                        28
over time, similar to the e¤ect of emigration during the Revolution. A département dominated by
large farms in mid-19th-century France was signi…cantly more productive in agriculture in 1862;
however, départements where the agricultural sector was populated by small- and medium-sized
farmers in 1862 have higher income per capita in 2000. Moreover, accounting for the composition
of agricultural holdings decreases the estimated coe¢ cient on the share of émigrés by roughly
half when the dependent variable is the value added per worker in agriculture in 1860, and by
approximately 40% when the variable of interest is GDP per capita in 2010. This implies that a
sizeable fraction of the observed reversal in the relationship between emigration rates during the
Revolution and subsequent economic performance is indeed driven by the nonmonotonic impact
of the concentration in landownership on comparative development.
      The uncovered evidence is complementary to the mechanism proposed by Franck and Galor
(2015), who argue that the early industrialization across French départements led to underinvest-
ment in education and lower employment in skilled-intensive occupations.


6    Conclusion

It is widely debated whether the 1789 Revolution enabled economic growth and industrialization
in France or stalled French development by consolidating an agrarian structure of small near-
subsistence farmers. In this study, we focus on the economic consequences of the local weakening
of the Old Regime, as proxied by the share of émigrés, mostly aristocrats, wealthy landowners and
clergymen, who ‡ed France during the 1789-1799 period and whose property was con…scated and
sold by the revolutionaries. Our identi…cation strategy exploits local variation in temperature
shocks during the summer of 1792 to obtain plausibly exogenous variation in the share of émigrés
across French départements. Emigration intensi…ed in August and September of 1792 when the
Revolution took a radical turn. King Louis XVI was imprisoned, and a few weeks later, the …rst
French Republic was proclaimed. At this critical juncture of the French Revolution, we show
that local shocks in the economic environment (captured by temperature shocks) are a strong
predictor of local emigration rates.
      The study establishes that emigration during the French Revolution has had a nonmonotonic
impact on regional income per capita over the subsequent 200 years. While emigration had a
negative impact on income during the 19th century, it had a positive and signi…cant e¤ect in the
long run. We suggest several mechanisms that may rationalize this pattern. First, in départe-
ments with more émigrés, there was more land redistribution. Large estates were fragmented into
smaller ones. This pattern may explain the archaic means of agricultural production in France
and its delayed industrialization during the 19th century. Second, the size and composition of the
local elites were shaped by emigration during the Revolution. High-emigration areas had fewer


                                               29
wealthy individuals as well as fewer large landowners.
      We conjecture that the changes in the economic environment due to emigration during the
Revolution shaped the incentives for human capital accumulation over time. Speci…cally, we …nd
that high-emigration départements have systematically higher literacy rates among the conscripts
even before the adoption of the laws regarding free and mandatory schooling in 1881-1882, and
this relationship further strengthens with respect to the generations born thereafter.
      This early rise in literacy rates may be linked to two elements in‡uencing human capital
accumulation. First, départements with a higher share of émigrés in the population during
the Revolution are shown to have a larger gap in labor productivity in favor of the industrial
and service sectors up until World War II. To the extent that human capital is complementary
to non agricultural activities, raising the relative productivity of the latter would incentivize the
accumulation of basic literacy in high-emigration areas. Second, the opportunity cost of acquiring
education re‡ected in agricultural productivity was lower in the high-emigration départements.
Indeed, using data from 1929, we show that child labor in agriculture was lower in départements
with low-emigration rates and high-agricultural productivity, underlying the adverse dynamic
impact of high opportunity cost on school attendance. Since World War II, these départements
have kept their edge in education, as re‡ected in higher rates of college graduates today. As such,
the reduction in the share of wealthy individuals in the local population and the fragmentation
of agricultural property in the wake of the Revolution are consistent with studies predicting a
nonmonotonic role of equality in the process of development (Galor and Zeira (1993), Galor and
Moav (2004)).
      Our study suggests several potential avenues for future research. For example, political
upheavals at di¤erent stages of development may shape economic trajectories and social pref-
erences across generations, and lead to the emergence of new political institutions over time.
Second, our study suggests that radical policies of land redistribution in agrarian societies can
have economic consequences that have a time-varying impact. Further research could explore
how policies speci…c to the industrial or service sector may in‡uence the long-term evolution of
human capital.




                                                 30
References

Acemoglu, D., D. Cantoni, S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2011): “The consequences
  of radical reform: the French Revolution,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3286–3307.

Acemoglu, D., T. A. Hassan, and J. A. Robinson (2011): “Social structure and develop-
  ment: a legacy of the Holocaust in Russia,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 895–946.

Ado, A. (1987 [2012]): Paysans en révolution. Terre, pouvoir et jacquerie, 1789-1794. Société
  des Etudes Robespierristes, Paris, France.

Aftalion, F. (1990): The French Revolution: an economic interpretation. Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge, UK.

Agulhon, M., G. Désert, and R. Specklin (1976): “Apogée et crise de la civilisation
  paysanne,” in Histoire de la France rurale, ed. by G. Duby, and A. Wallon, vol. 3. Editions du
  Seuil, Paris, France.

Arnaud, G. (1904): Histoire de la révolution dans le département de l’Ariège (1789-1795).
  Edouard Privat, Toulouse, France.

Baldensperger, F. (1924): Le mouvement des idées dans l’émigration française (1789-1815).
  Plon-Nourrit, Paris.

Balla, E., and N. D. Johnson (2009): “Fiscal crisis and institutional change in the Ottoman
  Empire and France,” Journal of Economic History, 69(3), 809–845.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, G. Postel-Vinay, and T. Watts (2010): “Long-run health
  impacts of income shocks: wine and phylloxera in nineteenth-century France,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 714–728.

Barral, J.-A. (1858): Drainage, irrigations, engrais liquides, tome troisième (2e édition). Li-
  brairie agricole de la maison rustique, Paris France.

Bastien, P. (2006): L’exécution publique à Paris au XVIIIe siècle. Une histoire des rituels
  judiciaires. Champ Vallon, Seyssel, France.

Bée, M. (1983): “Le spectacle de l’éxécution dans la France d’Ancien Régime,”Annales, Histoire,
  Sciences Sociales, 38(4), 843–862.

Biard, M. (1995): Collot d’Herbois: légendes noires et Révolution. Presses Universitaires de
  Lyon, Lyon, France.


                                                31
Blattman, C., and E. Miguel (2010): “Civil War,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(1),
  3–57.

Bloch, M. (1929): “Les plans parcellaires,”Annales d’Histoire Economique et Sociale, 1(1-2-3),
  60–70,225–231,390–398.

Bluche, F. (1992): Septembre 1792: logiques d’un massacre. Robert La¤ont, Paris, France.

Bodinier, B. (1999): “La vente des biens nationaux: essai de synthèse,”Annales historiques de
  la Révolution française, 315(1), 7–19.

Bodinier, B., and E. Teyssier (2000): L’événement le plus important de la révolution, la
  vente des biens nationaux. Société des études robespierristes et Comité des travaux historiques
  et scienti…ques, Paris, France.

Boisnard, L. (1992): La noblesse dans la tourmente, 1774-1802. Taillandier, Paris, France.

Bonin, S., and C. Langlois (1997): Atlas de la Révolution Française, Vol 10 - Economie.
  Editions de l’Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris, France.

Bonneuil, N. (1997): Transformation of the French Demographic Landscape, 1806-1906. Claren-
  don Press, Oxford, UK.

Bosker, M., E. Buringh, and J. L. van Zanden (2013): “From Baghdad to London: un-
  ravelling Urban Development in Europe and the Arab World 800-1800,”Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 95(4), 1418–1437.

Bouloiseau, M. (1972): La république jacobine, 10 août 1792 - 9 thermidor an II. Le Seuil,
  Collection Points Histoire, Paris, France.

Bouton, C. A. (1993): The ‡our war: gender, class and community in late ancien régime.
  Pennsylvania State University Press, State College, PA.

Brissot, J.-P. (1792): Second discours de J.P. Brissot, député, Sur la nécessité de faire la guerre
  aux Princes allemands, prononcé a la Société des Amis de la Constitution, séante aux Jacobins,
  à Paris dans la séance du 30 décembre 1791. De l’Imprimerie du Patriote François, Place du
  Théâtre Italien, Paris.

Caron, P. (1935): Les massacres de septembre. Maison du livre français, Paris, France.

Carra, J.-L. (1782): Système de la raison: ou le prophète philosophe. Kearby, London, UK.




                                                32
Caruana-Galizia, P. (2013): “Estimating French regional income: departmental per capita
  gross value added, 1872-1911,” Research in Economic History, 29, 71–95.

Cassirer, E. (1932 [2009]): The Philosophy of the Enlightenment. Princeton University Press,
  Princeton, NJ.

Chateaubriand, F.-R. d. (1847): “Opinion sur le projet de loi tendant a indemniser les an-
  ciens propriétaires de biens fonds con…squés et vendus au pro…t de l’Etat, en vertu des lois
  révolutionnaires, prononcée a la Chambre des Pairs, le 11 avril 1825,” in Oeuvres Complètes
  Tome Deuxième (Oeuvres Politiques). Firmin Didot, Paris, France.

Chevallier, E. (1887): Les salaires au XIXe siècle. Arthur Rousseau, Paris, France.

Coale, A. J. (1969): “The Decline of Fertility in Europe from the French Revolution to World
  War II,” in Fertility and Family Planning : A World View, ed. by S. Behrman, L. Corsa, and
  R. Freedman, pp. 3–24, Ann Arbor, MI. University of Michigan Press.

Cobb, R. (1972): Reactions to the French Revolution. Oxford University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Cobban, A. (1962): The social interpretation of the French Revolution. Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge, UK.

Combes, P.-P., M. Lafourcade, J.-F. Thisse, and J.-C. Toutain (2011): “The rise and fall
  of spatial inequalities in France: a long-run perspective,” Explorations in Economic History,
  48, 243–271.

Conley, T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of
  Econometrics, 92(1), 1–45.

Crépin, A. (2009): Histoire de la conscription. Gallimard, Folio Histoire, Paris.

Crouzet, F. (1964): “Wars, blockade, and economic change in Europe, 1792-1815,” Journal of
  Economic History, 24(4), 567–588.

         (2003): “The historiography of French economic growth in the nineteenth century,”
  Economic History Review, 56(2), 215–242.

Darnton, R. (1973): “The Encyclopédie wars of prerevolutionary France,”American Historical
  Review, 78(5), 1331–1352.

Daudin, G. (2010): “Domestic trade and market size in late eighteenth-century France,”Journal
  of Economic History, 70(3), 716–743.


                                               33
David, P. A. (1975): Technical choice innovation and economic growth. Essays on American
  and British experience in the 19th century. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Dell, M. (2012): “Path Dependence in Development: Evidence from the Mexican Revolution,”
  mimeo, Harvard University, Department of Economics.

du     Motey,        H.      R.     (1893):         Une    paroisse     rurale    au    duché
  d’Alençon: Saint-Germain-de Clairefeuille, des origines de la paroisse à 1790. E. Renaut-de-
  Broise, Alençon, France.

Duc de Castries, R. (1966): La vie quotidienne des émigrés. Hachette, Paris, France.

Dupâquier, J., and M. Dupâquier (1985): Histoire de la démographie. Perrin, Paris, France.

Finley, T., R. Franck, and N. D. Johnson (2017): “The e¤ects of land redistribution:
  evidence from the French Revolution,” Working paper, George Mason University.

Fiszbein, M. (2016): “Agricultural diversity, structural change and long-run development: evi-
  dence from US counties,” Working paper, Boston University.

France - Ministère de la Guerre (1839-1937): Compte rendu sur le recrutement de l’armée.
  Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.

Franck, R. (2010): “Economic growth and the separation of Church and State: the French
  case,” Economic Inquiry, 48(4), 841–859.

         (2016): “The political consequences of income shocks: explaining the consolidation of
  democracy in France,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(1), 57–83.

Franck, R., and O. Galor (2015): “Is Industrialization Conducive to Long-Run Prosperity?,”
  CESifo Working Paper Series No. 5354.

         (2017): “Technology-Skill Complementarity in Early Phases of Industrialization,” Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research Paper No. 23197.

Franck, R., and N. D. Johnson (2016): “Can public policies lower religiosity? Evidence from
  school choice in France, 1878-1902,” Economic History Review, 69(3), 915–944.

Franck, R., N. D. Johnson, and J. V. C. Nye (2014): “From internal taxes to national
  regulation: evidence from a French wine tax reform at the turn of the twentieth century,”
  Explorations in Economic History, 51(1), 77–93.

Furet, F. (1978): Penser la révolution française. Gallimard, Paris, France.

                                              34
Furet, F., and J. Ozouf (1977): Lire et écrire. L’alphabétisation des français de Calvin à Jules
  Ferry. Editions de Minuit, Paris, France.

Furet, F., and M. Ozouf (1988): Dictionnaire critique de la Révolution française. Flammarion,
  Paris, France.

Galor, O., and O. Moav (2004): “From physical to human capital accumulation: inequality
  and the process of development,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(4), 1001–1026.

Galor, O., and J. Zeira (1993): “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 60(1), 35–52.

Garrioch, D. (2002): The making of revolutionary Paris. University of California Press, Berke-
  ley, Berkeley, CA.

Gay, P. (1966): The Enlightenment: an interpretation; the rise of modern paganism. Alfred
  Knopf, New York, NY.

         (1969): The Enlightenment: an interpretation; the science of freedom. Alfred Knopf,
  New York, NY.

Godechot, J. (1951): Les institutions de la France sous la Révolution et l’Empire. Presses
  Universitaires de France, Paris, France.

Greer, D. (1935): The incidence of the terror during the French Revolution: a statistical
  interpretation. Gloucester, MA: P. Smith.

         (1951): The incidence of the emigration during the French Revolution. Gloucester, MA:
  P. Smith.

Grigg, D. B. (1992): The transformation of agriculture in the West. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.

Grosfeld, I., S. O. Sakalli, and E. Zhuravskaya (2017): “Middleman minorities and ethnic
  violence: anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian empire,” Paris School of Economics Working
  Paper, 0(0), 00–00.

Gueniffey, P. (2011): “La grande terreur: naissance et mort d’une idéologie,” in Histoires de
  la révolution et de l’empire, pp. 237–302. Perrin, Paris.

Guizot, F. (1829-1832): Histoire générale de la civilisation en Europe depuis la chute de l’empire
  romain jusqu’à la révolution française. Pichon et Didier, Paris, France.




                                                35
Haun, J. (1973): “Visual quanti…cation of wheat development,”Agronomy Journal, 65(1), 116–
  119.

Havard, O. (1911-1913): Histoire de la révolution dans les ports de guerre. Toulon. Nouvelle
  Librairie Nationale, Paris, France.

Heckscher, E. F. (1922): The continental system: an economic interpretation. Clarendon
  Press, Oxford, UK.

Heller, H. (2006): The Bourgeois Revolution in France, 1789-1815. Bergham Books, New York,
  NY.

Henderson, W. (1957): “The Anglo-French commercial treaty of 1786,” Economic History
  Review, 10(1), 104–112.

Hidalgo, F. D., S. Naidu, S. Nichter, and N. Richardson (2010): “Economic Determi-
  nants of Land Invasions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3), 505–523.

Higonnet, P. L.-R. (1981): Class, ideology, and the rights of nobles during the French
  Revolution. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK.

Hobsbawm, E. J. (1990): Echoes of the Marseillaise: two centuries look back on the French
  Revolution. Verso Books, London, UK.

Hoffman, P. T., G. Postel-Vinay, and J.-L. Rosenthal (2000): Priceless Markets. The
  Political Economy of Credit in Paris, 1660-1870. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Hyslop, B. F. (1934): French nationalism in 1789 according to the General Cahiers. Columbia
  University Press, New York, NY.

Israel, J. (2014): Revolutionary ideas: an intellectual history of the French Revolution from
  the rights of man to Robespierre. Princeton University Press, Princeton,NJ.

Jaurès, J. (1901-1903): Histoire socialiste de la Révolution française, Edition revue par A.
  Mathiez (1922-1924). Editions de la Librarie de l’Humanité, Paris.

Johnson, H. C. (1986): The Midi in revolution. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Jones, C. (2002): The Great Nation : France from Louis XV to Napoleon 1715-1799. Penguin
  Press, London, UK.

Jones, P. (1988): The peasantry in the French Revolution. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
  bridge, UK.

                                              36
Juhász, R. (2015): “Temporary protection and technology adoption: evidence from the
  Napoleonic blockade,” Working Paper.

Kaplan, S. L. (1984): Provisioning Paris - merchants and millers in the grain and ‡our trade
  during the eighteenth century. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.

         (1996): The bakers of Paris and the bread question 1700-1775. Duke University Press,
  Durham, NC.

Koyré, A. (1948): “Condorcet,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 9(2), 131–152.

Labrousse, E. (1933): Esquisse du mouvement des prix et des revenus en France au XVIIIe
  siècle. Librairie Dalloz, Paris, France.

Labrousse, E., R. Romano, and F. Dreyfus (1970): Le prix du froment en France au temps
  de la monnaie stable (1726-1913). Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes - SEVPEN, Paris, France.

Lebrun, F., J. Quéniart, and M. Venard (2003): Histoire générale de l’enseignement et de
  l’éducation en France: de Gutempberg aux Lumières (1480-1789). Perrin - Collection Tempus,
  Paris, France.

Lecarpentier, G. (1908): La vente des biens écclésiastiques pendant la révolution française.
  Alcan, Paris.

Lefebvre, G. (1924): Les paysans du Nord pendant la révolution française. C. Robbe, Lille,
  France.

         (1962): The French revolution, vol. I: from its origins to 1793. Columbia University
  Press, New York, NY.

Loutchisky, I. (1897): La petite propriété en France et la vente des biens nationaux. Honoré
  Champion, Paris.

Luterbacher, J., D. Dietrich, E. Xoplaki, M. Grosjean, and H. Wanner (2004): “Eu-
  ropean Seasonal and Annual Temperature Variability, Trends, and Extremes Since 1500,”
  Science, 303(5663), 1499–1503.

            (2006): “European Seasonal Temperature Reconstructions,” IGBP PAGES/World
  Data Center for Paleoclimatology Data Contribution Series No. 2006-060, NOAA/NCDC
  Paleoclimatology Program.

Maddison, A. (2001): The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Development Centre
  Studies, OECD.

                                              37
Marion, M. (1908): La vente des biens nationaux pendant la révolution (avec étude spéciale
  des ventes dans les départements de la Gironde et du Cher). Honoré Champion, Paris, France.

Markoff, J. (1996): The abolition of feudalism: peasants, lords, and legislators in the French
  revolution. Pennsylvania State University Press, Pittsburgh, PA.

Martin, J.-C. (1987): La Vendée et la France, 1789-1799. Editions du Seuil, Paris, France.

         (2006): Violence et révolution. Essai sur la naissance d’un mythe national. Editions du
  Seuil, Paris, France.

Marx, K. (1843 [1970]): Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. Cambridge University Press,
  Ed. Joseph O’Malley, London.

Mathiez, A. (1922-1924): La Révolution française. Librairie Armand Colin, Paris, France.

Mayeur, F. (2003): Histoire générale de l’enseignement et de l’éducation en France: De la
  Révolution à l’Ecole Républicaine (1789-1930). Perrin - Collection Tempus, Paris, France.

Maza, S. (2003): The myth of the French bourgeoisie: an essay on social imaginary, 1750-1850.
  Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

McPhee, P. (1999): Revolution and Environment in Southern France Peasants, Lords, and
  Murder in the Corbières 1780-1830. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Mornet, D. (1933): Les origines intellectuelles de la révolution française. Librarie Armand
  Colin, Paris, France.

Nassiet, M. (1993): Noblesse et pauvreté. La petite noblesse en Bretagne, XVe-XVIIIe siècle.
  Presses Universitaires de Rennes, Rennes, France.

Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long Term E¤ects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 123(1), 139–176.

Nunn, N., and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
  Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221–3252.

Palmer, R. R. (1941): Twelve who ruled: the year of the Terror in the French Revolution.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Pauling, A., J. Luterbacher, C. Casty, and H. Wanner (2006): “Five hundred years
  of gridded high-resolution precipitation reconstructions over Europe and the connection to
  large-scale circulation,” Climate Dynamics, 26, 387–405.

                                               38
Persson, K. G. (1999): Grain markets in Europe 1500-1900. Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge, UK.

Peyrard, C. (1996):       Les Jacobins de l’Ouest. Sociabilité révolutionnaire et formes de
  politisation dans le Maine et la Basse Normandie (1789-1799). Publications de la Sorbonne,
  Paris, France.

Resnick, D. P. (1966): The white terror and the political reaction after Waterloo. Harvard
  University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Rosenthal, J.-L. (1988): The fruits of revolution. Property rights, litigation and French
  agriculture, 1700-1860. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Sargent, T. J., and F. R. Velde (1995): “Macroeconomic policies of the French Revolution,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 103(3), 474–518.

Schama, S. (1989): Citizens: a chronicle of the French Revolution. Random House, New York,
  NY.

Scoville, W. C. (1953): “The Hugenots in the French economy,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 67(3), 423–444.

Shah, M., and B. M. Steinberg (2015): “Workforce and human capital investment: evidence
  from India,” NBER Working Paper, 0(21543), 00–00.

Shapiro, G., and J. Markoff (1998): Revolutionary demands: a content analysis of the
  Cahiers de Doléances of 1789. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

Shaw-Taylor, L. (2005): “Family farms and capitalist farms in mid nineteenth-century Eng-
  land,” Agricultural History Review, 53(2), 158–191.

Soboul, A. (1958): Les sans-culottes parisiens en l’an II: mouvement populaire et gouvernement
  révolutionnaire, 2 juin 1793 - 9 Thermidor An II. Librairie Clavreuil, Paris, France.

         (1962): Histoire de la Révolution française. Editions Sociales, Paris.

         (1968): “Survivances" féodales" dans la société rurale française au XIXe siècle,” in
  Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales, vol. 23, pp. 965–986. JSTOR.

Squicciarini, M. P., and N. Voigtländer (2015): “Human capital and industrialization:
  evidence from the age of enlightenment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4), 1–40.




                                               39
Sutherland, D. (2003): The French Revolution and empire: the quest for a civic order. Black-
  well Publishers, Oxford, UK.

Tackett, T. (1986): Religion, revolution, and regional culture in eighteenth-century France:
  the ecclesiastical oath of 1791. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

         (2015): The coming of the terror in the French revolution. Harvard University Press,
  Cambridge, MA.

Taine, H. (1876-1893): Les origines de la France contemporaine. Robert La¤ont - Bouquins
  [2011], Paris, France.

Taylor, G. V. (1967): “Noncapitalist wealth and the origins of the French Rrevolution,”
  American Historical Review, 72,(2), 469–496.

Thiers, A. (1823–1827): Histoire de la révolution française. Lecointre et Durey, Paris, France.

Tilly, C. (1964): The Vendée: a sociological analysis of the counter-revolution of 1793. Harvard
  University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Tocqueville, A. D. (1856): L’ancien régime et la révolution. Michel Levy, Paris, France.

Toutain, J.-C. (1987): “Le produit intérieur brut de la France de 1789 à 1982,” Economies et
  Sociétés, 21(5), 1–237.

Vivier, N. (1998): Propriété collective et identité communale: les biens communaux en France,
  1750-1914. Publications de la Sorbonne, Paris, France.

Vovelle, M. (1985): La mentalité révolutionnaire. Sociétés et mentalités sous la révolution
  française. Messidor, Paris, France.

Waldinger, M. (2014): “Drought and the French Revolution: the e¤ect of adverse weather
  conditions on peasant revolts in 1789,” Working paper, London School of Economics.

Zadoks, J., T. Chang, and C. Konzak (1974): “A decimal code for the growth stages of
  cereals,” Weed Research, 14(6), 415–421.




                                               40
               A. Emigrés as a Share of the                                       B. Average Temperature in
                                              :
                Dé partement’s Population                                                Summer 1792




                                                                           D. Squared Deviation from Temperature
          C. Squared Deviation from Temperature
                                                                             in Summer 1792 (baseline 1767-1791)
            in Summer 1792 (baseline 1767-1791)
                                                                              Partialing Out Geographic Controls

Figure 1: Share of Emigrés in Population and Summer Temperature in 1792 in French Départe-
ments

         Source: Greer (1951),Luterbacher, Dietrich, Xoplaki, Grosjean, and Wanner (2004),Luterbacher, Dietrich,
     Xoplaki, Grosjean, and Wanner (2006); Pauling, Luterbacher, Casty, and Wanner (2006).




                                                        41
                                                    Temperature Shocks in 1792 and Emigration across French Departments                                                                                                                                                                                 Temperature Shocks in 1792 and Emigration across French Departments
                                                                                                       Conditional on Geographic Characteristics                                                                                                                                                                                 Conditional on Geographic and Pre-1789 Historical Characteristics




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2




                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rhin (Bas)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rhin (Bas)

                                                                                           Py renne es Oriental es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Py renne es Oriental es


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Var




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1




                                              1
                                                                                                                                           Vienne                                                                         Var
                                                                                                                                                                          Cote d' Or May enne                                                                                                                                                                                                                            May enne
                                                                                                                                            Dordogn e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vienne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dordogn e        Cote d' Or
                                                                                                 Vienne (Haute)
                                                                                                Cantal                                         Mos ell e                                                Doubs                                                                                                                               Cantal                Correz e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vienne (Haute)
                                                                                                        Correz e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mos ell e
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mai ne-et-Loi re
                                                                                                                                                                                             Meurthe-et-Mos elle
                                                                                                                                 Seine et Ois e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Seine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sav oiete Ois e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cotes du Nord
                                                                                                                                                             Sev res (Deux
                                                                                                                                                           Orne        Sav oi )e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mai ne-et-LoiFini
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           re stere
                                                                                                                             Lan des                                                                                        Fini stere                                                                                                                                       M eusLan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e des                                     Meurthe-et-Mos elle
                                                                                                                                 Puy                                                               Cotes du Nord                                                                                                                                             Lot-et-GaronnePuy de Dome            Sev
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rhone Orne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      res (Deux )         Vendee
                                                                                                               Lot-et-Garonne      M eus
                                                                                                                                      de eDome Rhone                                   Vendee                                Alpes -M aritim es                                                                                                                            M arne
                                                                                                                                                                               Seine                                                                                                                                                Loz ere                                                  Bouche s du Seine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Saone et Loi reLoire-Inferieure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rhone                               laine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Alpes          es )
                                                                                           Loz ere                                M arne           Bouche s duSaone Rhoneet Loi  re Loire-Inferieure             Il le-et-Vi laine                                                                                                                                            Av eyron                               Rhin (Haut) Il le-et-Vi    Morbi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Bas shan            Alpes -M aritim es
                                                                                                                                                                                  Rhin  (Haut)        Alpes (Bas s es )




                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                   Eure-et-Loir
                                                                                                                                Av eyron                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M arne (Haute)                     Doubs
                                                                                                                                  M arne (Haute)                                    Sarthe                           Morbi han                                                                                                                          Tarn
                                                                                                                                         Garonne      (Haute-)                                                                                                                                                                                              Aube                                                        Sarthe
                                                                                                        Tarn        Aube                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eure-et-Loir       Saone (Haute)
                                                                                                                        Gironde                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aude                     Dro meAll ier                                  J ura
                                                                                                                                     Dro me
                                                                                                                                    Loiret Indre-et-Loi
                                                                                                                                     Loir-et-Cher         re        Saone (Haute)                                                                                                                                                                                 Ardennes          Niev
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gersre
                                                                                                   AudeCalv ados Ardennes                 All ier                                      J ura                                                                                                                                                                    M anc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Gironde         egeLoir-et-Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      he AriYonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Charente-i nferi eure                        Ain
                                                                                               Vaucl us e         Seine            Charente-iGers
                                                                                                                                                nferi eure                                                                                                                                         Pas de Calai s                               Vaucl us e Ais ne                                                Loiret
                                                                                                   Creus
                                                                                                      Euree        Ais ne et Marne      Niev re                    )       Ain                                                                                                                                                                                     Seine et MarneIndre-et-Loi re            Is ere
                                                      Pas de
                                                           Seine   s
                                                             CalaiInferi eure                                                        YonnePy renees (Hautes    Is ere                                                                                                                                                                                              Eure Charente
                                                                                                                   Indre M anc  he Ari ege
                                                                                                                              Charente                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Indre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ardec he      Garonne (Haute-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Py renees (Hautes )
                                                                                                 Loire (Haute)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Creus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Calv adose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Seine Inferi eure             Loire (Haute)                                                Py renees (Bas s es)
                                                                                           Ois e                      Ardec he    Cher                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Som m e                                                Ois e
                                                       Som m e                  Herault                         Lot                                         VosPygesrenees (Bas s es)                                                                                                                                                  Nord                            Lot                      Vos ges
                                                                                    Nord            Gard
                                                                                                                     Alpes (Hautes)




                                              -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Herault                     Alpes (Hautes)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gard




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Loire
                                                                                                              Loire




                                              -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Share of Emigres in Department Population




        Share of Emigres in Department Population




42
                                                      -.1                                   -.05                                              0                                           .05                                             .1                                                         -.1                                    -.05                                       0                                         .05                                  .1
                                                    Squared Dev iation f rom Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                                                                                                                                                                   Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)

                                                                     A. IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in                                                                                                                                                                                             B. IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in
                                                                        Summer 1792, Conditional on Geographic Controls                                                                                                                                                                            Summer 1792, Conditional on Geographic and Historical Controls



     Figure 2: Temperature Deviation in the Summer of 1792 and the Share of Emigrés, Controlling for Geographic and pre-1789 Historical
     Characteristics

                                                          Note: These …gures depict the partial scatterplots of the e¤ect of temperature shocks in the summer of 1792 on the share of émigrés in the population of
                                                    each French département. Panel A presents the relationship with the squared deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792 (1767-1791), while Panel B
                                                    reports the relationship with the absolute deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792 (1767-1791). Thus, the x- and y-axes in Panels A and B plot
                                                    the residuals obtained from regressing the share of émigrés in the population against the squared and absolute deviations from temperature in the summer of
                                                    1792, conditional on geographic and historical controls.
                                                                                                   .4




     .5
                                                                                                   .2




     0
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.2




     -.5
                                                                                                   -.4
                                                                                                   -.6




     -1
              60               01            30             95              00            10                60              01            30             95            00            10
           18               19            19             19              20            20                18              19            19             19            20            20




43
                           IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in                                             IV is the Absolute Deviation from Temperature in
                   Summer 1792, Conditional on Geographic and Historical Controls                                Summer 1792, Conditional on Geographic and Historical Controls



                        Figure 3: The E¤ect of Share of the Emigrés on GDP per Capita in 1860, 1901, 1930, 1995, 2000 and 2010

                   Note: These …gures. display the estimated coe¢ cients of the share of émigrés in the population on GDP per capita 1860, 1901, 1930, 1995, 2000, and
           2010 in the 2SLS regressions in Table 4, conditional on all the geographic and historical controls. Intervals re‡ect 90% con…dence levels.
     .5
                                                                                                                                                             .5




     .4
                                                                                                                                                             .4




     .3
                                                                                                                                                             .3




     .2
                                                                                                                                                             .2




     .1
                                                                                                                                                             .1




     0
                                                                                                                                                             0




     -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1
                                                                                                                                                             -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1
                             s                  s1                s2          s3          s4           s5             s6                s7              s8                           s                  s1                s2          s3          s4           s5             s6                s7              s8
             ut                              ut                ut          ut          ut           ut             ut                ut              ut              ut                              ut                ut          ut          ut           ut             ut                ut              ut
           lN                            N                 N           N           N            N              N                 N               N                 lN                            N                 N           N           N            N              N                 N               N




44
         Al                         ng                    ng          ng          ng          ng          ng                    ng          ng                   Al                         ng                    ng          ng          ng          ng          ng                    ng          ng
                                u di                  u di        u di        u di        u di        u di                  u di        u di                                            u di                  u di        u di        u di        u di        u di                  u di        u di
                              cl                    cl          cl          cl          cl          cl                    cl          cl                                              cl                    cl          cl          cl          cl          cl                    cl          cl
                           Ex                    Ex          Ex          Ex          Ex          Ex                    Ex          Ex                                              Ex                    Ex          Ex          Ex          Ex          Ex                    Ex          Ex


                                  GDP per Capita in 1860, Removing One "Nuts" at a Time.                                                                                                   GDP per Capita in 2010, Removing One "Nuts" at aTime.
                              IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792,                                                                                            IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792,
                                               Conditional on Geographic and Historical Controls                                                                                                       Conditional on Geographic and Historical Controls


                                 Figure 4: The E¤ect of the Share of Emigrés on GDP per Capita in 1860 and 2010, Removing one "nuts" at a Time

                                 Note: These …gures display the estimated coe¢ cients of the share of émigrés in the population on GDP per capita in 1860 and 2010 in the 2SLS regressions,
                           conditional on all the geographic and historical controls, where we remove one "nuts" at a time. The nomenclature of territorial units for statistics (or “nuts”)
                           is a standard for referencing administrative divisions within European Union countries. In this study, we use the …rst level of “nuts” for France. The complete
                           2SLS regressions are available upon request. Intervals re‡ect 90% con…dence levels.
             .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4




             .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




             -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.2




             -.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.4




             -.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.6




             -.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.8
                                   s                                                                                                 %                                 %                                     %                                     %                                                                                                        s                                                                                                 %                                 %                                     %                                     %                                     %
                              re                                  1%                              5%                              10                                20                                    20                                    10                                    5%                                  1%                           re                                  1%                              5%                              10                                20                                    20                                    10                                    10                                    1%
                         ig                                   p                               p                               p                                 p                                                                                                                 m                                   m                           ig                                   p                               p                               p                                 p                                                                                                                                                       m
                    Em                                   To                              To                                                                                                           m                                     m                               tto                                 tto                          Em                                   To                              To                                                                                                           m                                     m                                     m                               tto
                                                                                                                         To                                To                                   tto                                   tto                                                                                                                                                                                                         To                                To                                   tto                                   tto                                   tto




45
                 of                                 ng                              ng                              ng                                ng                                                                                                                  Bo                                  Bo                          of                                 ng                              ng                              ng                                ng                                                                                                                                                        Bo
            re                                    di                              di                              di                                di                                        Bo                                    Bo                                g                                   g                          re                                    di                              di                              di                                di                                        Bo                                    Bo                                    Bo                                g
                                              u                               u                               u                                 u                                         g                                     g                                  in                                  in                                                              u                               u                               u                                 u                                         g                                     g                                     g                                  in
          ha                                cl                              cl                              cl                                cl                                       in                                    in                               ud                                  ud                               ha                                cl                              cl                              cl                                cl                                       in                                    in                                    in                               ud
      S                                Ex                              Ex                                                                                                         ud                                    ud                                  cl                                  cl                             S                                Ex                              Ex                                                                                                         ud                                    ud                                    ud                                  cl
                                                                                                       Ex                                Ex                                     cl                                    cl                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ex                                Ex                                     cl                                    cl                                    cl
                                                                                                                                                                           Ex                                    Ex                                    Ex                                  Ex                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ex                                    Ex                                    Ex                                    Ex




                                       GDP per Capita in 1860, and the Distribution of Emigration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GDP per Capita in 2010, and the Distribution of Emigration
                                        IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792
                                                                   Conditional on Geographic and Historical Controls                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Conditional on Geographic and Historical Controls



     Figure 5: The E¤ect of the Share of Emigrés on GDP per capita in 1860 and 2010, Removing one the top and bottom 1%, 5% , 10%
     and 20% in the Distribution of the Share of Emigrés

                                        Note: These …gures display the estimated coe¢ cients of the share of émigrés in the population on GDP per capita in 1860 and 2010 in the 2SLS regressions,
                         conditional on all the geographic and historical controls, where we remove the top and bottom 1%, 5%, 10%, and 20% départements in the distribution of the
                         share of émigrés. The complete 2SLS regressions are available upon request. Intervals re‡ect 90% con…dence levels.
 Temperature Shocks in 1792 and Departemental-Level Income per Capita 1860                                                                                            Temperature Shocks in 1792 and Departemental-Level Income per Capita 2010
                                                         Conditional on Geographic and Pre-1789 Historical Characteristics                                                                                              Conditional on Geographic and Pre-1789 Historical Characteristics
                    .6




                                                                                                                                                                                          .3
  Share of Farms above 20 Hectares




                                                                                                                                                                       Share of Farms above 20 Hectares
                                                                              Ardeche                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Alpes-Maritimes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ille-et-Vilaine




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pyrenees (Basses)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Garonne (Haute-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SeineCote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      et Oise                       Rhin (Bas)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Marne            Savoie   d'Or
                                       Seine Inferieure Herault
                                                            Loire (Haute)
                                                                                   Marne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Drome                         Rhin (Haut)
                                                                                           Gers                                                                                                                                                                                 Sarthe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Loire-Inferieure




                                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                    .2




                                                                    Creuse            Eure-et-Loir                                                                                                  Seine Inferieure                           Puy   Indre-et-Loire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    de  Dome    Sevres (Deux) Mayenne
                                                                          LoireEure                                                                                                                                                      SeineCharente
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                et Marne
                                                            Nord Calvados                                                                                                                                                     Vaucluse  Loire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Vienne (Haute)                            Isere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pyrenees (Hautes)
                                                                    TarnAisne                Pyrenees
                                                                                       Indre-et-Loire   (Hautes)
                                                                                                     Pyrenees  (Basses)           Maine-et-Loire                                                                                                                                   Vendee                  Finistere
                                                             Cantal                                     Cote d'Or                                                                                                                    AubeCorreze
                        Pas de Calais                                Lot-et-Garonne
                                                                        Oise                                                                                                                                                                                                     Meurthe-et-Moselle
                                                          Lozere                                           Isere                                                                                                                              Marne (Haute)




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                         Somme                                            Gironde     Yonne
                                                                           SeineCharente
                                                                                  et Marne                                                                                                                                         Lot-et-Garonne     Loir-et-Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bouches du Rhone
                                                                      Aube
             0




                                                                                   Drome                         Rhin (Haut)                                                                                                                                   Rhone                               Morbihan
                                                                                Marne   Allier
                                                                                       (Haute)   Seine et Oise Jura  Vendee                 Var                                                Somme                                    Gironde
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Alpes   (Hautes)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aveyron                    Ain Jura
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Loiret
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Seine
                                                             Pyrennees    Charente-inferieure
                                                                 Aude Alpes   (Hautes)
                                                                       Orientales       Loir-et-Cher
                                                                                             Bouches  du RhoneLoiret
                                                                                                                 Loire-Inferieure Morbihan                                                                                                               VienneVosges                   Cotes du Nord Var
                                                                             Indre
                                                                 Vienne (Haute)
                                                                 Vaucluse
                                                                                    Garonne    (Haute-)
                                                                                                 Rhone                                                                                                                Lozere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nord              Indre Yonne
                                                                                    MeuseVienne Orne Ain
                                                                                    Ariege
                                                                           MancheAveyron                                      Alpes (Basses)                                                                         Herault      Tarn Manche                       Saone et Loire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nievre Moselle                       Alpes (Basses)
                                                                                          Nievre SavoieSeine Meurthe-et-Moselle                                                                                                                                     Orne
                                                                                 Puy de Dome Vosges




                                                                                                                                                                          -.1
                                                                                                   Saone (Haute)SartheIlle-et-Vilaine                                                                                                                 Allier
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Charente-inferieure
    -.2




                                                                                         Landes Sevres (Deux) DoubsMayenne          Rhin (Bas)                                                                                        Oise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Calvados  Ardennes     Landes                                    Maine-et-Loire
                                                                                             Cher                                           Finistere                                                                                           Lot Eure-et-Loir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ardeche                          Doubs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cantal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Aude                Ariege Gers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dordogne
                                                               Gard          Correze                                                                                                                                                                             Saone  (Haute)
                                                                                                      Saone et Loire Cotes du Nord                  Alpes-Maritimes                                                                          Eure
                                                                                                                                                                                              Pas de Calais                  Gard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Loire  (Haute)




                                                                                                                                                                                          -.2
                                                                                  Lot
                                                                            Ardennes                                                                                                                                     Pyrennees   Orientales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aisne
                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Meuse
                                                                                            Dordogne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creuse
                                       -.1                      -.05                 0                .05                                            .1                                                       -.1              -.05                 0                .05                                             .1
                                                                          Log G DP per Capita in 1860                                                                                                                                    Log G DP per Capita in 2010


                                              A. IV is the Squared Deviation from                                                                                                                                   B. IV is the Squared Deviation from
                                                       Temperature in Summer 1792                                                                                                                                      Temperature in Summer 1792


   Temperature Shocks in 1792 and Ratio of 40ha Farms to 10ha Farms in 1862                                                                                             Temperature Shocks in 1792 and Share of Farms Above 20 Hectares in 1862
                                                         Conditional on Geographic and Pre-1789 Historical Characteristics                                                                                              Conditional on Geographic and Pre-1789 Historical Characteristics
                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pyrennees Orientales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ardennes
   Ratio of 40ha Farms to 10ha Farms




                                                                                                                                                                           Share of Farms above 20 Hectares




                                                             Pyrennees Orientales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nord
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lozere                                                   Vendee
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .5




                                                          Lozere           Ardennes                                                                                                                                       Loire (Haute)         Drome
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vaucluse                                                     Alpes (Basses)
                                                                       Aisne                                                                                                                                                      TarnAisne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Correze
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MarneAllier
                             1




                                                                                      Allier                      Vendee                                                                                                            Alpes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Vienne      (Hautes)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Haute)   Meuse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Marne        Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (Haute)
                                                          Nord
                                                          LoireVaucluse
                                                                 (Haute)                   Cher                                                                                                 Somme
                                                                                                                                                                                               Pas de Calais                         Aube             Landes   Moselle
                         Pas de Calais                                            Ariege
                                                                                 Marne                                                                                                                                            Creuse  Indre                Sevres (Deux)
                                                                   Tarn Indre    Drome                                                                                                               Seine Inferieure           Calvados
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cantal       Loire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ardeche                              Mayenne                   Var
                                                                 Calvados                                                  Alpes (Basses)
                                  Somme
                                                                Vienne
                                                                            Correze
                                                                        (Haute)                 Sevres
                                                                                                Moselle(Deux)                                                                                                                               Eure AriegeGers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vienne             Doubs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cote d'Or Meurthe-et-Moselle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Maine-et-Loire
                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                      Aube (Hautes)
                                                                     Alpes                                                                                                                                                            Oise                                                               Finistere
                                                           Cantal                      Landes
                                                                                         Vienne
                                                                                         Gers                                                                                                                         Herault Aude              Aveyron
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Charente                     Ain
                                     Seine Inferieure          AudeCreuse Ardeche       Nievre
                                                                              Marne (Haute)                                                                                                                                                            Nievre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Eure-et-Loir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rhone Seine
                                                                             Eure Meuse                                                  Var                                                                                                     Garonne    (Haute-)
                                                                         Loire      Eure-et-Loir      Cote d'Or                                                                                                                                                              Loire-Inferieure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PyreneesLoiret
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Basses)
                    0




                                                                       Oise      Aveyron
                                                                                  Garonne    (Haute-)       Ain Meurthe-et-Moselle
                                                                                                            Doubs                        Finistere                                                                                                   Loir-et-Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bouches du Rhone
                                                      Herault                         Loir-et-Cher
                                                                                     Indre-et-Loire
                                                                               Charente                                                                                                                                      Gard Lot-et-Garonne    Indre-et-Loire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Seine et Marne
                                                                                               Rhone       LoiretMayenne       Maine-et-Loire                                                                                           Charente-inferieure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lot                 Saone et Loire
                                                                                                                                                                                      -.5




                                                                          Seine et Marne                 Seine
                                                                         Charente-inferieure
                                                                    Lot-et-Garonne         Bouches du Rhone                                                                                                                                               DordogneOrne        Sarthe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rhin   (Haut)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cotes du Nord
                                                                                Lot                 Saone et Loire                                                                                                                                            Seine et Oise
                                                              Gard                                            Rhin (Haut)                                                                                                               Gironde                Saone (Haute)
                                                                          Manche                   Pyrenees                                                                                                                              Manche Yonne                  Isere Jura                Morbihan
                                                                         Gironde               Seine  et Oise(Basses)Ille-et-Vilaine
                                                                                                    Orne                                                                                                                                                                              Ille-et-Vilaine
         -1




                                                                                    Yonne                     Loire-Inferieure Morbihan
                                                                                                                  Jura
                                                                                                               Sarthe
                                                                                                                                                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vosges
                                                                                          Dordogne Isere
                                                                                  Puy de Dome                          Cotes du Nord                                                                                                             Puy de Dome
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pyrenees (Hautes)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Savoie
                                                                                                 Savoie
                                                                                               Vosges
                                                                                                                                                  Alpes-Maritimes                                                                                                                                                Alpes-Maritimes
                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.5




                                                                                                Saone (Haute)
                     -2




                                                                                           Pyrenees (Hautes)                                                                                                                                                                                     Rhin (Bas)
                                                                                                                                  Rhin (Bas)
                                       -.1                    -.05              0              .05                                                   .1                                                       -.1             -.05              0              .05                                                   .1
                                                           T emperature Deviations in the Summer of 1792                                                                                                                   T emperature Deviations in the Summer of 1792


                                                C. IV is the Squared Deviation from                                                                                                                                 D. IV is the Squared Deviation from
                                                        Temperature in Summer 1792                                                                                                                                     Temperature in Summer 1792


Figure 6: Temperature Deviation in the Summer of 1792 and GDP per Capita in 1860 and 2010,
Controlling for Geographic Traits

                                               Note: These …gures depict the partial scatterplots of the association between the squared deviation of
                                       temperature in the summer of 1792 (1767-1791) on GDP per capita in 1860 (Panel A), GDP per capita in
                                       2010 (Panel B), the ratio of farms above 40 ha to farms below 10 ha in 1862 (Panel C), as well as the ratio of
                                       farms above 20 ha in 1862 (Panel D). Thus, the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from regressing the
                                       share of émigrés in the population against the squared deviations from temperature in the summer of 1792,
                                       conditional on the geographic and historical set of covariates.




                                                                                                                                                              46
                                Table 1: Emigrés during the Revolution

                  Panel A. Départements with High and Low Emigration
            Five départements with largest             Five départements with smallest
    Number of émigrés            Share of émigrés Number of émigrés      Share of émigrés

Moselle                 3827      Alpes-Maritimes        1.26%      Loire            105      Loire        0.04%
Pyrenees Orientales     3854     Bouches-du-Rhone        1.80%   Hautes-Alpes        105   Hautes-Alpes    0.09%
Bouches-du-Rhone        5125            Var              1.96%      Cher             239      Cher         0.11%
Var                     5331     Pyrenees Orientales     3.48%   Haute-Loire         271     Rhone         0.11%
Bas-Rhin               20510         Bas-Rhin            4.56%      Indre            278   Haute-Loire     0.12%


                                          Panel B. Social Groups

                        Nobles                  23%            Priests          34%
                        Upper Middle Class      10%      Lower Middle Class      3%
                        Working Class            6%          Peasants            7%
                        Unidenti…ed             17%


                                      Panel C. Correlations between Social Groups

                         Priests   Nobles    Upper Middle Class     Lower Middle Class        Working Class

 Nobles                   0.62
 Upper Middle Class       0.46      0.56
 Lower Middle Class       0.54      0.50            0.80
 Working Class            0.58      0.52            0.71                      0.89
 Peasants                 0.53      0.35            0.43                      0.76                 0.86


        Note: The data on the social categories of émigrés reported in Panels B and C are only available
    for 69 out of the 86 départements in mainland France. In Panel C, the correlations are between the
    natural logarithm of the variables.
        Source: Greer (1951).




                                                    47
Table 2: Property Ownership before and after the French Revolution in 15 Villages in the District
of Avesnes in the Nord Département
                                                                             Ownership
                                                                         Before     After
                                                                         the Revolution (%)

                              Peasants                                      33.52        44.18
                              Bourgeois                                      4.73        25.68
                              Nobility                                      37.08        14.35
                              Church                                        18.80         0.03
                              Poor Institutions and Hospitals               0.69         0.58
                              Commons*                                       5.18        15.80


           Note: * Before the Revolution, there was no clear ownership of the commons.
           Source: Lefebvre (1924, Tableau II, pp.892-893).




Table 3: First-Stage Regressions: Squared and Absolute Deviations from Temperature in Summer 1792
                                                                     (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
                                                                    First stage: the instrumented variable is the Share of Emigres

 Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)      4.450***   5.929***   6.159***
                                                                    [1.052]    [1.393]    [1.499]
 Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                      2.365***   2.612***   2.590***
                                                                                                     [0.497]    [0.708]    [0.770]

 Geographic Controls                                                 No          Yes        Yes       No          Yes        Yes
 Historical Controls                                                 No          No         Yes       No          No         Yes
 F-stat (1st stage)                                                 17.89       18.11      16.88     22.61       13.62      11.32
 Observations                                                        85          85         85        85          85         85



           Note: This table reports the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions where the IV is the squared deviation
      of standardized summer temperature in 1792 (columns (1)-(3)) or the absolute deviation of standardized
      summer temperature in 1792 (columns (4)-(6)) and where the instrumented variable is the share of émigrés in
      the population (the dependent variable in the second stage of the 2SLS regression is GDP per capita in 1860
      as shown in Tables 4 and D.12). The speci…cations in columns (1) and (4) do not include controls, those in
      columns (2) and (5) only include geographic controls, while those in columns (3) and (6) include all controls.
      The dependent variable is in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at
      the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                              48
    Table 4: Emigrés on GDP per Capita (IV: Squared Deviation of Temperature in Summer 1792)
                                                                                        Panel A. GDP per capita 1860-1930
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)                (9)        (10)      (11)              (12)
                                      OLS         OLS        2SLS             2SLS         OLS     OLS       2SLS     2SLS                OLS        OLS       2SLS              2SLS
                                                 GDP per capita 1860                              GDP per capita 1901                               GDP per capita 1930

Share of Emigres                     -0.0109    -0.0811***    -0.257***     -0.255***    -0.00861   -0.0681     -0.376**     -0.376**     0.0340     -0.00614    -0.0532       -0.0505
                                     [0.0322]     [0.0304]     [0.0853]      [0.0749]    [0.0388]   [0.0534]     [0.184]      [0.181]    [0.0289]    [0.0288]    [0.0542]      [0.0443]

Adjusted R2                          -0.011       0.585                                   -0.012     0.278                                0.002       0.608
Geographical Controls                  No          Yes           Yes           Yes          No        Yes          Yes         Yes         No          Yes            Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                    No          No            No            Yes          No        No           No          Yes         No          No             No            Yes
Observations                           85          85            85            85           83        83           83          83          85          85             85            85

                                                                             First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature                             5.929***     6.159***                            4.967***    4.895***                             5.929***      6.159***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                      [1.393]      [1.499]                             [1.267]     [1.209]                              [1.393]       [1.499]

F-stat (1st stage)                                              18.113       16.881                              15.359      16.378                               18.113        16.881

                                                                                     Panel B. GDP per capita 1995-2010
                                      (1)         (2)       (3)             (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)                  (9)       (10)      (11)             (12)
                                      OLS        OLS       2SLS            2SLS       OLS      OLS       2SLS     2SLS                  OLS       OLS      2SLS              2SLS
                                                GDP per capita 1995                           GDP per capita 2000                                GDP per capita 2010

Share of Emigres                      0.0237    0.0478**     0.174***     0.174***     0.0238    0.0553**    0.201***     0.196***     0.0201     0.0493*     0.171***      0.176***
                                     [0.0195]   [0.0212]     [0.0525]     [0.0541]    [0.0199]   [0.0222]    [0.0600]     [0.0617]    [0.0225]    [0.0254]    [0.0602]      [0.0607]
Adjusted R2                           0.003       0.472                                0.001       0.470                               -0.005       0.466
Geographical Controls                   No         Yes         Yes          Yes          No         Yes         Yes         Yes          No          Yes        Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                     No         No          No           Yes          No         No          No          Yes          No          No         No            Yes
Observations                            86          86         86           86           86          86         86          86           86          86         86            86

                                                                           First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature                           5.950***     6.216***                           5.950***     6.216***                            5.950***      6.216***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                    [1.378]      [1.487]                            [1.378]      [1.487]                             [1.378]       [1.487]

F-stat (1st stage)                                            18.647       17.476                              18.647      17.476                              18.647        17.476



             Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on GDP per capita in
       1860, 1901, and 1930 (Panel A) and in 1995, 2000, and 2010 (Panel B) in OLS and 2SLS regressions. All
       the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is the squared
       standardized deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792. Robust standard errors are reported in
       brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                             49
Table 5: The E¤ect of Emigrés on the Value Added Per Capita and the Workforce in Agriculture, Industry
and Services, 1860-1990
                                                               Panel A. Value Added per Worker in Agriculture, Industry and Services
                                          (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)
                                        2SLS        2SLS     2SLS       2SLS      2SLS      2SLS      2SLS       2SLS      2SLS      2SLS       2SLS      2SLS
                                      1860 Value Added per Worker in 1930 Value Added per Worker in 1982 Value Added per Worker in 1990 Value Added per Worker in
                                      Agriculture Industry Services Agriculture Industry Services Agriculture Industry Services Agriculture Industry Services

 Share of Emigres                     -0.444***       -0.178*      -0.193***   -0.478***      -0.0272       -0.0434        0.531***      0.603**      0.517**       0.694***    0.628***    0.521**
                                        [0.129]       [0.0965]      [0.0630]     [0.144]      [0.0523]      [0.0443]        [0.185]      [0.250]      [0.224]        [0.227]     [0.240]    [0.223]

 Geographic controls                     Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes      Yes          Yes
 Historical controls                     Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes      Yes          Yes
 Observations                            85              85             85        85            85            85             86            86           86               86       86           86

                                                                                    First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

 Squared Deviation from Temperature    6.159***       6.159***     6.159***     6.159***      6.159***      6.159***       6.159***      6.159***     6.159***      6.216***    6.216***    6.216***
 in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)             [1.499]        [1.499]      [1.499]      [1.499]       [1.499]       [1.499]        [1.499]       [1.499]      [1.499]       [1.487]     [1.487]     [1.487]

 F-stat (1st stage)                     16.881         16.881       16.881       16.881        16.881        16.881         17.476        17.476       17.476        17.476      17.476      17.476

                                                      Panel B. Share of Workforce in Agriculture, Industry and Services
                                            (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)         (6)                                         (7)              (8)                (9)
                                           2SLS            2SLS          2SLS           2SLS              2SLS        2SLS                                        2SLS             2SLS               2SLS
                                                                                                Share of Workforce in
                                      Agriculture 1860 Industry 1860 Services 1860 Agriculture 1930 Industry 1930 Services 1930                           Agriculture 2010     Industry 2010    Services 2010

 Share of Emigres                          0.0514               -0.321***       0.201*              -0.103                -0.130*          0.139**              -0.787***        0.168**             0.151***
                                          [0.0669]                [0.115]       [0.104]            [0.0968]               [0.0743]         [0.0641]               [0.215]        [0.0684]            [0.0501]

 Geographic controls                        Yes                   Yes             Yes                 Yes                   Yes              Yes                   Yes             Yes                 Yes
 Historical controls                        Yes                   Yes             Yes                 Yes                   Yes              Yes                   Yes             Yes                 Yes
 Observations                               85                    85              85                  85                    85               85                    86              86                  86

                                                                                          First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

 Squared Deviation from Temperature      6.159***               6.159***       6.159***           6.159***                6.159***         6.159***              6.216***        6.216***            6.216***
 in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)               [1.499]                [1.499]        [1.499]            [1.499]                 [1.499]          [1.499]               [1.487]         [1.487]             [1.487]

 F-stat (1st stage)                        16.881                16.881         16.881             16.881                  16.881           16.881                17.476          17.476              17.476

                                       Panel C. Ratio of Value Added per Worker in Industry and Services to Agriculture
                                                                                      (1)         (2)            (3)               (4)
                                                                                     2SLS        2SLS           2SLS              2SLS
                                                    Ratio of Value Added per Worker in Industry and Services to Agriculture
                                                                                     1860        1930           1982              1990

                                       Share of Emigres                             0.243*     0.440***       -0.000431        -0.147
                                                                                    [0.126]     [0.147]         [0.135]        [0.136]

                                       Geographic controls                            Yes         Yes           Yes                Yes
                                       Historical controls                            Yes         Yes           Yes                Yes
                                       Observations                                   85          85            86                 86

                                                        First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

                                       Squared Deviation from Temperature          6.159***    6.159***       6.216***        6.216***
                                       in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                   [1.499]     [1.499]        [1.487]         [1.487]

                                       F-stat (1st stage)                           16.881      16.881         17.476          17.476



                Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the value added per worker
         in agriculture, industry, and services in 1860, 1930, and 1990 (Panel A) and the shares of the workforce in
         agriculture, industry, and services in 1860, 1930, and 2010 (Panel B) in 2SLS regressions. All the dependent
         variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is the squared standardized
         deviation from temperature in summer 1792. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant
         at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                                     50
                                                         Table 6: Emigrés and the Mechanization of Agriculture, 1862
                                                                            (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)             (7)        (8)
                                                                           2SLS        2SLS        2SLS       2SLS        2SLS         2SLS            2SLS       2SLS
                                                                         Fertilizer   Ploughs    Scari…ers Grubbers Searchers Horse Hoes              Harrows    Ridgers
                                                                                                    per Worker in Agricultural Sector, 1862

                                 Share of Emigres                        -0.413***     -0.199    -1.893***    -2.568***     -1.229**     -0.746         0.003     -0.535
                                                                           [0.147]     [0.131]     [0.560]      [0.766]      [0.551]     [0.467]       [0.301]    [0.466]

                                 Geographic controls                        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes             Yes      Yes              Yes     Yes
                                 Historical controls                        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes             Yes      Yes              Yes     Yes
                                 Observations                               85           85         85           85              85       85               85      85

                                                                                           First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

                                 Squared Deviation from Temperature      6.159***     6.159***   6.159***     6.159***      6.159***    6.159***      6.159***   6.159***
                                 in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)               [1.499]      [1.499]    [1.499]      [1.499]       [1.499]     [1.499]       [1.499]    [1.499]

                                 F-stat (1st stage)                       16.881       16.881     16.881       16.881          16.881    16.881        16.881     16.881

                                                (9)           (10)        (11)         (12)        (13)                 (14)                        (15)                                 (16)
                                               2SLS          2SLS         2SLS         2SLS       2SLS                  2SLS                        2SLS                                 2SLS
                                              Seeders     Root Cutters   Tedders      Reapers    Croppers    Steam-Powered Threshers    Animal-Powered Threshers     First Principal Component of Agricultural Tools




51
                                                                                                            per Worker in Agricultural Sector, 1862

     Share of Emigres                         -1.268**       -0.366      -1.873***     -0.997     -0.695                0.394                      -0.454                               -1.799**
                                               [0.545]       [0.434]       [0.698]     [0.872]    [0.754]              [0.368]                     [0.514]                               [0.748]

     Geographic controls                        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes                   Yes                         Yes                                  Yes
     Historical controls                        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes                   Yes                         Yes                                  Yes
     Observations                               85            85           85           85         85                    85                          85                                   85

                                                                                                 First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

     Squared Deviation from Temperature       6.159***      6.159***     6.159***     6.159***   6.159***              6.159***                    6.159***                            6.159***
     in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                [1.499]       [1.499]      [1.499]      [1.499]    [1.499]               [1.499]                     [1.499]                             [1.499]

     F-stat (1st stage)                        16.881        16.881       16.881       16.881     16.881                16.881                      16.881                               16.881



                Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the number of agricultural instruments per agricultural worker in the
           agricultural sector in 1862 in 2SLS regressions. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is the squared
           standardized deviation from temperature in summer 1792. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
           * at the 10% level.
   Table 7: Emigrés and Electors in 1839 under the Censitory Regime of the July Monarchy
                                                (1)                      (2)                     (3)                     (4)                       (5)
                                               2SLS                     2SLS                    2SLS                    2SLS                      2SLS
                                         Share of Electors      Share of Landowners     Share of Businessmen    Share of Professionals   Share of Civil Servants
                                     in Department Population     among Electors           among Electors          among Electors           among Electors

Share of Emigres                            -0.546***                  -0.101**                0.0917                   0.147                   0.425**
                                              [0.168]                   [0.048]                [0.098]                 [0.112]                  [0.172]

Geographic controls                            Yes                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Historical controls                            Yes                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Observations                                   81                        67                      67                      67                       67

                                                        First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature           7.733***                 7.872***                7.872***                7.872***                  7.872***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                    [1.514]                  [1.600]                 [1.600]                 [1.600]                   [1.600]

F-stat (1st stage)                            26.093                    24.195                 24.195                  24.195                    24.195



             Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the share of voters in
       the population and the shares of landowners, businessmen, professionals (i.e., lawyers and doctors), and civil
       servants among those voters in 1839, under the censitory regime of King Louis Philippe (1830-1848), in 2SLS
       regressions. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is
       the squared standardized deviation from temperature in summer 1792. Robust standard errors are reported
       in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                        52
                             Table 8: Size Distribution of Private Landholdings over Time and Share of Commons in 1863
                                                                                                 Panel A. Emigres and Land Distribution
                                                                (1)          (2)                   (3)                    (4)                (5)                   (6)
                                                               2SLS         2SLS                 2SLS                    2SLS              2SLS                  2SLS
                                                              Share of Farms above                          Ratio of the Number of Farms                   Share of Commons
                                                             40ha, 1862 20ha, 1862        40 ha to 10 ha, 1862 50 ha to 10 ha, 1929 50 ha to 10 ha, 2000          1863

                        Share of Emigres                      -1.535***   -0.873***              -1.603***              -1.755***              -0.768***       1.720**
                                                                [0.453]     [0.290]                [0.481]                [0.494]                [0.266]       [0.811]

                        Geographic controls                      Yes            Yes                 Yes                    Yes                    Yes            Yes
                        Historical controls                      Yes            Yes                 Yes                    Yes                    Yes            Yes
                        Observations                             86             86                  86                     86                     86             84

                                                                                              First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

                        Squared Deviation from Temperature    6.216***    6.216***                6.216***               6.216***               6.216***       5.131***
                        in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)             [1.487]     [1.487]                 [1.487]                [1.487]                [1.487]        [1.221]

                        F-stat (1st stage)                     17.476      17.476                  17.476                 17.476                 17.476         17.657

                                                                                 Panel B. Temperature Shock in Summer 1792, Farms in 1862, 1929 and 2000, and Commons in 1863
                                                                                    (1)          (2)            (3)                    (4)                (5)                 (6)
                                                                                                                         Reduced Form Regressions




53
                                                                                  Share of Farms above                   Ratio of the Number of Farms                 Share of Commons
                                                                                 40ha, 1862 20ha, 1862 40 ha to 10 ha, 1862 50 ha to 10 ha, 1929 50 ha to 10 ha, 2000        1863


     Squared Deviation of Temperature                                              -6.599**        -3.172*           -6.724**              -10.19***        -4.419***         11.91**
     in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                                     [2.676]        [1.830]            [2.903]                [3.254]          [1.570]         [5.677]
     Share of Church Property Sold in Department                                    536.9*         351.8*             598.8*                  405.4            345.3           -631.0
                                                                                    [280.0]        [203.0]            [320.0]                [408.7]          [259.3]         [563.4]
     Squared Deviation of Temperature                                             -11,099***       -5,562*          -12,117***              -8,537**        -9,867***          -1,781
     in Summer 1792 (1767-1791) * Share of Church Property Sold in Department       [3,875]        [2,969]            [4,516]                [4,191]          [3,640]         [6,594]

     Adjusted R2                                                                      0.396         0.282             0.365                  0.513            0.667            0.557
     Observations                                                                       67            67               67                     67               67               66



             Note: Panel A of this table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the share of farms above 40 ha and 20 ha in 1862 (columns
        (1)-(2)), on the ratio of farms above 40 ha to farms below 10 ha in 1862 (column (3)), on the ratio of farms above 50 ha to 10 ha in 1929 (column (4)), on the
        ratio of farms above 40 ha to 10 ha in 2000 (column (5)), and on the share of the commons within the département in 1863 (column (6)) in 2SLS regressions.
        All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is the squared standardized deviation from temperature in
        summer 1792. Panel B of this table reports reduced-form regressions that include the share of Church land sold during the Revolution in the 67 départements
        where this information is available (Bodinier and Teyssier, 2000) and the interaction between this variable and the IV, i.e., the squared standardized deviation
        from temperature in the summer of 1792. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10%
        level.
                     Table 9: Emigrés and the Share of Illiterate Army Conscripts
                                       (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)          (8)        (9)
                                      2SLS       2SLS         2SLS      2SLS          2SLS      2SLS      2SLS          2SLS       2SLS
                                                                   Share of Illiterate Conscripts by Decade
                                      1840s      1850s        1860s     1870s        1880s      1890s     1900s         1910s     1930s

Share of Emigres                     -0.330*    -0.285        -0.260    -0.460*     -0.342     -0.318    -0.543**   -0.605**     -0.343***
                                     [0.185]    [0.183]       [0.214]   [0.241]     [0.250]    [0.290]    [0.254]    [0.246]       [0.109]

Geographic controls                    Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes
Historical controls                    Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes
Observations                           84         84           86         86         84          84         84           84        86

                                                           First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature   6.834***   6.834***     6.216***   6.216***   5.131***   5.131***   5.131***   5.131***     6.216***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)            [1.547]    [1.547]      [1.487]    [1.487]    [1.221]    [1.221]    [1.221]    [1.221]      [1.487]

F-stat (1st stage)                    19.515     19.515       17.476     17.476     17.657     17.657     17.657        17.657    17.476



    Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the share of illiterate
French army conscripts, i.e., 20-year-old men who reported for military service in the département where their
father lived, in 2SLS regressions. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of
the 2SLS regressions is the squared standardized deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792. Robust
standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                  54
                                     Table 10: Emigrés and French Workers below Age 15 in the Agricultural Sector, 1929

                                                      (1)                       (2)                          (3)                                 (4)
                                                     2SLS                      2SLS                         2SLS                                2SLS
                                                   Share of            Share of French agricultural workers below age 15 among                 Ratio of
                                          the agricultural workforce   agricultural workers agricultural workers below age 15     agricultural workers above age 15

     Share of Emigres                             -1.087**                  -0.794**                      -0.833**                            -0.804**
                                                   [0.444]                   [0.394]                       [0.344]                             [0.403]

     Geographic controls                             Yes                      Yes                           Yes                                 Yes
     Historical controls                             Yes                      Yes                           Yes                                 Yes
     Observations                                    85                       86                            86                                  86




55
                                                                          First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

     Squared Deviation from Temperature           6.877***                  6.863***                      6.863***                            6.863***
     in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                    [1.685]                   [1.678]                       [1.678]                             [1.678]

     F-stat (1st stage)                            16.656                    16.724                        16.724                              16.724



                 Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the share of French agricultural workers below age 15 among the agricultural
            workforce (column (1)), agricultural workers (column (2)), agricultural workers below age 15 (column (3)), and agricultural workers above age 15 (column (4))
            in 2SLS regressions. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is the squared standardized deviation from
            temperature in the summer of 1792. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.
                                        Table 11: Can Land Redistribution Explain the Impact of Emigrés?
                                                                          (1)                  (2)                        (3)        (4)
                                                                         2SLS                 2SLS                       2SLS       2SLS
                                                                       1860 Value Added per Worker in Agriculture       GDP per capita 2010

                         Share of Emigres                              -0.444***                -0.224**                0.176***     0.105**
                                                                         [0.129]                [0.0988]                [0.0607]     [0.0413]
                         Ratio of 40ha Farms to 10ha Farms, 1862                                0.134***                           -0.0441***
                                                                                                [0.0367]                             [0.0160]

                         Geographic controls                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes          Yes
                         Historical controls                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes          Yes
                         Observations                                     85                      85                      86           86




56
                                                                            First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

                         Squared Deviation from Temperature            6.159***                 7.309***                6.216***    7.446***
                         in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                     [1.499]                  [1.405]                 [1.487]     [1.403]

                         F-stat (1st stage)                             16.881                   27.071                  17.476      28.147


         Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the value added per worker in agriculture in 1860 (as in Table 5) and on
     GDP per capita in 2010 (as in Table 4), accounting for the ratio of farms above 40 ha to farms below 10 ha in 1862 in columns (2) and (4) in 2SLS regressions.
     All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is the squared standardized deviation from temperature in the
     summer of 1792. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.
       Appendix for Online Publication
       A. Historical Background
       A.1 The Origins of the French Revolution
       Most historians now agree on the immediate causes of the French Revolution. The Old
Regime experienced a …scal crisis in the late 1780s, resulting mainly from the French support to
the American War of Independence and by an ine¢ cient tax system in need of reform. The crisis
was exacerbated by two consecutive years of bad harvests and peasant revolts in 1788 and 1789
(see, e.g., Aftalion (1990), Balla and Johnson (2009), Waldinger (2014), and Tackett (2015) for a
discussion).
       However, the structural causes of the French Revolution are still debated. Some historians
emphasize the rise of the bourgeoisie, while others stress the con‡icts within the nobility and
the Third Estate (Furet (1978)). Such a debate is keenly related to the importance of ideas in
the unfolding of events and, in particular, to the violence of the French Revolution, leading to a
declaration of war against foreign countries and to internal con‡ict. As noted by Israel (2014),
there were revolts before and after the French Revolution which did not have major political and
economic consequences: it is therefore di¢ cult to argue that ideas would not play a role in the
deeper roots of the French Revolution and the outbreak of revolutionary violence. These ideas
include the development of a French national identity encouraged by the monarchy in the wake
of the defeat in the Seven Years’War (1756-1763) as well as the development over two centuries
of a national state with a centralized administration which gradually rendered local aristocrats,
who used to serve as local justice o¢ cers, costly and redundant (Tocqueville (1856)). These ideas
also relate to the Enlightenment philosophers and their revolutionary disciples. Enlightenment
philosophers dismissed revealed religions and criticized existing social and political hierarchies,
but they were oblivious to their optimistic faith in reason, nature and people.31 When every
revolutionary thought that he represented the “people”, and that his actions were guided by the
“will of the people,”he then felt legitimized in using violence so that his revolutionary ideas would
prevail.32 According to Furet (1978) this also explains the obsession of revolutionaries with trea-
sons and conspiracies: the revolution was inherently good, seen as freeing the entire population
from tyranny, and therefore, only hidden and evil forces would oppose it. This “revolutionary
  31
     On the philosophy of Enlightenment, see, for example, Cassirer (1932 [2009]) as well as Gay (1966) and Gay
(1969). On the relationship between Enlightenment philosophy and the revolution, see notably Mornet (1933) and
Martin (2006), and speci…cally Koyré (1948) on Condorcet, the only Enlightenment philosopher who took an active
part in the Revolution.
  32
     For instance, in 1782, future revolutionary leader Jean-Louis Carra published a book where he advocated
violence to overthrow “superstition” and “tyranny” (Carra (1782)). Another telling example can be found in the
Instruction written to the soldiers on 26 Brumaire Year II (November 16, 1793) by Comité du Salut Public member
Jean-Marie Collot d’Herbois as they quelled the revolt in Lyon: “Everything is permissible for those who act in
service of the revolution” (Tout est permis pour ceux qui agissent dans le sens de la révolution). On the repression
carried out by Collot d’Herbois in Lyon, see, for example, Palmer (1941) and Biard (1995).


                                                        57
mentality” (Vovelle (1985)) may rationalize the revolutionaries’ obsession with …nding culprits
and conspirators among their royalist opponents but also amidst the most devoted in their own
ranks.33

       A.2 The “Second Revolution”
       During the summer of 1792, France experienced political turmoil and widespread agitation
that would lead to the collapse of the House of Bourbon. The Legislative Assembly had declared
war on April 20, 1792, against Austria. France attacked the Austrian Netherlands, but Prussia
joined forces with Austria and, at …rst, the French army su¤ered losses. These foreign armies were
thought to be preparing to invade France, and rumors spread among the Parisian population that
nobles and priests were plotting with the leaders of the foreign armies. The Brunswick Manifesto,
issued on July 25, 1792, by Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick and commander of the
armies allied against France, heightened the tensions as it threatened that Parisian civilians would
be held personally responsible and tried in a military court if the members of the French royal
family were harmed. While this measure was intended to intimidate the French revolutionaries,
it only galvanized them. On August 10; 1792, the radical Parisian sans-culottes, supported by
volunteers from Brittany and the South of France, attacked the King’s castle and jailed Louis
XVI and his family. As rumors of foreign invasion intensi…ed, aristocrats and priests who were
thought to be a part of the conspiracy against the revolution became targets of violence.
       On September 2-6, 1792, the radical sans-culottes, who were mostly of bourgeois back-
ground, slaughtered aristocrats and clergy members who were imprisoned in the Parisian jails,
along with petty thieves and prostitutes (Soboul (1958)). Similar episodes of violence occurred
in various parts of France (Caron (1935), Bluche (1992), Marko¤ (1996)). Some of this violence
was caused by peasant revolts, which were exacerbated by the July 22, 1792, decree pertaining
to mass conscription, as well as by the June 18, 1792, and August 25, 1792, laws, which subor-
dinated the payments of feudal dues to the presentation of the primal titles (Peyrard (1996), pp.
107-114, Ado (1987 [2012]), pp. 311-322). The war took a di¤erent turn with the victory of the
French revolutionary army on September 20; 1792, at Valmy. The following day, the monarchy
was abolished and the republic proclaimed. The trial of King Louis XVI began on December 11,
1792. On January 20, 1793, the members of the National Convention voted 380 to 310 in favor
of his execution, and he was guillotined the next day.

       A.3 Primary School Provision during the 19th Century
       Under the Old Regime, the French state barely intervened in primary schooling and let the
Church organize its own network of primary schools (Lebrun, Quéniart, and Venard (2003)). The
  33
    As revolutionary leader Jacques-Pierre Brissot exclaimed in a 1791 speech: “We need great treasons” (Nous
avons besoin de grandes trahisons) (Brissot (1792)).



                                                     58
French Revolution harmed the Catholic school system, but the successive French rulers between
1799 and 1830 (Napoléon Bonaparte, 1799-1815, Louis XVIII, 1815-1824, Charles X, 1824-1830)
enabled the Church to (re-)develop its educational network. After 1830, the French political
regimes (the July Monarchy under King Louis-Philippe I, 1830-1848, the Second Republic, 1848-
1852, and the Second Empire, 1852-1870) were less favorable to the Church, but education laws
which were passed under those regimes fostered the development of Catholic schools. Thus,
François Guizot, who was King Louis-Philippe I’s prime minister, reshaped the organization of
schooling in France with the June 28, 1833, law that compelled all French communes to host
a primary school in their jurisdiction. This law enabled the Church to organize its own private
education system, but also to retain its control over public schooling. In particular, monks
and nuns could be employed as teachers in public schools while religious instruction remained
mandatory During the Second Republic, Education Minister Alfred de Falloux passed the March
15, 1850 law and the August 27, 1851, regulation that favored the Church since towns would
not have to fund a public school if a private (i.e., Catholic) school already operated in their
jurisdiction. Besides, all teachers had to ful…ll the duties prescribed by the Church. Finally,
Catholic secondary schools could compete with public secondary schools and could still receive
subsidies from the State and from the local governments.
       Nonetheless, the political stance of the Catholic Church led to a con‡ict on education
against the French state which reached its apex after the establishment of the Third Republic in
1875. The Republicans, who opposed the Catholic Church for its support for the Royalist politi-
cians, …rst weakened the Catholic educational system in the 1880s and 1890s before separating
Church and State in 1905. See, for example, Mayeur (2003), Franck and Johnson (2016), and
Franck and Galor (2017) for recent studies on this issue.

       B. Temperature Shocks, Wheat Prices, Local Violence, and Emigration

       B.1. The Impact of Temperature Shocks on Wheat Prices
       In late 18th-century France, there is ample anecdotal evidence suggesting that abnormal
weather conditions would negatively impact crops and in particular wheat production, which was
the main crop cultivated and consumed in most French départements (Kaplan (1984), Kaplan
(1996)). Late spring and summer climatic conditions are important determinants of the winter
wheat yields (Triticum aestivum), which is planted in the fall and harvested in the summer or
early autumn of the following year.34
       When local markets are not perfectly integrated, local wheat prices are likely to respond to
local yield ‡uctuations, increasing the probability of social agitation when prices rise.35 Anecdotal
  34
    On the growth and developmental stages of wheat and the impact of weather conditions, see, for example,
Haun (1973) and Zadoks, Chang, and Konzak (1974).
 35
    On market integration (and lack thereof) during the Revolution, see, for example, Daudin (2010).


                                                    59
evidence from historians such as Soboul (1962) (pp.342-346) and Johnson (1986) (p.256) are
consistent with this reality.36 Unfortunately, there are no comprehensive data on wheat prices
for 1792, but such data do exist for 1797-1800, that is, for the later part of the Revolution
(Labrousse, Romano, and Dreyfus (1970)). This allows us to run panel-level regressions where
the price of wheat in each département is linked to the temperature shocks in the summer in that
département over the 1797-1800 period:

                                      Pd;t =   d   +   t   +   1 Zd;t   + ud;t ;

       where Pd;t is the price of wheat in département d in year t, Zd;t is the temperature deviation
in département d in the summer of year t,          d   and     t   are département and year …xed e¤ects, and
ud;t is an error term for département d in year t. We consider several speci…cations for Zd;t
including the squared and absolute deviation de…ned in the main text. For completeness, we also
constructed separate measures for positive (and negative) weather shocks to investigate whether
wheat prices di¤erentially respond to abnormally warm or cold summer temperatures.
       We report the regression results in columns (1)-(5) of Table D.5. In the …rst column, our
explanatory variable is the squared deviation from standardized temperature; this speci…cation
does not include département …xed e¤ects so as to highlight the source of variation in our identi…-
cation strategy. In columns (2)-(5) we include département-speci…c constants to account for any
time-invariant département-level characteristics: the main explanatory variable is the squared
deviation from standardized temperature in column (2), the absolute deviation from standard-
ized temperature in column (3), the positive and negative squared deviations in column (4) and
the positive and negative absolute deviations in column (5).
       Reassuringly, increases in temperature shocks at the département level led systematically
to higher wheat prices during the 1797-1800 period, consistent with an economy composed of
relatively fragmented markets where local weather ‡uctuations have material local economic
consequences. In Figure D.3 in Appendix D we plot the percentage change in yearly wheat prices
between 1797 and 1798 and the di¤erence in summer temperature shocks for the same period.
There is a clearly positive relationship.

       B.2. The “Second Revolution”: Violence and Emigration during the Summer
of 1792
       To provide some support to the narrative that emigration in a département was partly
driven by local violence resulting from abnormal weather conditions, we test whether the tem-
perature shocks in the summer of 1792 are signi…cantly related to local riots during the “Second
  36
    In a study of the Revolution in the South of France between 1789 and 1793, Johnson (1986) writes (p.256):
“The great concentration of violent episodes occurred in March 1789, July and August 1789, July 1791, March and
April 1792, and July and August 1792. All occurred in either the spring or summer and were for the most part
the results of poor harvests and food shortages.”


                                                       60
Revolution.”For this purpose, we use the data from Marko¤ (1996), who provides information on
local riots in August and September 1792, which we aggregate at the level of the département. We
have information on 82 departements. The average département has 53:30 riots with a standard
deviation of 193:65, a minimum of 0, and a maximum of 1; 489. In the OLS regressions, Rd is
the log of the number of riots in August and September 1792 in département d, and Zd;1792 is
the squared (or absolute) deviation of temperature in the summer of 1792:


                                 Rd =   0   +   1 Zd;1792   + X0d : + vd

where X0d is a vector of economic, geographical, and institutional characteristics of département
d, and vd is an error term for département d.
      We report the regression results in columns (6) and (7) of Table D.5 in Appendix D.
Larger temperature shocks at the département level in the summer of 1792 lead systematically to
more riots. Figure D.1 provides a graphical representation of the statistical association implied
by column (6) in Table D.5. The evidence uncovered regarding the robust impact of abnormal
temperatures on wheat prices and peasant revolts during the in‡ection point of the French Rev-
olution, namely the summer of 1792, increases our con…dence regarding the plausibility of our
identi…cation strategy.

      B.3 First-Stage Robustness Checks: Temperature Shocks in the Summer of
1792 and Emigration
      Given our reliance on the credibility of temperature shocks as a plausible source of varia-
tion for emigration during the Revolution, we have performed a comprehensive set of robustness
checks. First, we show that the weather conditions in the summer of 1792 are the critical tem-
perature shocks during the Revolution for understanding emigration. Second, in an attempt to
mitigate concerns that our instrument correlates mechanically with preexisting measures of de-
velopment (or other large-scale events after the end of the Revolution), we amassed a multitude of
alternative indexes of social and economic signi…cance, failing to …nd any systematic association.
      Speci…cally, emigration rates are explained neither by deviations from temperatures in the
spring, fall, or winter of 1792 in Table D.6, nor by deviations from temperatures in all the other
summers between 1788 and 1800 in Table D.7 and Figure D.2. Also, we show in Table D.8 that
squared and absolute deviations from standardized rainfall in the summer of 1792 do not explain
variations in the share of émigrés. In Table D.9 we report the …rst-stage relationship between
the squared temperature deviation in the summer of 1792 and the share of émigrés accounting
for spatial dependence in the error structure (Conley (1999)). Moreover, in Table D.10, we show
that our …rst-stage regression results are robust to using other baselines, such as a 50-year rolling
window based on summer temperatures between 1747 and 1791, a couple of …xed 25-year windows


                                                   61
(1751-1775 and 1776-1800), or a …xed 50-year window (1751-1800). Furthermore, in regressions
available upon request, we show that deviations from temperature in the summers from 1788 to
1800 do not systematically map into variations in the number of death sentences across France
during the 1793-1794 Reign of Terror (Greer (1935)).37 We also test in regressions available upon
request additional speci…cations for the …rst-stage regression, …nding that measures of abnormal
temperatures other than the squared and absolute deviation of temperature in the summer of 1792
are less strongly correlated with the share of émigrés. In particular, we …nd that the one-sided
deviation of temperature is only weakly correlated with the share of émigrés, thus suggesting
that both higher and lower than average temperatures in the summer of 1792 contributed to the
‡ight of the émigrés.
       Moreover, we provide in Tables D.11, D.19, and D.20 several tests in support of the plausi-
bility of the exclusion restriction. These tests are meant to show that our instrumental variable,
the summer of 1792 temperature shock, is not correlated with variables which may potentially
be correlated with emigration rates and the evolution of income per capita in the medium and
long run. In Panel A of Table D.11, we focus on violence before 1789 and after 1815, as proxied
by the “‡our war” of 1775, which is viewed as the last major series of riots triggered by bad
harvests and hunger before 1789 (Bouton (1993)), and by the post-1815 “white terror”when the
royalist regime of Louis XVIII arrested and sentenced to death some of their revolutionary and
Bonapartist opponents (Resnick (1966)). In Panel B of Table D.11, we examine the demands of
the French population in 1789 as expressed in the cahiers de doléances (Hyslop (1934), Shapiro
and Marko¤ (1998)). We aggregate at the département level the number of times major political
and economic issues were mentioned in the cahiers de doléances.38 Such issues include the ap-
proval of vote by head (a …rst step toward democratic voting which was in opposition to the vote
by order as was the case under the Old Regime), state intervention in education, tendency to
socialism, as well as the abolition of guilds, feudal dues, and serfdom. In Panel C of Table D.11,
we measure human capital before the Revolution proxied by the share of brides and grooms who
could sign their wedding contracts over the 1686-1690 and 1786-1790 periods (Furet and Ozouf
(1977)). Lastly, in Panel D of Table D.11, we assess the presence of the clergy that was hostile
to the Revolution, and the number of famous aristocratic families. We use the data from Tackett
(1986) on the share of clergymen who refused to take the oath in support of the Constitution
Civile du Clergé in 1791. As Tackett (1986) shows, this piece of legislation, which was hostile to
the Catholic Church (Godechot (1951)), re‡ected not only the views of the local priests at the
  37
     We …nd that the unconditional relationship between temperature deviation in the summer of 1792 is signi…-
cantly and positively correlated at the 10% level with the share of death sentences during the Reign of Terror, but
that this is driven by the number of death sentences in one département, Loire-Inférieure.
  38
     Cahiers de doléances were redacted at the level of the baillage, which was an administrative division of France
under the Ancien Régime.



                                                        62
start of the Revolution but also those of the laypeople who pressured priests to accept or reject
the oath, thereby providing a measure of the religiosity of the local population. In addition, we
use information on the most prestigious noble families, as listed in the Almanach de Saxe Gotha,
in 1750, which can be viewed as proxying for the higher ends of the stock of regional political
and economic power (Squicciarini and Voigtländer (2015)).39
       In Table D.19, we show that temperature shocks in the summer of 1792 are not correlated
with variables that proxy religiosity during the long 19th century (see Franck and Johnson (2016)
for a discussion): these are the number of religious communities in each département devoted to
education, charity, and solely to religious purposes in 1856 (from the 1856 French census), as well
as the share of representatives in the lower house of Parliament who voted against the separation
of Church and State in 1905 (Franck (2010)). Finally, we examine in Table D.20 whether our
instrument is correlated with the spread of the phylloxera in 1875 and 1890, a disease which was
harmful to vine roots but also to the health of the people living in the regions hit more harshly
(Banerjee, Du‡o, Postel-Vinay, and Watts (2010)).
       All in all, while information prior to 1789 at the département level on the number of
priests, large landowners, and land distribution is missing,40 the results reported in Tables D.11,
A.19, and D.20 are reassuring since none of the potentially important variables is correlated with
our instrument. Indeed, if our instrument was systematically correlated with an economic and
political factor related to the land distribution or the composition of the population before the
Revolution, such a correlation would likely have been re‡ected in these observed traits including a
culture of violence before, during, and after the Revolution, complaints in the cahiers de doléances,
prerevolutionary human capital, local religiosity, and proxies for the presence of local elites.




  39
     The data of Furet and Ozouf (1977) and Squicciarini and Voigtländer (2015) do not cover all the French
départements and cannot therefore be included as part of the historical controls in our baseline regressions.
  40
     While some attempts were made to survey the French population under the Old Regime, it was only un-
der Napoleon Bonaparte’s rule in 1801 that the …rst systematic count of the French population was undertaken
(Dupâquier and Dupâquier (1985)). Still, it was only in 1851 that a survey o¤ered for the …rst time systematic
information on the professions of the inhabitants at the local level. Moreover, the cadastre, which registered prop-
erty ownership at the local level, was also given an impulse under Napoleon Bonaparte’s rule in 1807 but was only
completed in 1850 (Bloch (1929)).


                                                        63
     D. Figures and Tables

                                                                 Temperature Shocks in Summer 1792 and Department-Level Violence in Summer 1792
                                                                                Conditional on Geographic and Historical Characteristics

                                                                                                                                                                               Var
                                                        4                                                                                  Isere
                                                                                                            Indre
              Temperature Shock in the Summer of 1792



                                                                                                     Aube                                                           Maine-et-Loire
                                                                                                                                                            Cotes du Nord
                                                                                                                    Ariege
                                                        2




                                                                Seine Inferieure
                                                                                           Gard             Correze
                                                                                                               Marne (Haute)
                                                                                                                        Vienne          Cote d'Or Mayenne               Morbihan
                                                                                                                      Landes                         Jura
                                                                                                                                   Saone (Haute)
                                                                                                                    Garonne    (Haute-)           Rhin (Haut)                    Finistere
                                                                                                                                 Moselle
                                                                                                                Puy de Dome Seine et Oise         Sarthe

                                                                                                                 Marne                               VendeeIlle-et-Vilaine
                                                                                                                                RhoneSaone   et Loire
                                                        0




                                                                                                                            Cher
                                                                                                                             Pyrenees     Seine
                                                                                                                                        (Hautes)
                                                                                                                                     Orne                                                  Alpes-Maritimes
                                                                                                          Seine et Marne Bouches du Rhone
                                                                                                    Lot-et-Garonne                                                       Rhin (Bas)
                                                                                       Nord                Ardennes                                              Alpes (Basses)

                                                                                                Calvados    Eure    Eure-et-Loir
                                                                                                                         Gers                 Loiret
                                                                                                  CreuseLoire
                                                                                                VienneOrientales
                                                                                           Pyrennees   (Haute)
                                                                                                      Aisne            Loir-et-Cher Pyrenees
                                                                                                                      Indre-et-Loire            (Basses)
                                                                                                                                              Ain
                                                                                                                                               Doubs
                                                          Somme                                           Charente-inferieure
                                                                                                                Charente Dordogne
                                                         Pas de Calais                            Tarn
                                                                                          Loire (Haute)                           Sevres (Deux) Meurthe-et-Moselle
                                                                                    Lozere Vaucluse      GirondeLotMeuse
                                                        -2




                                                                                                      Oise                       Vosges
                                                                                   HeraultCantal            Ardeche
                                                                                                                     Allier
                                                                                                                        Nievre                    Loire-Inferieure
                                                                                                                    Yonne
                                                                                                                  Aveyron

                                                                                                          Manche
                                                        -4




                                                             -.1                          -.05                               0                             .05                             .1
                                                                                                        Riots in August & September 1792


                                                                 IV is the Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792

Figure D.1: Temperature Deviation in Summer 1792 and Local Violence in Summer 1792, Con-
trolling for Geographic and Historical Characteristics

         Note: This …gure depicts the partial scatterplot of the e¤ect of temperature shocks in the summer of 1792
     on the logarithm of the number of riots in August and September 1792 in each French département. Thus,
     the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from regressing the logarithm of the number of riots in August
     and September 1792 against the squared deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792, conditional on
     geographic and historical controls.




                                                                                                                        64
 Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Share of Emigres in Department Population
                                             3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                                                   Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rhin ( Bas )

                                                                                                                                                                                                        Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s
                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Var                                                                                                                                                                                                           Var                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Var
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bouc hes du Rhone


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                    Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Alp es - M ar it im es
                                                                                                                                            M os ele
                                                                                                                                                   l                                                                                                                                                                                                     M os ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l M ay enne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MMos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ayelenne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l
                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                       M ay enne
                                                                                                                                                                               Rhin (Doubs
                                                                                                                                                                                      Haut )                                                                                                                                                                                     Rhin ( Haut )                   Doubs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rhin ( Haut )              Doubs

                                                                                           Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Vie nne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l se
                                                                                                                                       M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                            M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M eus e
                                                            Cot es duSevr      Nor es d ( Deux)                                                        Cot e d'O r                                                                                                                                                                                           Cot es du Nor d                         Cot e d'O r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cot eCotd'O    es   r du         Nor   d- G ar onne
                                                              Fin ris e-
                                                              Loi     t erIVendee
                                                                            e verados
                                                                            nf       ieO
                                                                                       ur rene                nneLot
                                                                                                          Vie Dor       - et - e)
                                                                                                                    dogne
                                                                                                                      ( Haut    G ar onne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O Fi  nhe-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rt neis t er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              et e-MLoi ros
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e- el         ieSevr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ur e es ( Deux)Vie nne ( Haut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I lenf er Vendee                             Dor e) Lot - et - G ar onne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dogne                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sevr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r e-es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M Loi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vendee I nf(et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ViDeux)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e-nne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 er  Fi   Dor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mnur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ie  isos tO Lot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e(erdogne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Haut   - et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e Cal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rlene    e)
                                                                       M -aiCal
                                                                             na                                 Pas de Cala is Ar dennes    M eur t he- et - M os elle                                                                                                                                                                     PasAr de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dennes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CalaMvisados
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              eur                    Mai                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         eur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M aitnhe-                         el        v adosAr dennes Pas de Cala is
                                                              Iel - et      Vil e-
                                                                                 i eet - Loir e
                                                                                 n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ie l - et - Via    i e n e- et - Loir e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ielet- et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 - Loi    ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       - Vi len i e
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                  M anc he                                     Sein e et O is e                                                                            Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                                                                                        Sei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M nance ethe O is e                                                                                                                       Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                                                                                                                                    Sein e( Haut    et O   M                                                                                                                             Alp es ( Bas s es)
                                                                                                                        Nor d MCor                             Saone ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                Nor  dnM                                                Saone ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Saone                          e) isanc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nor d
                                                                M or bihChar  an ent e- inSei   f er
                                                                                                  n eie ur
                                                                                                        I nfe er ie ur e              ar neez e M ar ne ( Haut                                     Aude Savoie                                                                                                                                       e arI nfne            MMorar   bihnean ( Haut e)                                                                                             Aude                                                                                                                                                                  neMe- (or inbi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f her
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an  M      are nnne                                                                       Aude
                                                                                                                        Sein e           rAube                 Cante)al          JTar
                                                                                                                                                                                   ur an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sei    Sei  n eer ieAube
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ur e                                       Char ent e- in f er ie ur e Cor r ezCant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J ur a     e al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tar n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Savoie                                                                                                                                                             Char
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M ar ent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aube
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Haut       e) ie ur Sei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sei     ee Ir nf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cor      ezer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e ieCant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ur e al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  J ur a                      Tar n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Savoie
                                                                                      Sar t he        Eur e- et - SomLoir m e                         G ar onne ( Haut e- )                                                                                                                                                                    Som m e Eur      Eur e- et      - Loi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sar      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t he                                                                              G ar onne ( Haut e- )                                                                                                                                                                                    Eurt e-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sar      he et - Eur     Loir                  Som mGe ar onne      ( Haut e- )
                                                                                                    Eur e               Ais Landes
                                                                                                                             ne                                                              Dr om e e
                                                                                                                                                                                                Lozer                                                                                                                                          Ais ne             e                                                                                          Lozer e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Landes                                     Dr om e                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Landes        Ais ne            Lozer e                                                    Dr om e
                                                                                                      G ir onde                                                            Ar ie ge                              Her ault                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G ir onde                                HerAraul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ie ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t                                                                                                                                                                                      G ir onde                                                               Ar ie ge         Her ault
                                                                                                                                           G er s             Py r enees ( HautAines )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             G erAins          Py r enees ( Haut es )                                                                                                                                                                                                               G er s               Py r enees (AiHaut   es )
                                                                                              Char
                                                                                           I ndr     ent- Loi
                                                                                                 e- et     e r e SeiO   n es
                                                                                                                           i eet M ar ne                                                                           G ar d                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Seis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ine et M ar ne                         I ndr e- et - Loir e           Char ent e                     G ar d                                                                                                                                                                                               I ndr e- Char
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            et - Loi ent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sei rneee etSaone       M ar O  ne s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ie                           G ar d n
                                                                                                                                                        Saone et Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Saone et Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         et Loir e
                                                                                                        Loir - et - Cher  Loir et                            Vosges                Av ey r on                                                                                                                                                                                 Loir etLoi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vosges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r - et - Cher                                                                       Av ey r on                                                                                                                                                                           LoirVosges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        - Loi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          et r- et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cher                                                                    Av ey r on
                                                                                                                                                           Puy de Dom e                        Ar dec he                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Puy de Dom e                   Ar dec he                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Puy de Dom e                                 Ar dec he
                                                                                                                                          Nie vr Lot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lot
                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                                       Yonne     e                       I s er e                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yonne                        Nie vr e                                                                                                                   I s er e                                                                                                                 YonneNie vr e                                                                                                                                                      I s er e
                                                                                                                     I ndr e                         Ale
                                                                                                                                                      il r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I ndr e Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I ndr e            Al e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l  r
                                                                                                                                  Cr eus e              Py r enees ( Bas s es )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr eus e                                            Py r enees ( Bas s es )                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr eus e                                     Py r enees ( Bas s es )
                                                                                                                                                                            Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Loir e ( Haut e)
                                                                                                                                      Cher                Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cher                                                  Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cher                                                                  Rhone
                                                                                                                                                                                    Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Alp es ( Haut es)
                                             -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                                  Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Loir e


                                                  -1                                         -.5                                              0                                          .5                                        1                                     1.5                                                                                    -1                                                    0                                                   1                                                    2                                            3                                                         -.5                                                                         0                                                                          .5                                                                           1
                                                                                                     Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 788                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 789                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 790
                                                  c oe f = .1 5 87 09 35 , (ro bu s t) s e = .18 56 3 6, t = .8 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                              c oe f = -.1 24 35 8 85 , (rob u s t) s e = .08 59 03 8 , t = -1.4 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c oe f = .0 5 01 70 74 , (ro bu s t) s e = .36 90 9 15 4, t = .14
 Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Share of Emigres in Department Population
                                             3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rhin ( Bas )

                                                                                                                                                                      Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                 Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s
                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Var                                                                                                                                                                                                                Var                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Var
                                                                                                                                                                                               Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bouc hes du Rhone


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                                                           Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Alp es - M ar it im es
                                                                                                                          M os ele
                                                                                                                                 l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M os ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M ay enne M os ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                        M ay enne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M ay enne
                                                                                                                                                                                           Rhin ( Haut )
                                                                                                                                                                                        Doubs                                                                                                                                                                                                        Doubs Rhin ( Haut )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rhin ( Haut )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Doubs

                                                                     Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Vie nne
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                l se                                                                                                                                                                                 Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l se
                                                                                                  M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M eus e

                                                                             Lot     - etVi   - GnnearCot
                                                                                                        onnees du Nor d                    Cot e d'O r                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cot e d'O r Lot - et - G ar onne                                                                                              Cot es du Nor d                                                                                                                                                  Cotes es (Dor du
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lot     Nor           Cot e d'O r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            et -dG ar onne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -Haut
                                                            Sevr esO(Loi      rDeux)
                                                                                 Dor
                                                                                   e- dogneI nfe er ie ur( e
                                                                                                           Haut e) Fin is t er e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ViM         Dor dogne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e nne t( he-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Haut                                                Sevr es ( Deux)                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sevr              Deux)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eie(dogne
                                                              PasM de
                                                                        Vendee
                                                                       ainCale- vne
                                                                                 rados
                                                                               Caleta  is- Ar  dennes                                  M eur t he- et - M os elle                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pas Ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dedennes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Caleur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a is      ete)- M os elle                            O r ne Calv ados M ain e- et - Vendee      Loir e- I nf er ie ur e                                             Fin is t er e                                                                                                  Loi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rCal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OvVi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nIados
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vendee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            erisnf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ar er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    dennes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CalM    ur e t e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a isreur    he- et - M os elle
                                                                                   Ie   l -Loi
                                                                                             etr -eVia
                                                                                                     l n
                                                                                                       i e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Loir eI e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l - et - Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i e                                                                                                                                                                    M Iaie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ln-e-etet- Vi -a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     lLoi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                            Sein e et O is e M anc he                                                                                                                                                                    Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                                                                      Sein eSaone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          et O ( isHaut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e               Alp es ( Bas s es)                            M anc he                                                                                                                                                                                              MSeianc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n e he   et O is e                                                                                                           Alp es ( Bas s es)
                                                                          Nor iedur                                                                                Saone ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                      Nor                               e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Saone ( Haut e)
                                                          Char
                                                           Seinent
                                                               eSei I ne-
                                                                       nf
                                                                        e inerf er   Mie ureareneM or bih an  Cor r ez e M ar neCant  ( Haut
                                                                                                                                          al e)                           Aude                                                              Savoie                                                                                                                    M  Aude
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cor    rd ez(eHaut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ar ne         Seine)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e  I nfe er ie ur e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Savoi                                    Char ent e- in f er ie ur e                                     M or bih an                                                                                                                                                SeiM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Char Nor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nent   dbi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nfhM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       eorI e-   inan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   erfar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ie ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ner ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ie ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cor eMr eez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    arene    ( Haut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                al e)                    Aude                                                                            Savoie
                                                                                               Aube                                                      Tar n                         J ur a                                                                                                                                                                          Tar nalSein e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aube                    J ur a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sei    e        Aube    Cant                   J ur na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tar
                                                             EurSom
                                                                  e-Sar etm t- he
                                                                                Loi
                                                                                 e r                                     G ar onne ( Haut e- )                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Som  onne        Haut e- ) Eur e-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mDre( om                    et - Loir                  Sar t he                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SarEur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Som   tmhee-  e et - Loir        G ar onne ( Haut e- )
                                                                  Eur     eAi s ne
                                                                             Landes                                                                               Lozer e                                                  Dr om e                                                                                                                                    Ais ne Lozer       ee               Eur  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Landes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ais Eur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne e               Landes                           Lozer e                                                                  Dr om e
                                                                G ir onde                                                                       Ar ie ge                  Her ault                                                                                                                                                                                    Ar ie ge Her ault                                  G ir onde                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G ir onde                                  Ar ie ge                 Her ault
                                                                                                       G er s ( Haut es )
                                                                                                Py r enees                                                                                                        Ain                                                                                                                                                      Py r enees   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ainer  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ( Haut   es )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G er s       Py r enees ( Haut es ) Ain
                                                              SeiChar
                                                            I ndrnOe s
                                                                  e-     eteent
                                                                        iet      Merare ne
                                                                              - Loi                                                                                   G ar d                                                                                                                                                                                         Sein Oe s  iete M ar ne G ar d I ndr       Char
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e- ent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       et - eLoir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Char
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I ndrOn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sei   ieent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e- eetet-eLoi  Mr ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e ne                                       G ar d
                                                                                                                                                                   Saone et Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                   Saone et Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Saone et Loir e
                                                              Loir -Loietr et
                                                                            - Cher                                                                       Vosges
                                                                                                                                                          Av ey r on                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av ey r on LoiVosgesr etLoir - et - Cher                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Loir - et -Loi   Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r et Vosges                  Av ey r on
                                                                                                                                          Puy de Dom e                             Ar dec he                                                                                                                                                                        Puy de Dom      Ar dec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e he                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Puy de Dom e                      Ar dec he
                                                                                                                        Lot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lot
                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                             Yonne                               Nie vr e                                                                                                             I s er e                                                                                                        NiYonne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e vrI se  er e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yonne Nie vr e                                                                                                       I s er e
                                                                                                      I ndr e                                   Ale
                                                                                                                                                 il r                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         il r I ndr e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I ndr e              Ale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           il r
                                                                                      Py r enees ( Bas s es )Cr eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr eus ePy r enees ( Bas s es )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr eus e                 Py r enees ( Bas s es )
                                                                                                                                                                Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                           Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Loir e ( Haut e)
                                                                                                                Cher                                                                                              Rhone                                                                                                                                                  Rhone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cher                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cher                             Rhone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                            Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alp es ( Haut es)
                                             -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                                                         Loir e                                                                                                                                                                            Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Loir e


                                                  -.2                                                                         0                                                                       .2                                                                   .4                                                                 -.1                                                       0                                                       .1                                                       .2                                                .3                                                         -2                                                                     0                                                                     2                                                                     4
                                                                                                     Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 791                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 792                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 793
                                                  c oe f = .4 3 92 06 68 , (ro bu s t) s e = .66 65 3 36 4, t = .66                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c oe f = 4.3 36 37 74 , (ro bu s t) s e = 1 .0 50 5 17 , t = 4 .13                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c oe f = -.0 02 09 2 29 , (rob u s t) s e = .08 62 84 9 5, t = -.0 2
 Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Share of Emigres in Department Population
                                             3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                           Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rhin ( Bas )

                                                   Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s
                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                          Var                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Var                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Var
                                                                                                               Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bouc hes du Rhone


                                                                                                                             Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                                    Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Alp es - M ar it im es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M os ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M os ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M os ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                        M ay enne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M ay enne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M ay enne
                                                                                                                                                                                       Doubs                                Rhin ( Haut )                                                                                                                                                                 Rhin ( Haut )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Doubs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rhin ( Haut )Doubs

                                                        Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Vie nne
                                                                                                                       Vauc u
                                                                                                                            l se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l se
                                                                                                                                                                                                     M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M eus e
                                                    CotDor
                                                   Lot      es     -du        Nor    d                                                                           Cot e d'O r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cot e d'OLot    r et - G ar onne        Cot es du Nor d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cot e d'O r                                                                         Cot  es     du Nor d
                                                   Sevr
                                                    LoiVir-ee-
                                                             et
                                                             es
                                                              ndogne
                                                             Fi
                                                             nne
                                                             Vendee
                                                                      G
                                                                      t( er
                                                                  IisCal
                                                                     nf
                                                                             ar
                                                                         (Deux)
                                                                             Haut
                                                                           ver
                                                                                 onne
                                                                              Oeierur
                                                                             ados     e)
                                                                                     ne e                                                                                                  Ar dennes                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M eur t he-Vi e nne          Dor -dogne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ( Haut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             elle e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sevr esLoi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (rDeux)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e- I Ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vendee     er ie ur e Fin is t er e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nf dennes                                O r ne                                                                                                                                                      M eur t he-Aretdennes                                                           Vie nne ( Haut e) Dor    Lot  - etSevr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dogne  - G ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O r esLoi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                onne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ner (e- Deux)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I nf er ieFi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vendee         urn iset er e
                                                   MI e                                                                Pas de Cala is                                                                            M eur t he- et - M os elle                                                                                                                                                                                                    et   - M os                                                Pas de Cala is Calv ados                                                                                                                                                                                 - M os
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pas elle de Cala is                                                                      Calv ados
                                                      lai-nete- -et  Vial- niLoi
                                                                              ere                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l -M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ie   et ai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                - nVie-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a i et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l n e - Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Iel -Metai-nVi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e-a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l niete - Loir e
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                           M anc he                                         Sein e et O is e  Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                                                                                                                                                             Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                                                                                                          M anc he                      Sein e et O is e                                                                                         Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                                                                            Sein e et O is e               M anc he
                                                                                                                                              NorSavoi
                                                                                                                                                  d e                               Saone ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                             Saone ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Saone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nor d ( Haut e) M ar ne MAude
                                                  Char M   entorAude e-biCor
                                                                         hinan
                                                                             f er   ie ur
                                                                                 r ez    e Sei
                                                                                        Cante nal
                                                                                                e I nf er ie ur e Sein e                                                    M ar ne M ar ne ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                         Savoie                            Aude                         Cor r ez M ear ne ( Haut e) Char entNor   e- indf erMie urar ebi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       or  ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            h an                    Sein eSeiI nnfe er ie ur e                                                                                                                      Savoie                                                  ar nee)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ( Haut                           Sei n en erI ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sei       nf e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           er ie ur e                     Char ent e-    M inorf er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bihieanur e
                                                                       Tar n                                                                           J ur a              Aube                                                                                                                                                                                                                         J ur a               Tar n Cant al                                                                 Aube                                                                                                                                                                                        J ur a                                                Cant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Aube
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tar
                                                    G ar onne      Sar t (he     Haut e- ) Eur      e- et - Loir        Som m e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G ar onne ( Haut e- )                                                       Som mSar  e t he            Eur e- et - Loir                                                                                                                                                                        Som                                       G ar onne ( Haut        Eur e- et - LoiSar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Eur ee- )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r
                                                              Landes                             Eur e e
                                                                                                  Lozer                               Dr om e Ais ne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dr om e                       Lozer e                                                    LandesAis ne                                                        Eur e                                                                                                                                            Dr om e          Ais ne      Lozer    e m e                                                                         Landes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t he
                                                            GArer
                                                            G   ir ieonde
                                                                       ge Her ault
                                                                       s ( Haut es )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Her ault             Ar ie ge                                           G ir onde                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Her ault                                            Ar ie ge                                                      G ir onde
                                                   Py r enees                                                                                          Ain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ain                                            Py r enees ( GHaut    er ses )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ain                                                                         Py r enees ( G   Hauter ses )
                                                       CharI ndr   ent e- eet - Loir e                     G ar d         O s
                                                                                                                            i e Sein e et M ar ne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G ar d                                                     Char ent e                I ndr e- et - Loir eSeinOe s  i et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e M ar ne                                                                                                                                                                 G ar d                                    O s i e Sein e et M ar ne                              I ndrChar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e- etent    er e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           - Loi
                                                                                                                                                    Saone et     Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Saone et Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Saone et Loir e
                                                                             Av ey Loir ron
                                                                                          - et - Cher             Loir et                                                                                      Vosges                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av ey r Vosges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              on                                                                                     Loir - et - CherLoir et                                                                                                                                                            Vosges                                 Av ey r on                                              Loir - et - Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Loir et
                                                                                                   Puy de Dom e               Ar dec he                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ar dec he              Puy de Dom e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ar dec he              Puy de Dom e
                                                                      Lot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lot
                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                                     Nie vr e  Yonne
                                                                                                                                                  I s er e                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I s er e                                                                              Nie vr e                                 Yonne                                                                                                                                                                                     I s er e                                                   Nie vr e Yonne
                                                                             I ndr e                               Ale
                                                                                                                     il r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                il r              I ndr e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       il r                 I ndr e
                                                             Py r enees       Cr eus      e s es )
                                                                                      ( Bas                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr eus ePy r enees ( Bas s es )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cr eus e                Py r enees ( Bas s es )
                                                                                                               Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Loir e ( Haut e)
                                                                                                      Cher                                                                Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rhone                                                         Cher                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rhone              Cher
                                                                                                                     Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Alp es ( Haut es)
                                             -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                              Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Loir e


                                                  -.5                                                      0                                                        .5                                                  1                                                1.5                                                                       -1                                                    -.5                                                       0                                                      .5                                                1                                                                             -1                                              -.5                                                      0                                                 .5                                                   1
                                                                                                     Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 794                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 795                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 796
                                                  c oe f = .2 9 51 82 82 , (ro bu s t) s e = .22 90 5 57 1, t = 1.2 9                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c oe f = -.1 82 21 7 59 , (rob u s t) s e = .19 49 68 , t = -.9 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c oe f = -.3 30 15 1 76 , (rob u s t) s e = .19 39 72 4 6, t = -1 .7
 Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Share of Emigres in Department Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Share of Emigres in Department Population
                                             3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3




                                                                        Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rhin ( Bas )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rhin ( Bas )

                                                                  Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Py r ennees O r ie nt ale s
                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2




                                                                                                                    Var                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Var                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Var
                                                                                Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bouc hes du Rhone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bouc hes du Rhone


                                                                                           Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Alp es - M ar it im es                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Alp es - M ar it im es
                                                                                       M os ele
                                                                                              l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M os ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M os ele l
                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                          M ay enne                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M ay enne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M ay enne
                                                                        RhiDoubs
                                                                           n ( Haut )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RhinDoubs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ( Haut )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rhin ( Haut )           Doubs

                                                                                                                                    Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vie nne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vie nne
                                                                         Vauc u
                                                                              l se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l se                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vauc u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l se
                                                                                                 M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M eus e                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M eus e
                                                                                       Cot e d'O r Lot - et - G ar onne                                                                                                 Cot es du Nor d                                                                                                                                                                                Cot es du Nor    Cot d  e d'O r                       Lot - et - G ar onne                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cot esCot    due Nor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d'O dr                                                                    Lot - et - G ar onne
                                                                                                         Dore)dogne                                             Sevr es ( Deux)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t erISevr  eres   e( nne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          eDeux)  Dor     dogne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sevr es ( Deux)Vie nne (Dor      dogne
                                                                         M eur t he- et - MVieos
                                                                                               nne
                                                                                              Ar  le ( Haut
                                                                                                 dennes
                                                                                                 el
                                                                                                 Pas    de Cala is
                                                                                                                                                                             Vendee Loir e- I nf er O
                                                                                                                                                                               M ain e- et - LoiIr e
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ie Cal
                                                                                                                                                                                                          urr ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                                                                                              v ados                                                     Fin is t er e                                                                                                                                         Finrise-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Loi        Me eur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nf      ietVi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vendee  ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       he-      -( M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             etCal vHaut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O    e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        os rel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ados    ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             le                                           Ar dennes                                Pas de Cala is                                                                                                              Ar dennes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M eur t he-                 Finvisados
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   et - M os elle Cal   t er eO r ne Loir e- I nf er ie ur eVendee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pas de Cala is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Haut   e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   l - et - Vial n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i e                                                                                                                                                                                                            l - et -MVia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ie           lain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              inee- et - Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Iel - et - Via i e M ain e- et - Loir e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l n
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                         Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                     Sein e et O is e                                              M anc he                                                                                                                                           Alp es ( Bas s es)                                                         M anc                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Alp es ( Bas s es)
                                                                       Saone ( Haut Nor  e) d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Saone ( Haut          e)he                                                       Sein e et O is e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nor d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M anc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Saone       he e) Sein e et O is e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ( Haut
                                                                             AudeSavoiMCor
                                                                                        e ar rne   ( Haut e) M ar ne
                                                                                                ez e                                       Char
                                                                                                                                             Seient
                                                                                                                                                n e Sei
                                                                                                                                                     e-ninef er
                                                                                                                                                             I nfie ur
                                                                                                                                                                    er ei ur e                                         M or bih an                                                                                                                                 Savoie                                                             M or bih an   Char
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M arent ne e- ( Haut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in f er e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Corie ur  e eAude
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rAube
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ez                       Mn ear Ine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sei        nf Sei
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          er nieeur e                                                                                                                                         Savoie                   MMNor  dne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ararne   ( Haut e)  SeiM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n eorI bi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nfh an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er ie ur e                     Char ent e- in fCant    ezee Aude
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er ierur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cor
                                                                           J urCant
                                                                                aTar al
                                                                                      n                                   Aube                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          J ur a                                                      Tar n Cant al                                                                                                                                                                                                             Aube           J ur a Sein e                                                        al   Tar n
                                                                                     G ar onne ( Haut e- )Som m e                                                                  Eur e- et  - Loi
                                                                                                                                                                                            Sar      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t he                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sar t he               GEur   e- et - (Loi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ar onne         r e- )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Haut                                                 Som m e                                                                                                                                                         SomEur m e  e- Sar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           et - tLoi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  her                                                    G ar onne ( Haut e- )
                                                                          Lozer e Dr om e Ais ne                       Landes                                                    Eur e                                                                                                                                                                            Dr om e                                                                                                                            Eur  eLozer  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Landes                          Ais ne                                                                                                                                     Dr om e               Ais ne             Eur   e                                           Lozer e                                  Landes
                                                                         Her aulArt ie ge                                         G ir onde                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ar ie ge Her ault
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G ir onde                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Her ault G ir ondeAr ie ge
                                                                              Ain          Py r enees G      er s es )
                                                                                                          ( Haut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ain                                                                                                           G er s              Py r enees ( Haut es )                                                                                                                                                          Ain                                                                                                        G er s      Py r enees ( Haut es )
                                                                             G ar d                                     OChar
                                                                                                                          s    ent
                                                                                                                          i e Sein ee et M arI ne
                                                                                                                                               ndr e- et - Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IChar   entete - Loir e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ndr e-                                            Sein e et M    G ar ar ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d         O s ie                                                                                                                                                                 Sein e et O s iMe ar ne               I ndr e- et - LoirGe ar dChar ent e
                                                                                    Saone et Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Saone et       Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Saone et Loir e
                                                                             Vosges
                                                                            Av ey r on                                                              Loir - Loi
                                                                                                                                                            et r- et
                                                                                                                                                                  Cher                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vosges                       Loir - et Av - Cher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ey r ron
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Loi   et                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vosges                                   Loir et Loir - et - Cher                               Av ey r on
                                                                         ArPuydecde
                                                                                  he Dom e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ar dec he                        Puy de Dom e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ar dec he                Puy de Dom e
                                                                                                Lot I s er e Nie vr e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lot
                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                Yonne                                                                                                                                                                                                              I s er e                                                               Nie vr e                                       Yonne                                                                                                                                                                                 I s er e                                                       YonneNie vr e
                                                                                          Ale
                                                                                           il r        I ndr e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              il r         I ndr e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        il r                    I ndr e
                                                                                       Cr eus e Py r enees ( Bas s es )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cr eus e                                                        Py r enees ( Bas s es )                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cr eus e                                           Py r enees ( Bas s es )
                                                                        Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Loir e ( Haut e)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Loir e ( Haut e)
                                                                                                 Rhone Cher                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rhone                                                                                  Cher                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rhone                                                                   Cher
                                                                                           Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Alp es ( Haut es)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Alp es ( Haut es)
                                             -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2




                                                                                           Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Loir e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Loir e


                                                  -.5                                                                       0                                                                      .5                                                                  1                                                                      -.5                                                                                                                0                                                                                                         .5                                                         -4                                                     -2                                                          0                                                      2                                                        4
                                                                                                     Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 797                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 798                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Su mmer Temperatur e Sh oc k , 1 799
                                                  c oe f = .1 6 65 32 01 , (ro bu s t) s e = .19 54 1 22 9, t = .85                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c oe f = .1 1 27 05 58 , (ro bu s t) s e = .38 15 5 30 5, t = .3                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c oe f = -.0 79 15 4 41 , (rob u s t) s e = .05 59 75 9 8, t = -1 .41




Figure D.2: Unconditional Correlation between the Squared Deviation from Temperature in
Summers 1788-1799 and the Share of Emigrés in the Population

                                                                                        Note: This …gure graphs the relationship between the squared deviation from standardized temperature in
                                                          all the summers between 1788 and 1799 and the share of émigrés in the population. It shows that the negative
                                                          and signi…cant relationship between the squared deviation from standardized temperature in the summer of
                                                          1792 and the share of émigrés does not hold for any other summer between 1788 and 1799.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     65
                                                                             Wheat Prices Changes and Differences in Summer Temp. Shocks 1797-1798
                   Percentage Change in Wheat Prices Between 1797 and 1798




                                                                                                       Unconditional Relationship
                                                                                                                                    HAUTES-PYRENEES
                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                    GERS
                                                                                                                                    LOTAVEYRON
                                                                                                 LOT-ET-GARONNE     TARN
                                                                                                           HAUTE-GARONNE
                                                                                              GIRONDE
                                                                                                   DORDOGNE
                                                                                                          HAUT-RHIN
                                                                                                         LANDES      ARIEGE
                                                                                                              BASSES-PYRENEES
                                                                                                            BAS-RHIN CANTAL
                                                                                                                      AUDE
                                                      0




                                                    FINISTERE                                                  PUY-DE-DOME
                                                                                                             CREUSE
                                                                                                              CORREZEHERAULT
                                                                                                        HAUTE-SAONE
                                                                                                         ALLIER
                                                                                                       INDRE             LOZERE
                                                                                    ISERE CHARENTE          DOUBS
                                                                                           DROME HAUTE-VIENNE
                                                                               CHARENTE-INFERIEURE            MOSELLE
                                                                                                              PYRENEES-ORIENTALES
                                                                                                           JURA
                                                                                            VIENNE
                                                                                  HAUTES-ALPES
                                                                                         RHONE      AINBOUCHES-DU-RHONE
                                                                                                  LOIRE     MEURTHEOISE
                                                                              EURE-ET-LOIR
                                                                                       VAR (SAUF GRASSE      ARDECHE
                                                                                                             39-47)                NORD
                                                                                       SEINE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                     COTE-D'OR
                                                                                                  SEINE
                                                                                           SEINE-ET-OISE
                                                                                                      CHER  VOSGES
                                                                                                     VAUCLUSE              AISNE
                                                                                                                        SOMME
                                                                                               SEINE-ET-MARNE
                                                                                    EURE BASSES-ALPES
                                                                                  INDRE-ET-LOIRE                             GARD
                                                                                            SAONE-ET-LOIRE
                                                                                   LOIR-ET-CHER
                                                                      CALVADOS
                                                                           SARTHE
                                                                           ORNE                                MEUSE      PAS-DE-CALAIS
                                       -.2




                                                                                 DEUX-SEVRES                     HAUTE-LOIRE
                                                                       MAINE-ET-LOIRE LOIRETNIEVRE
                                                                   MANCHE
                                                              MORBIHAN
                                                                                                      HAUTE-MARNE   ARDENNES
                                                                  LOIRE-INFERIEURE
                                                                             VENDEE
                                                                                                               MARNE
                                                                ILLE-ET-VILAINE                   AUBE
                                                                       MAYENNE                YONNE
                                                         COTES-DU-NORD
                         -.4




                                                                             -1               -.5              0                .5                    1
                                                                                  Change in Summer Temperature Shocks Between 1797 and 1798


                                                                                            Wheat Price Changes,1797-1798

Figure D.3: Wheat Price Changes and Di¤erences in Summer Temperature Shocks, 1797-1798

        Note: This …gure graphs the relationship between the change in the summer temperature shocks between
    1797 and 1800 and the percent change in wheat prices between 1797 and 1798.




                                                                                                              66
     .2
                                                                                                  .15




     .15
                                                                                                  .1




     .1
                                                                                                  .05




     .05
                                                                                                  0




     0
     -.05
                                                                                                  -.05
               11          21      31      41       51       61      71      81      91      01             11      21      31      41      51      61       71      81      91      01
            18          18      18      18       18       18      18      18      18      19             18      18      18      18      18      18       18      18      18      19




67
                                                A. Fertility                                                                        B. Infant Mortality

                                                         Figure D.4: Emigres, Fertility, and Infant Mortality, 1811-1936

                    Note: This graph displays the estimated coe¢ cients of the share of émigrés on fertility and infant mortality between 1811 and 1901 in 2SLS regressions
              where the IV is the squared deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792. All the dependent variables are in logarithms. Intervals re‡ect 95% con…dence
              levels.
                                                                                                 .6




     .4
     .3
                                                                                                 .4




     .2
     .1
                                                                                                 .2




     0
                                                                                                 0




     -.1
              68              75             82             90            99            10               68          75            82             90            99              10
           19              19             19             19            19            20               19          19            19             19            19              20




68
                           A. Share of High-School Graduates among                                                  B. Share of College Graduates among
                                   Men Ages 16-24, 1968-2010                                                              Men Ages 16-24, 1968-2010

                                        Figure D.5: Emigres and the Human Capital of Frenchmen Ages 16-24, 1968-2010

                   Note: This graph displays the estimated coe¢ cients of the share of émigrés on the share of high school graduates among men ages 16-24 and on the share
            of college graduates among men ages 16-24, 1968-2010 in 2SLS regressions. The IV is the squared deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792. All the
            dependent variables are in logarithms. Intervals re‡ect 95% con…dence levels.
                   Table D.1: Average Farm Size in France in 1862 and in the USA in 1860
                                                                                                                             Observations   Mean     Median   Std.Dev.   Min.     Max.

                                                                              Average Farm Size, France, 1862
Average   Farm   Size                                                                                                             88        23.12    18.12     13.14     4.57     62.83
Average   Farm   Size,   Above Median Temperature Shock in Summer 1792                                                            43        27.35    25.98     14.39     7.97     62.83
Average   Farm   Size,   Below Median Temperature Shock in Summer 1792                                                            45        17.02    19.08     10.46     4.57     49.80
Average   Farm   Size,   Above Median Wheat Production 1862                                                                       44        29.86    28.51     13.20     8.56     62.83
Average   Farm   Size,   Below Median Wheat Production 1862                                                                       44        16.38    14.47      9.05     4.57     49.27

                                                                               Average Farm Size, USA, 1860
Average Farm Size                                                                                                                1944       336.17   562.54    218.64    10.78   15172.6
Average Farm Size, Above Median Wheat Production 1860                                                                             979       248.49   189.38    301.30    10.78    5610.0
Average Farm Size, Below Median Wheat Production 1860                                                                             964       425.42   291.56    728.33    11.71   15172.6

                                                         Average Farm Size, France 1862, Excluding Farms below 5 ha (=12.36 acres)
Average   Farm   Size,   Excluding   Farms   below   5   ha (=12.36 acres)                                                         88       102.99   78.59      91.33    36.32   705.58
Average   Farm   Size,   Excluding   Farms   below   5   ha (=12.36 acres), Above Median Temperature Shock in Summer 1792          43       107.01   92.09      81.61    46.33   484.77
Average   Farm   Size,   Excluding   Farms   below   5   ha (=12.36 acres), Below Median Temperature Shock in Summer 1792          45       99.16    75.48     100.51    36.32   705.58
Average   Farm   Size,   Excluding   Farms   below   5   ha (=12.36 acres), Above Median Wheat Production 1862                     44       108.74   78.98     107.87    42.29   705.58
Average   Farm   Size,   Excluding   Farms   below   5   ha (=12.36 acres), Below Median Wheat Production 1862                     44        97.25   77.91      71.91    36.32   484.77

                                                  Average Farm Size, USA 1860, Excluding Farms Below 9 acres
Average Farm Size Excluding Farms Below 9 acres                                                                                  1944       354.74   231.11    639.89    12.14   17403.0
Average Farm Size, Excluding Farms Below 9 acres, Above Median Wheat Production 1860                                             979        256.89   194.18    310.37    12.14   5610.0
Average Farm Size, Excluding Farms Below 9 acres, Below Median Wheat Production 1860                                             965        454.00   309.44    841.41    26.00   17403.0

                                                                Note: Farm size is measured in acres.




                                                                                     69
                              Table D.2: Descriptive Statistics
                                                   Obs.    Mean       Std.Dev      Min.        Max.
Explanatory variables
Share of Emigres in Population                      86      0.0047      0.0064       0.00       0.05
Altitude                                            88      353.37      344.24      36.02     1729.22
Land Suitability                                    88        0.75       0.19        0.21       0.98
Latitude                                            88       46.54       2.11      42.60       50.49
Longitude                                           88        2.62       2.66       -4.06        7.55
Distance to Paris                                   88     357.07       178.66       0.00      693.86
Distance to Lyon                                    88      322.25      145.85       0.00      709.62
Distance to Marseille                               88      448.50      210.44       0.00      879.23
Department Area                                     88    618807.00   148900.10   61087.20   1084890.00
Distance to Border                                  88     191.11       134.17      16.56      557.59
Distance to Coast                                   88     159.54       111.61      10.42      411.07
Temperature in Summer 1792                          88       17.97       1.36       13.69       21.82
Lack of Commons in Department                       88        0.32       0.47         0           1
Mechanical Mills 1789                               88        0.08       0.31         0           2
Encyclopedie Subscribers                            86        1.00       0.00         1         1.00
University in 1700                                  88        0.18       0.39         0           1
GDP per capita
GDP per capita 1860                                 87      498.18      144.20    273.00      1105.00
GDP per capita 1901                                 86      863.42      269.40    255.30      1816.40
GDP per capita 1930                                 87     6464.61     1500.21    4033.47     14109.90
GDP per capita 1995                                 88       17.64       3.17      13.23       38.83
GDP per capita 2000                                 88       20.37       3.99      15.49       47.72
GDP per capita 2010                                 88       24.65       5.60      18.36       63.22
Value added by workforce in each sector
1860 Value Added per Worker in Agriculture          87      0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
1930 Value Added per Worker in Agriculture          87      0.01        0.00        0.00        0.02
1982 Value Added per Worker in Agriculture          88    3699.27      6510.40     225.52     55433.29
1990 Value Added per Worker in Agriculture          88    6069.24      6372.52     320.53     36589.30
1860 Value Added per Worker in Industry             87      0.00         0.00       0.00        0.00
1930 Value Added per Worker in Industry             87      0.02         0.00       0.01        0.03
1982 Value Added per Worker in Industry             88    5182.49      9865.68     304.84     88828.12
1990 Value Added per Worker in Industry             88    10524.74    23123.32     685.78    210220.80
1860 Value Added per Worker in Services             87      0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
1930 Value Added per Worker in Services             87      0.01        0.00        0.01        0.02
1982 Value Added per Worker in Services             88    6716.78     12338.99     670.73    111846.40
1990 Value Added per Worker in Services             88    10455.12    20475.20    1034.12    186043.20
Workforce in agriculture, industry and services
Share of the Workforce in Agriculture 1860          87      0.63        0.16        0.01        0.89
Share of the Workforce in Agriculture 1930          87      0.45        0.16        0.00        0.73
Share of the Workforce in Agriculture 1982          88      0.13        0.07        0.00        0.34
Share of the Workforce in Agriculture 1990          88      0.09        0.05        0.00        0.26
Share of the Workforce in Agriculture 1999          88      0.07        0.04        0.00        0.19
Share of the Workforce in Agriculture 2010          88      0.22        0.09        0.00        0.47
Share of the Workforce in Industry 1860             87      0.22        0.11        0.06        0.52
Share of the Workforce in Industry 1930             87      0.30        0.11        0.13        0.63
Share of the Workforce in Industry 1982             88      0.34        0.07        0.20        0.49
Share of the Workforce in Industry 1990             88      0.31        0.06        0.15        0.44
Share of the Workforce in Industry 1999             88      0.26        0.05        0.14        0.36
Share of the Workforce in Industry 2010             88      0.23        0.03        0.14        0.33
Share of the Workforce in Services 1860             87      0.15        0.07        0.05        0.47
Share of the Workforce in Services 1930             87      0.25        0.08        0.13        0.54
Share of the Workforce in Services 1982             88      0.53        0.07        0.40        0.71
Share of the Workforce in Services 1990             88      0.60        0.06        0.47        0.76
Share of the Workforce in Services 1999             88      0.68        0.06        0.57        0.85
Share of the Workforce in Services 2010             88      0.53        0.09        0.37        0.86


                                              70
                                    Table D.3: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                                              Obs.   Mean    Std.Dev   Min.   Max.
Child Labor, Agricultural Survey, 1929
Share of French agricultural workers below age 15   in the agricultural sector                 87    0.01     0.01     0.00   0.07
Share of French agricultural workers below age 15   among agricultural workers                 89    0.01     0.01     0.00   0.06
Share of French agricultural workers below age 15   among agricultural workers below age 15    89    1.00     0.00     1.00     1
Share of French agricultural workers below age 15   among agricultural workers above age 15    89    0.07     0.05     0.01   0.26
Voters in 1839
Share of Electors in Departmental Population                                                   82    0.01     0.00     0.00   0.01
Share of Landowners Among Electors                                                             67    0.56     0.09     0.28   0.72
Share of Businessmen Among Electors                                                            67    0.24     0.09     0.10   0.60
Share of Professionals Among Electors                                                          67    0.11     0.04     0.04   0.24
Share of Civil Servants Among Electors                                                         67    0.09     0.04     0.02   0.18
Share of Illiterate Conscripts
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1840s                                                           85    0.37     0.18     0.03   0.71
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1850s                                                           85    0.32     0.17     0.03   0.68
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1860s                                                           88    0.23     0.14     0.02   0.54
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1870s                                                           89    0.16     0.10     0.01   0.47
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1880s                                                           86    0.11     0.08     0.01   0.38
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1890s                                                           86    0.05     0.04     0.01   0.20
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1900s                                                           86    0.03     0.03     0.00   0.15
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1910s                                                           86    0.03     0.02     0.00   0.09
Share of Illiterate Conscripts 1930s                                                           89    0.05     0.01     0.03   0.08
Price of Wheat, 1797-1800
Wheat Price, 1797-1800                                                                        337    18.28    4.92     9.08   38.48
Share of Church Land Sold in Department
Share of Church Land Sold in Department                                                        67    0.025    0.013    0.00   0.156




                                                        71
                              Table D.4: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                         Obs.   Mean    Std.Dev   Min.    Max.
Average Temperature in Summers 1788-1800
Average Temperature in Summer 1788                                        88    18.48    1.38     14.18   22.31
Average Temperature in Summer 1789                                        88    17.37     1.3     12.66   20.87
Average Temperature in Summer 1790                                        88    18.09    1.43     14.03   22.04
Average Temperature in Summer 1791                                        88    18.16    1.37     13.93   21.95
Average Temperature in Summer 1792                                        88    17.97    1.36     13.69   21.82
Average Temperature in Summer 1793                                        88    18.49    1.44     14.72   22.53
Average Temperature in Summer 1794                                        88    18.38    1.33     14.16   22.13
Average Temperature in Summer 1795                                        88    17.39    1.38     13.23   21.34
Average Temperature in Summer 1796                                        88    17.37    1.37     13.21   21.34
Average Temperature in Summer 1797                                        88    17.84    1.41     13.58   21.93
Average Temperature in Summer 1798                                        88    18.48    1.37     13.83   22.13
Average Temperature in Summer 1799                                        88    16.82    1.32     12.88   20.77
Average Temperature in Summer 1800                                        88    17.86    1.42     13.39   21.57
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1788 (1763-1787)     86    0.82     0.53     0.02    2.27
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1789 (1764-1788)     86    1.34     1.00     0.00    3.73
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1790 (1765-1789)     86    0.27     0.29     0.00    1.25
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1791 (1766-1790)     86    0.15     0.15     0.00    0.51
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1792 (1767-1791)     86    0.05     0.07     0.00    0.30
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1793 (1768-1792)     86    0.97     1.17     0.00    5.45
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1794 (1769-1793)     86    0.43     0.44     0.00    1.61
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1795 (1770-1794)     86    1.35     0.47     0.32    2.17
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1796 (1771-1795)     86    1.48     0.49     0.31    2.28
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1797 (1772-1796)     86    0.32     0.34     0.00    1.35
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1798 (1773-1797)     86    0.48     0.19     0.00    0.96
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1799 (1774-1798)     86    5.25     1.64     1.68    9.31
Squared Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1800 (1775-1799)     86    0.26     0.32     0.00    1.29
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1788 (1763-1787)    86    0.85     0.32     0.13    1.51
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1789 (1764-1788)    86    1.05     0.48     0.01    1.93
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1790 (1765-1789)    86    0.44     0.28     0.00    1.12
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1791 (1766-1790)    86    0.33     0.21     0.02    0.72
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1792 (1767-1791)    86    0.19     0.14     0.01    0.55
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1793 (1768-1792)    86    0.81     0.56     0.01    2.33
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1794 (1769-1793)    86    0.54     0.37     0.01    1.27
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1795 (1770-1794)    86    1.14     0.22     0.56    1.47
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1796 (1771-1795)    86    1.20     0.22     0.56    1.51
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1797 (1772-1796)    86    0.47     0.31     0.01    1.16
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1798 (1773-1797)    86    0.67     0.17     0.02    0.98
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1799 (1774-1798)    86    2.26     0.36     1.30    3.05
Absolute Standardized Deviation of Summer Temperature 1800 (1775-1799)    86    0.41     0.31     0.01    1.13




                                              72
  Table D.5: Do Temperature Deviations In‡uence Local Food Prices and Local Violence?
                                                     (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                                                     OLS          OLS       OLS       OLS           OLS         OLS          OLS
                                                                  Price of Wheat 1797-1800                   Riots in Aug. & Sept. 1792

Squared Deviation from Temperature                 0.030***      0.028***
in Summer 1797-1800                                 [0.006]       [0.006]
Absolute Deviation from Temperature                                         0.063***
in Summer 1797-1800                                                          [0.020]
Negative Squared Deviation from Temperature                                            0.029***
in Summer 1797-1800                                                                     [0.006]
Positive Squared Deviation from Temperature                                            0.159**
in Summer 1797-1800                                                                     [0.077]
Negative Absolute Deviation from Temperature                                                      0.065***
in Summer 1797-1800                                                                                [0.020]
Positive Absolute Deviation from Temperature                                                      0.200***
in Summer 1797-1800                                                                                [0.064]
Squared Deviation from Temperature                                                                           6.077***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                                                                    [1.536]
Absolute Deviation from Temperature                                                                                        2.553***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                                                                                  [0.784]

Within R2                                            0.148        0.522      0.511      0.529      0.519
Adjusted R2                                          0.522        0.516      0.506      0.522      0.512
Department …xed e¤ects                                No           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Year …xed e¤ects                                      Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Clusters                                               85           85         85         85        85
Geographic controls                                                                                             Yes          Yes
Historical controls                                                                                             Yes          Yes
F-stat                                                                                                         15.654       10.592
Observations                                          337          337        337        337        337          82           82


        Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the absolute and squared deviation from standardized temperature
    in summer 1797-1800 on the price of wheat in OLS regressions with département - and year-…xed e¤ects in
    1797-1800 period (columns 1-4) and in the summer of 1792 on the number of riots in August and September
    1792 accounting for geographic and historical controls (columns 5-6). All the dependent variables are in
    logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
    * at the 10% level.




                                                            73
     Table D.6: Robustness Checks on the First-Stage Regressions: Squared and Absolute Deviations from Temperature in Summer, Spring,
     Fall and Winter 1792
                                                                                                  Panel A: Squared Deviation from Temperature
                                                                                        (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)
                                                                                         First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres in Population

                     Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)    6.159***                                 10.26***   5.983***   7.203***   11.48***
                                                                                      [1.499]                                  [2.151]    [1.533]    [1.715]    [2.295]
                     Squared Devation from Temperature in Spring 1792 (1767-1791)               -1.029                         3.221**                         3.225**
                                                                                                [1.063]                        [1.317]                          [1.409]
                     Squared Devation from Temperature in Autumn 1792 (1767-1791)                          2.807                           1.600                 3.661
                                                                                                          [2.780]                         [2.348]               [2.331]
                     Squared Devation from Temperature in Winter 1792 (1767-1791)                                   -0.200                          0.721*     1.119**
                                                                                                                    [0.444]                         [0.412]     [0.508]

                     Geographic Controls                                                Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                     Historical Controls                                                Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                     F-stat (1st stage)                                                16.88     0.94      1.02      0.20      12.98       8.73       9.17       7.69
                     Observations                                                       85        85        85        85        85          85         85         85




                                                                                                  Panel B: Absolute Deviation from Temperature




74
                                                                                        (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)
                                                                                         First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres in Population

                     Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)   2.590***                                 3.772***   2.518***   2.679***   3.492***
                                                                                      [0.770]                                  [0.974]    [0.860]    [0.777]    [1.046]
                     Absolute Devation from Temperature in Spring 1792 (1767-1791)              -2.647                          5.326                            4.817
                                                                                                [2.704]                        [3.215]                          [3.189]
                     Absolute Devation from Temperature in Autumn 1792 (1767-1791)                         1.511                           0.319                 1.330
                                                                                                          [1.500]                         [1.283]               [1.386]
                     Absolute Devation from Temperature in Winter 1792 (1767-1791)                                   0.591                           0.827       1.216
                                                                                                                    [0.589]                         [0.528]     [0.756]

                     Geographic Controls                                                Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                     Historical Controls                                                Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                     F-stat (1st stage)                                                11.32     0.96      1.01      1.01       8.04       5.79       7.03       4.15
                     Observations                                                       85        85        85        85         85         85         85         85



              Note: This table reports robustness checks to our baseline …rst-stage speci…cation in the 2SLS regressions where the IV is the squared deviation of
          standardized summer temperature in 1792 (Panel A) and the absolute deviation of standardized summer temperature in 1792 (Panel B) and where the
          instrumented variable is the share of émigrés in the population (the dependent variable in the second stage of the 2SLS regression is GDP per capita in 1860
          as shown in Tables 4 and D.12) when all geographic and historical controls are included. The robustness checks consider the e¤ect of the squared and absolute
          deviation from standardized temperature in spring, fall, and winter 1792. The dependent variable is in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in
          brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.
Table D.7: Robustness Checks: Deviations from Temperature in Summer 1792 on GDP per
Capita 1860: Summers 1788-1800
                                                                                         Panel A. GDP per capita 1860
                                                                   (1)            (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)                   (6)       (7)         (8)              (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)          (13)
                                                                                                                                         Reduced Form
                                                                                                                                       GDP per capita 1860

Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)   -1.572***    -1.485***    -1.551***     -1.510***    -1.775***    -1.651***     -1.656***    -1.085**    -1.578***    -2.356***    -1.245**    -1.750***      -1.582***
                                                                  [0.381]      [0.373]      [0.391]       [0.400]      [0.518]      [0.395]       [0.482]     [0.450]      [0.385]      [0.508]     [0.514]      [0.460]        [0.384]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1788 (1763-1787)                   0.225
                                                                               [0.188]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1789 (1764-1788)                               0.0267
                                                                                           [0.0576]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1790 (1765-1789)                                             0.142
                                                                                                         [0.115]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1791 (1766-1790)                                                          0.259
                                                                                                                      [0.415]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1793 (1768-1792)                                                                       0.0260
                                                                                                                                   [0.0348]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1794 (1769-1793)                                                                                    0.0535
                                                                                                                                                 [0.146]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1795 (1770-1794)                                                                                                 0.290**
                                                                                                                                                              [0.141]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1796 (1771-1795)                                                                                                              0.0855
                                                                                                                                                                           [0.152]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1797 (1772-1796)                                                                                                                          0.316**
                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.156]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1798 (1773-1797)                                                                                                                                       0.141
                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.171]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1799 (1774-1798)                                                                                                                                                   -0.0154
                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.0254]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1800 (1775-1799)                                                                                                                                                                  -0.0891
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.210]

Adjusted R2                                                      50.745       48.659        51.532       48.843       53.864        49.995       47.751       56.946       44.806      56.396      49.938        50.004        49.379
F-stat                                                            0.643        0.646         0.638       0.642        0.639         0.640        0.638        0.655        0.639       0.654       0.641         0.639         0.639
Geographical Controls                                              Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                                                Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                                                        85           85            85          85           85            85           85           85           85          85          85            85            85

                                                                                           Panel B. GDP per capita 2010
                                                                            (1)           (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)                        (6)       (7)       (8)                 (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)          (13)
                                                                                                                                                  Reduced Form
                                                                                                                                               GDP per capita 2010

Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)             1.093***      1.077***      1.151***     1.141***      1.123**      0.896***      1.022**     1.217***     1.088***     0.839*      0.812*       0.702*      1.102***
                                                                           [0.316]       [0.328]       [0.318]      [0.336]      [0.440]       [0.320]      [0.422]      [0.365]      [0.313]     [0.438]     [0.463]      [0.421]      [0.320]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1788 (1763-1787)                            -0.0406
                                                                                         [0.113]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1789 (1764-1788)                                          0.0739
                                                                                                      [0.0453]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1790 (1765-1789)                                                        0.108
                                                                                                                    [0.103]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1791 (1766-1790)                                                                    -0.0386
                                                                                                                                 [0.331]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1793 (1768-1792)                                                                                 0.0650**
                                                                                                                                              [0.0260]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1794 (1769-1793)                                                                                               0.0452
                                                                                                                                                            [0.121]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1795 (1770-1794)                                                                                                            0.0735
                                                                                                                                                                         [0.107]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1796 (1771-1795)                                                                                                                        0.0709
                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.125]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1797 (1772-1796)                                                                                                                                      0.102
                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.113]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1798 (1773-1797)                                                                                                                                                 -0.120
                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.120]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1799 (1774-1798)                                                                                                                                                             -0.0338
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.0214]
Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1800 (1775-1799)                                                                                                                                                                            0.0878
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.112]

Adjusted R2                                                                 0.596         0.590        0.601         0.596       0.590         0.618        0.591        0.592        0.591       0.594       0.595        0.602         0.593
Geographical Controls                                                        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                                                          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
F-stat                                                                     69.199        64.722        63.743       72.482       68.747        81.521       62.906       68.585       64.497      73.169      62.912       73.857        63.111
Observations                                                                  86            86           86            86          86            86           86           86           86          86          86           86            86




                 Note: This table reports reduced-form regressions that assess the e¤ect of the squared deviation from
          standardized temperature in the summer of 1792 on GDP per capita in 1860 (Panel A) and GDP per capita
          in 2010 (Panel B), accounting for the squared deviation standardized temperature in the summers over the
          1788-1800 period. It shows that only the squared deviation from standardized temperature in 1792 has a
          negative impact on GDP per capita in 1860 and a positive impact on GDP per capita in 2010. The dependent
          variables are in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level,
          ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                                                      75
Table D.8: First-Stage Regressions: Squared and Absolute Deviations from Temperature and
Rainfall in Summer 1792
                                                                                (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
                                First stage: the instrumented variable is the Share of Emigres

        Squared Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)        6.159***   6.458***
                                                                              [1.499]    [1.524]
        Squared Deviation from Rainfall in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                       0.980*
                                                                                         [0.525]
        Absolute Deviation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                             2.590***   2.840***
                                                                                                    [0.770]    [0.828]
        Absolute Deviation from Rainfall in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                             0.617
                                                                                                               [0.420]

        Geographic controls                                                    Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
        Historical controls                                                    Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
        F-stat (1st stage)                                                      85         85         85         85
        Observations                                                          16.862     28.958     13.190     18.876



         Note: This table reports robustness checks to our baseline …rst-stage speci…cation in the 2SLS regressions
     where the IV is the squared and absolute deviation of standardized summer temperature in 1792 and where
     the instrumented variable is the share of émigrés in the population (the dependent variable in the second
     stage of the 2SLS regression is GDP per capita in 1860 as shown in Table 3). The robustness checks consider
     the e¤ect of the squared and absolute deviation from standardized rainfall in the summer of 1792. All the
     dependent variables are in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the
     1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                             76
Table D.9: First-Stage Regressions: The Impact of Summer Deviations from Temperature in
Summer 1792 on Emigration, Accounting from Spatial Correlation
                                                                 (1)            (2)       (3)
                                                                 OLS           OLS        OLS
                                                                         Share of Emigres

                     Squared Deviation from Temperature          4.336        5.950        6.216
                     in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)

                     White Robust Standard Errors              [1.140]***   [1.445]***   [1.481]***

                     Spatial std. errors, 25 km                [1.038]***   [1.278]***   [1.332]***

                     Spatial std. errors, 50 km                [1.043]***   [1.279]***   [1.333]***

                     Spatial std. errors, 100 km               [1.141]***   [1.278]***   [1.319]***

                     Spatial std. errors, 200 km               [1.449]***   [1.185]***   [1.177]***

                     Spatial std. errors, 300 km               [1.634]***   [1.154]***   [1.102]***

                     Spatial std. errors, 400 km               [1.732]**    [1.185]***   [1.071]***

                     Spatial std. errors, 500 km               [1.761]**    [1.229]***   [1.069]***

                     Geographic controls                          No           Yes          Yes
                     Historical controls                          No           No           Yes
                     Observations                                 86           86           86


         Note: This table reports White robust standard errors and spatial Conley (1999) standard errors for the
     …rst stage of our 2SLS regressions between our IV, the squared deviation from standardized temperature in
     the summer of 1792, and the instrumented variable, the share of émigrés in the population. The dependent
     variable is in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, **
     at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                          77
Table D.10: Robustness Checks: Baseline Deviations from Temperature in Summer 1792 and
GDP per capita 1860 and 2010
                                                                                                            Panel A. GDP per capita 1860
                                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)     (7)                    (8)          (9)        (10)
                                                                                                                    Reduced Form
                                                                                                                  GDP per capita 1860

Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)    -1.572***
                                                                  [0.381]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)               -0.637***
                                                                              [0.167]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1742-1791)                             -1.050***
                                                                                           [0.282]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1742-1791)                                          -0.740***
                                                                                                         [0.177]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1776-1800)                                                       -3.524***
                                                                                                                     [0.819]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1776-1800)                                                                    -1.152***
                                                                                                                                   [0.334]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1775)                                                                                 -0.614***
                                                                                                                                               [0.183]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1775)                                                                                              -0.618***
                                                                                                                                                             [0.153]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1800)                                                                                                            -1.731***
                                                                                                                                                                          [0.432]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1800)                                                                                                                       -0.748***
                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.209]
Adjusted R2                                                       0.643       0.627       0.635         0.638        0.654         0.639      0.623         0.628        0.641         0.629
F-stat                                                           50.745       44.345      41.400        39.224       58.143        49.856     36.158        34.390       45.597       40.144
Geographical Controls                                              Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                                                Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Observations                                                       85           85          85            85           85            85         85            85           85            85

                                                                                                      Panel B. GDP per capita 2010
                                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)     (7)               (8)          (9)        (10)
                                                                                                               Reduced Form
                                                                                                            GDP per capita 2010

Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)    1.093***
                                                                 [0.316]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)               0.516***
                                                                             [0.140]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1742-1791)                            0.627***
                                                                                         [0.229]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1742-1791)                                        0.304**
                                                                                                     [0.144]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1776-1800)                                                   2.439***
                                                                                                                [0.632]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1776-1800)                                                             0.951***
                                                                                                                           [0.209]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1775)                                                                           0.388***
                                                                                                                                        [0.144]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1775)                                                                                     0.213*
                                                                                                                                                  [0.121]
Squared Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1800)                                                                                                 1.168***
                                                                                                                                                              [0.366]
Absolute Devation from Temperature in Summer 1792 (1751-1800)                                                                                                            0.471***
                                                                                                                                                                          [0.167]

Adjusted R2                                                       0.596       0.599       0.569      0.544       0.608        0.620     0.564     0.534       0.589       0.569
F-stat                                                           69.199      70.393      74.461      81.776      69.595       74.409    72.049    90.221      72.318      69.639
Geographical Controls                                              Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
Historical Controls                                                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations                                                       86           86          86         86          86           86        86        86          86          86



             Note: This table reports reduced-form regressions that assess the e¤ect of our IVs, the squared and
       absolute deviations from standardized temperature in the summer of 1792, on GDP per capita in 1860 (Panel
       A) and GDP per capita in 2010 (Panel B), where we consider baseline periods other than the 25 years preceding
       1792. In all speci…cations, the squared deviation from standardized temperature in 1792 has a negative impact
       on GDP per capita in 1860 and a positive impact on GDP per capita in 2010. The dependent variables are
       in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5%
       level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                              78
        Table D.11: Summer Temperature Shock 1792 and Emigration: Falsi…cation Tests
                                                Panel A. Violence before and after 1789-1815.
                                                   (1)                      (2)                         (3)                                                   (4)
                                                  OLS                       OLS                        OSLS                                                  OSLS
                                         Riots during Flour War White Terror - Convictions   White Terror - Convictions                                  White Terror
                                            May - June 1775     in Ordinary Court 1815-1816 in Provost Courts 1816-1818                                Arrests 1815-1816

Squared Deviation from Temperature                   -2.807                            -6.521                                  0.870                         0.347
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                           [1.954]                           [4.265]                                [1.883]                       [2.825]

Geographical Controls                                  Yes                                Yes                                    Yes                          Yes
Historical Controls                                    Yes                                Yes                                    Yes                          Yes
Observations                                           86                                 84                                     84                           84

                                                                  Panel B. Cahiers de Doleances.
                                          (1)                        (2)            (3)          (4)                    (5)                 (6)                (7)
                                          OLS                       OLS            OLS          OLS                    OLS                 OLS                OLS
                                     Approving Vote          State Intervention Abolition of Mercantilist       Reform or Abolition     Abolition of    Tendency Towards
                                        by Head                in Education       Guilds      Demands             of Feudal Dues         Serfdom            Socialism

Squared Deviation from Temperature        0.764                    0.575           0.113         -0.131                0.772              -0.115              -0.106
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)               [0.632]                  [0.507]         [0.335]        [0.346]              [0.687]             [0.144]             [0.214]

Geographical Controls                     Yes                      Yes              Yes           Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Historical Controls                       Yes                      Yes              Yes           Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Observations                              77                       77               77            77                   77                   77                  77

                                                     Panel C. Human Capital before the Revolution.
                                                   (1)                           (2)                           (3)                                         (4)
                                                  OLS                          OSLS                           OLS                                         OLS
                                         Share of grooms who            Share of brides who          Share of grooms who                          Share of brides who
                                     signed their wedding contract signed their wedding contract signed their wedding contract               signed their wedding contract
                                               1686-1690                     1686-1690                     1786-1790                                   1786-1790

Squared Deviation from Temperature                 -0.876                            0.101                             -0.273                              -1.732
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                         [1.363]                          [1.425]                            [1.521]                             [1.390]

Geographical Controls                               Yes                               Yes                               Yes                                 Yes
Historical Controls                                 Yes                               Yes                               Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                        75                                75                                78                                  78

                                 Panel D. Clergy and Aristocracy at the Outbreak of the Revolution
                                                           (1)                                  (2)                                         (3)
                                                          OLS                                  OLS                                         OLS
                                            Share of Clergymen Against the            Number of Noble Families               Share of Noble Families in Gotha
                                    1791 Oath to the Civil Constitution of the Clergy in Gotha Almanach 1790                  Almanach in Population 1790

Squared Deviation from Temperature                             -1.434                                 -19.92                               0..00006
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                     [1.698]                                [19.22]                             [0.00007]

Geographical Controls                                            Yes                                    Yes                                  Yes
Historical Controls                                              Yes                                    Yes                                  Yes
Observations                                                     76                                     83                                   83



           Note: This table reports reduced-form regressions between our IV, the squared deviation from stan-
      dardized temperature in the summer of 1792 and several variables which could potentially be endogenous to
      economic growth, and which could bias our estimates if they were correlated with our IV. These are variables
      pertaining to violence before 1789 and after 1815, demands from the cahiers de doléances (Panel B), measures
      of human capital before the Revolution (Panel C), and measures for the presence of the local clergy and
      aristocracy at the outbreak of the Revolution (Panel D). All the dependent variables are in logarithm. Robust
      standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                            79
Table D.12: Emigrés and GDP per capita (IV: Absolute Deviation of Temperature in Summer 1792)
                                                                                       Panel A. GDP per capita 1860-1930
                                       (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)         (5)     (6)       (7)      (8)                       (9)        (10)      (11)              (12)
                                       OLS         OLS        2SLS           2SLS         OLS     OLS      2SLS     2SLS                       OLS        OLS       2SLS              2SLS
                                                  GDP per capita 1860                           GDP per capita 1901                                      GDP per capita 1930

Share of Emigres                      -0.0109    -0.0811***    -0.186**    -0.246***     -0.00861     -0.0681       -0.214       -0.278       0.0340      -0.00614     -0.0386       -0.0370
                                      [0.0322]     [0.0304]    [0.0729]     [0.0784]     [0.0388]     [0.0534]      [0.158]      [0.193]     [0.0289]     [0.0288]     [0.0535]      [0.0459]

Adjusted R2                           -0.011       0.585                                  -0.012       0.278                                  0.002        0.608
Geographical Controls                   No          Yes           Yes         Yes           No          Yes          Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                     No          No            No          Yes           No          No           No           Yes          No           No           No            Yes
Observations                            85          85            85          85            83          83           83           83           85           85           85            85

                                                                             First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Absolute Deviation from Temperature                            2.612***     2.590***                               2.163***     1.937***                              2.612***      2.590***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                      [0.708]      [0.770]                                [0.651]      [0.641]                               [0.708]       [0.770]

F-stat (1st stage)                                              13.616       11.320                                 11.050       9.139                                 13.616        11.320

                                                                                      Panel B. GDP per capita 1995-2010
                                       (1)         (2)       (3)            (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)                     (9)        (10)      (11)              (12)
                                       OLS        OLS       2SLS           2SLS        OLS      OLS       2SLS     2SLS                     OLS        OLS      2SLS               2SLS
                                                 GDP per capita 1995                           GDP per capita 2000                                    GDP per capita 2010

Share of Emigres                       0.0237    0.0478**     0.205***    0.204***      0.0238     0.0553**      0.223***     0.215***      0.0201      0.0493*    0.195***       0.197***
                                      [0.0195]   [0.0212]     [0.0615]    [0.0670]     [0.0199]    [0.0222]      [0.0675]     [0.0704]     [0.0225]     [0.0254]   [0.0660]       [0.0706]

Adjusted R2                            0.003      0.472                                 0.001       0.470                                  -0.005        0.466
Geographical Controls                   No         Yes          Yes         Yes          No          Yes           Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes           Yes
Historical Controls                     No         No           No          Yes          No          No            No           Yes          No           No          No            Yes
Observations                             86         86          86          86           86           86           86           86           86           86          86            86

                                                                           First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Absolute Deviation from Temperature                           2.632***    2.620***                               2.632***     2.653***                             2.632***       2.620***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                     [0.701]     [0.757]                                [0.701]      [0.739]                              [0.701]        [0.757]

F-stat (1st stage)                                             14.107      11.970                                 14.107       12.871                                14.107        11.970



             Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the logarithm of GDP per
       capita in OLS and 2SLS regressions in 1860, 1901, and 1930 (Panel A) and in 1995, 2000, and 2010 (Panel
       B). The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions is the absolute standardized deviation from temperature
       in the summer of 1792. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in
       brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                            80
Table D.13: The E¤ect of the Social Categories of Emigrés on GDP per capita in 1860 and 2010
                                                     (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                                                    2SLS                   2SLS                    2SLS                   2SLS
                                                         GDP per capita 1860                            GDP per Capita 2010

  Share of Rich Emigres                           -0.293**                                        0.205**
  (Clergy, Nobility, Upper Middle Class)           [0.116]                                        [0.0885]
  Share of Poor Emigres                                                  -0.0824***                                      0.0605**
  (Lower Middle Class, Workers, Peasants)                                  [0.0313]                                      [0.0244]

  Geographic Controls                               Yes                     Yes                     Yes
  Historical Controls                               Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes
  Observations                                      68                      68                      69                     69

                                                                       First stage: the instrumented variable is
                                            Share of Rich Emigres   Share of Poor Emigres Share of Rich Emigres    Share of Poor Emigres

  Squared Deviation from Temperature              4.342***                15.46***               4.638***                15.70***
  in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                       [1.247]                 [3.840]                [1.293]                 [3.760]

  F-stat (1st stage)                               12.130                  16.207                 12.862                  17.422



            Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the di¤erent categories of émigrés in the population on GDP per
       capita in 1860 and 2010 in 2SLS regressions. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst
       stage of the 2SLS regressions is the squared standardized deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792.
       Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the
       10% level.




                                                                    81
                              Table D.14: Emigrés and Population Size, 1801-2010
                                                                           Panel A. Population of Département, 1801-2010
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)            (9)       (10)       (11)
                                      2SLS       2SLS       2SLS          2SLS       2SLS      2SLS       2SLS      2SLS            2SLS       2SLS       2SLS
                                                                                     Population of Département
                                      1801       1821        1841         1861       1881       1901      1921       1968           1982       1999       2010

Share of Emigres                      0.0600     0.0778     0.0975       0.0630     -0.139     -0.0447     0.202     0.398**       0.492**    0.554***   0.594***
                                     [0.0927]   [0.0956]   [0.0989]      [0.107]    [0.148]    [0.165]    [0.148]    [0.182]       [0.195]     [0.204]    [0.208]

Geographic controls                    Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Historical controls                    Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations                           84         84         84            86         84         84         86         86            86         86         86

                                                                      First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature   6.834***   6.834***   6.834***     6.216***   5.131***   5.131***   6.216***   6.216***       6.216***   6.216***   6.216***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)            [1.547]    [1.547]    [1.547]      [1.487]    [1.221]    [1.221]    [1.487]    [1.487]        [1.487]    [1.487]    [1.487]

F-stat (1st stage)                    19.515     19.515     19.515       17.476     17.657     17.657     17.476      17.476        17.476     17.476     17.476

                                                                         Panel B. Population of Chef-Lieu of Département, 1806-2006
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)            (10)       (11)       (12)
                                      2SLS       2SLS       2SLS         2SLS       2SLS       2SLS      2SLS       2SLS      2SLS             2SLS       2SLS       2SLS
                                                                                   Population of Chef-Lieu of Département
                                      1806       1821        1841        1861       1881       1901       1921      1946       1968            1982       1999       2006

Share of Emigres                     -0.188     -0.0795     -0.186       0.0696      0.143      0.517      0.585       0.700        0.802     0.867*     0.942*     0.972**
                                     [0.273]    [0.240]     [0.219]      [0.270]    [0.298]    [0.475]    [0.508]     [0.518]      [0.498]    [0.491]    [0.492]    [0.482]

Geographic controls                    Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Historical controls                    Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations                           86         86         84            85         86         86         86         86            86         86         86         86

                                                                           First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature   6.216***   6.216***   6.834***     6.209***   6.216***   6.216***   6.216***   6.216***       6.216***   6.216***   6.216***   6.216***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)            [1.487]    [1.487]    [1.547]      [1.484]    [1.487]    [1.487]    [1.487]    [1.487]        [1.487]    [1.487]    [1.487]    [1.487]

F-stat (1st stage)                    17.476     17.476     19.515       17.514     17.476     17.476     17.476      17.476        17.476     17.476     17.476     17.476



             Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the population in each
       département (Panel A) and in the chef -lieu (i.e., main administrative center) of each département over the
       1801-2010 period. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. The IV in the …rst stage of the 2SLS regressions
       is the squared standardized deviation from temperature in the summer of 1792. Robust standard errors are
       reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                           82
Table D.15: Emigrés and Financial Development: Savings Banks’ Loans and Contracts Sealed
by Notaries
                                            (1)         (2)            (3)                 (4)        (5)       (6)
                                           2SLS       2SLS            2SLS                2SLS      2SLS       2SLS
                                          Total Value of Loans from Savings Banks        Contracts Sealed by Notaries
                                           1875        1881           1900                1861       1901      1931

 Share of Emigres                          -0.122        -0.166          0.0108          -0.197*     -0.141        0.167
                                           [0.290]       [0.256]         [0.195]         [0.112]     [0.131]      [0.133]

 Geographic controls                        Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes
 Historical controls                        Yes           Yes             Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes
 Observations                               83            83              83               86         83           86

                                                     First Stage: the Instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

 Squared Deviation from Temperature       4.895***     4.895***         4.895***        6.216***    4.895***   6.216***
 in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                [1.209]      [1.209]          [1.209]         [1.487]     [1.209]    [1.487]

 F-stat (1st stage)                        16.378        16.378          16.378          17.476      16.378       17.476

                                                                           Reduced Form
 Squared Deviation from Temperature        -0.600        -0.813          0.0527         -1.225*      -0.689        1.039
 in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                [1.611]       [1.430]         [1.068]        [0.692]      [0.702]      [0.853]


          Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the amount of loans given
     by savings banks (columns 1-3) and the number of contracts sealed by notaries (columns 4-6) where the IV
     is the squared standardized deviation from summer temperature in 1792. All the dependent variables are in
     logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
     * at the 10% level.




                                                             83
    Table D.16: Emigrés and Civil Servants in the Workforce in the 19th century
                                                              (1)        (2)           (3)
                                                            2SLS        2SLS          2SLS
                                                           Share of Civil Servants in Workforce
                                                             1851       1866          1881

               Share of Emigres                            0.814***   0.363**        0.150
                                                            [0.217]   [0.180]       [0.262]

               Geographic controls                           Yes        Yes           Yes
               Historical controls                           Yes        Yes           Yes
               Observations                                  84         86            83

                         First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

               Squared Deviation from Temperature          6.834***   6.216***      4.895***
               in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                   [1.547]    [1.487]       [1.209]

               F-stat (1st stage)                           19.515     17.476        16.378


    Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the share of civil servants
in the workforce during the 19th century where the IV is the squared standardized deviation from summer
temperature in 1792. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in
brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




                                                      84
                             Table D.17: Emigrés and Octroi Tax Rates, 1875
                                                      (1)                           (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)
                                                     2SLS                          2SLS        2SLS      2SLS        2SLS
                                     Share of Communes with Octroi in 1875                  Octroi Tax Rates
                                       Out of Total Number of Communes                  by Département in 1875 on
                                                in Département)                Pure Alcohol    Beef      Sheep       Pork

Share of Emigres in Population                      1.281***                       0.199       0.261**    0.319*    0.337**
                                                     [0.428]                      [0.248]      [0.116]    [0.174]   [0.164]

Geographical controls                                  Yes                         Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes
Historical controls                                    Yes                         Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes
Observations                                           83                          83            83         83        83

                                                    First stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature                  4.895***                     4.895***     4.895***   4.895***   4.895***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                           [1.209]                      [1.209]      [1.209]    [1.209]    [1.209]

F-stat (1st stage)                                   16.378                       16.378       16.378     16.378     16.378

                                                                         Reduced Form

Squared Deviation from Temperature                  6.269***                       0.973       1.278**    1.559*    1.650**
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                           [2.140]                      [1.351]      [0.579]    [0.881]   [0.812]


          Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on the share of communes
     with an octroi in each département in 1875 as well as on the tax rates on several goods in 1875 where the
     IV is the squared standardized deviation from summer temperature in 1792. All the dependent variables are
     in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5%
     level, * at the 10% level.




                                                         85
                     Table D.18: Emigrés and Public Spending before World War I
                                          Panel A. Primary schools and male & female population age 5-15
                                                                (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
                                                               2SLS        2SLS       2SLS       2SLS      2SLS        2SLS
                                                                  Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15
                                                               1876        1881       1886       1891      1896        1901
                     Share of Emigres                        -0.387** -0.407** -0.389**         -0.335*   -0.277    -0.427***
                                                              [0.156]     [0.167]    [0.157]    [0.183]   [0.187]     [0.156]

                     Geographic controls                          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
                     Historical controls                          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
                     Observations                                 83              83            82            82            83               83

                                                                   First Stage: the instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

                     Squared Deviation from Temperature      4.895***        4.895***       4.893***      4.811***       4.895***      4.895***
                     in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)               [1.209]         [1.209]        [1.210]       [1.239]        [1.209]       [1.209]

                     F-stat (1st stage)                         16.378           16.378      16.359        15.065         16.378          16.378

                                    Panel B. Total Public Spending on Education per Pupil in Primary Schools
                                                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)                               (6)
                                                              2SLS      2SLS      2SLS        2SLS      2SLS                              2SLS
                                                                           Total Public Spending per Pupil
                                                              1876      1881       1886       1891      1896                              1901

                     Share of Emigres                            0.0005      -0.184*         -0.133       -0.393**        -0.127       -0.358**
                                                                [0.0971]     [0.102]        [0.0908]       [0.165]        [0.103]       [0.139]

                     Geographic controls                          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
                     Historical controls                          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
                     Observations                                 83              83            83            83            83             83

                                             First Stage: the Instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

                     Squared Devation from Temperature       4.895***        4.895***       4.895***      4.895***       4.895***      4.895***
                     in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)               [1.209]         [1.209]        [1.209]       [1.209]        [1.209]       [1.209]

                     F-stat (1st stage)                         16.378           16.378      16.378        16.378         16.378        16.378

                                                           Panel C. Roads & Railroads
                                              (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)                              (7)        (8)         (9)
                                             2SLS       2SLS        2SLS      2SLS      2SLS       2SLS                             2SLS       2SLS       2SLS
                                                Area Covered by Roads          Area Covered by Railroad                                  Total Spending on
                                             within Department’sTerritory    within Department’sTerritory                                Road Maintenance
                                             1881       1900        1913      1881      1900       1913                             1881       1900        1913

Share of Emigres                           -0.526***   -0.447***     -0.671***          -0.443**      -0.172         -0.155        -0.153        -0.587***    -0.417***
                                             [0.160]     [0.143]       [0.225]           [0.223]      [0.130]        [0.117]       [0.179]         [0.175]      [0.134]

Geographic controls                           Yes         Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes        Yes
Historical controls                           Yes         Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes        Yes
Observations                                  83          83               83             83            83            83            83               83         83

                                                                   First Stage: the Instrumented variable is Share of Emigres

Squared Deviation from Temperature          4.895***   4.895***      4.895***           4.895***      4.895***      4.895***      4.895***         4.895***   4.895***
in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                   [1.209]    [1.209]       [1.209]            [1.209]       [1.209]       [1.209]       [1.209]          [1.209]    [1.209]

F-stat (1st stage)                           16.378      16.378         16.378           16.378        16.378        16.378        16.378           16.378     16.378



      Note: This table reports the e¤ect of the share of émigrés in the population on measures pertaining to
public spending on education per pupil (Panel A), the number of primary schools with respect to the male
and female population ages 5-15 (Panel C), and the infrastructure of roads and railroads (Panel C) where the
IV is the squared standardized deviation from summer temperature in 1792. All the dependent variables are
in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5%
level, * at the 10% level.




                                                                            86
Table D.19: Summer Temperature Shock 1792 and Religiosity before World War I: Falsi…cation
Tests
                                                                (1)                                         (2)                       (3)                      (4)
                                                                OLS                                         OLS                      OLS                      OLS
                                      Share of Representatives in the lower House of Parliament                    Number of Religious Communities Devoted to
                                              Against the Separation of Church & State            Educational Purposes 1856 Charity Purposes 1856 Only Religious Purposes 1856

 Squared Deviation from Temperature                            -0.671                                      -2.419                   2.930                    -0.254
 in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                                    [0.534]                                     [2.131]                 [1.903]                   [2.467]

 Geographical Controls                                          Yes                                         Yes                      Yes                       Yes
 Historical Controls                                            Yes                                         Yes                      Yes                       Yes
 Observations                                                   83                                          82                       82                        82



             Note: This table reports reduced-form regressions between our IV, the squared deviation from standard-
        ized temperature in the summer of 1792 and variables which could potentially be endogenous to economic
        growth, and which could bias our estimates if they were correlated with our IV. These are variables pertaining
        to religiosity before World War I. All the dependent variables are in logarithm. Robust standard errors are
        reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the 10% level.




       Table D.20: Summer Temperature Shock 1792 and the Phylloxera: Falsi…cation Tests
                                                                                            (1)       (2)
                                                                                           OLS       OLS
                                                                                          Departments hit by
                                                                                           the Phylloxera in
                                                                                           1875      1890

                                      Squared Deviation from Temperature                  -0.347        -0.312
                                      in Summer 1792 (1767-1791)                          [0.735]       [1.005]

                                      Geographical Controls                                 Yes           Yes
                                      Historical Controls                                   Yes           Yes
                                      Observations                                          86            86


             Note: This table reports reduced-form regressions between our IV, the squared deviation from standard-
        ized temperature in the summer of 1792 and variables which could potentially be endogenous to economic
        growth, and which could bias our estimates if they were correlated with our IV. These are variables pertaining
        to the départements hit by the phylloxera in 1875 and 1890. All the dependent variables are in logarithm.
        Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** signi…cant at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, * at the
        10% level.




                                                                            87
 Table D.21: Descriptive Statistics for Variables in Robustness Analysis
                                   Obs. Mean Std.Dev Min. Max.
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1)
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1811      85    0.30      0.08    0.16 0.53
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1821      85    0.29      0.10    0.14 0.60
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1831      85    0.32      0.09    0.16 0.53
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1841      85    0.27      0.08    0.14 0.46
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1851      85    0.30      0.08    0.16 0.48
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1861      88    0.29      0.10    0.12 0.63
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1871      86    0.31      0.08      0    0.49
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1881      86    0.25      0.08      0    0.48
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1891      86    0.22      0.06      0    0.40
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1901      86    0.19      0.04      0    0.29
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1911      86    0.04      0.01    0.02 0.07
Infant Mortality (Age 0-1) 1931      89    0.07      0.01    0.01 0.10
Coale Fertility Index
Coale Fertility Index 1811           87    0.40      0.10    0.24 0.87
Coale Fertility Index 1821           87    0.39      0.11    0.24 0.82
Coale Fertility Index 1831           87    0.37      0.11    0.23 0.74
Coale Fertility Index 1841           87    0.34      0.08    0.21 0.61
Coale Fertility Index 1851           87    0.34      0.07    0.21 0.54
Coale Fertility Index 1861           90    0.31      0.06    0.21 0.48
Coale Fertility Index 1871           88    0.29      0.06    0.18 0.50
Coale Fertility Index 1881           88    0.29      0.06    0.20 0.57
Coale Fertility Index 1891           88    0.25      0.05    0.16 0.45
Coale Fertility Index 1901           88    0.25      0.04    0.18 0.42
Coale Fertility Index 1911           87    0.21      0.03    0.14 0.30
Coale Fertility Index 1931           90    0.19      0.03    0.12 0.25




                                  88
               Table D.22: Descriptive Statistics for Variables in Robustness Analysis
                                                                                                                Obs.   Mean      Std.Dev.    Min.      Max
 Octroi Tax Rates
Octroi Tax Rates Pure Alcohol 1875                                                                               86     13.07      7.12       3.8       45
Octroi Tax Rates Oil of First Quality 1875                                                                       86     9.50       6.12        0       42.65
Octroi Tax Rates Beef 1875                                                                                       86     7.62       2.61        3        20
Octroi Tax Rates Veal 1875                                                                                       86     8.21       3.91        0        20
Octroi Tax Rates Sheep 1875                                                                                      86     8.27       3.04        0        20
Octroi Tax Rates Pork 1875                                                                                       86     7.02       3.02        0        20
Octroi Tax Rates Charcoal 1875                                                                                   86     0.71       1.14        0        10
 Cahiers de Doleances
Approving Vote by Head                                                                                           77     0.06       0.25        0         1
Etatisme in Education                                                                                            77     0.05       0.28        0         2
Abolition in Guilds                                                                                              77     0.03       0.16        0         1
Mercantilist Demands                                                                                             77     0.04       0.19        0         1
Reform or Abolition of Feudal Dues                                                                               77     0.08       0.27        0         1
Abolition of Serfdom                                                                                             77     0.01       0.11        0         1
Tendency towards Socialism                                                                                       77      0.0        0.1        0         1
 Noble Families
Number of Noble Families in Gotha Almanach 1790                                                                  85     13.67      7.66         1        41
Share of Noble Families in Gotha Almanach in 1790 Population                                                     83    0.00005   0.000025   0.000003   0.0001
 Total Public Spending per Pupil
Total Public Spending per Pupil 1876                                                                             86     4.12      10.29        0       93.28
Total Public Spending per Pupil 1881                                                                             86     8.35      4.52         0       22.88
Total Public Spending per Pupil 1886                                                                             86     18.43     4.97       3.06      37.10
Total Public Spending per Pupil 1891                                                                             86     26.70     5.81       16.05      50.17
Total Public Spending per Pupil 1896                                                                             86     32.39     7.06       18.92      53.67
Total Public Spending per Pupil 1901                                                                             86     39.25     29.79      16.97     302.18
 Commune Public Spending per Pupil
Commune Public Spending per Pupil 1876                                                                           86     12.36     3.76        4.04      29.68
Commune Public Spending per Pupil 1881                                                                           86     10.27     5.60        2.47      43.19
Commune Public Spending per Pupil 1886                                                                           86     9.78      12.36       1.57     111.28
Commune Public Spending per Pupil 1891                                                                           86     8.43      14.31       1.01     128.01
Commune Public Spending per Pupil 1896                                                                           86     7.12      10.07       1.52      82.45
Commune Public Spending per Pupil 1901                                                                           86     12.28     15.31       1.16     127.04
 Pre-revolutionary human capital
Share of grooms who signed their wedding contract 1686-1690                                                      77     0.26       0.15       0.06      0.64
Share of brides who signed their wedding contract 1686-1690                                                      77     0.12       0.07       0.01      0.33
Share of grooms who signed their wedding contract 1786-1790                                                      80     0.42       0.24       0.05      0.92
Share of brides who signed their wedding contract 1786-1790                                                      80     0.23       0.17       0.02      0.69
 Violence before and after the Revolution
Riots during Flour May-June 1775                                                                                 88      3.50     13.94        0        101
White Terror- Convictions in Ordinary Court 1815-1816                                                            85     44.07     43.69        0        185
White Terror- Convictions in Provost Court 1815-1816                                                             85      3.15     3.92         0         24
White Terror - Arrests 1815-1816                                                                                 85     39.79     59.32        0        494
Départements hit by Phylloxera
Départements hit by Phylloxera 1875                                                                              89     0.18       0.39        0         1
Départements hit by Phylloxera 1890                                                                              89     0.29       0.46        0         1
 Religiosity before WWI
Number of Religious Communities Devoted to Educational Purposes 1856                                             85     36.15     167.28       0       1547
Number of Religious Communities Devoted to Charitable Purposes 1856                                              85     16.69     77.463       0        712
Number of Religious Communities Devoted to Only ReligiousPurposes 1856                                           85      7.73      36.06       0        333
Share of Representatives in the lower House of Parliament Who Voted against Separation of Church & State 1905    86     0.68        0.30       0         1




                                                                   89
              Table D.23: Descriptive Statistics for Variables in Robustness Analysis
                                                                             Obs.    Mean      Std.Dev.    Min.       Max
 Population of Departement
Population of Departement 1801                                                85    641577.8   2933688    110732    27300000
Population of Departement 1821                                                86    706318.6   3249226    121418    30500000
Population of Departement 1841                                                86    793475.5   3651846    132584    34200000
Population of Departement 1861                                                89    837300.4   3925182    125100    37400000
Population of Departement 1881                                                87    862890.3   4005441     74244    37700000
Population of Departement 1901                                                87    892279.3   4150369     92304    3.90E+07
Population of Departement 1921                                                89    876884.7   4138580     89275    3.92E+07
Population of Departement 1968                                                88    593623.9   791113.2    80736     6648664
Population of Departement 1992                                                88     649898    821404.6    76948     6285496
Population of Departement 1999                                                88    698841.7   878124.3    75644     6340619
Population of Departement 2010                                                88    747640.3    942826    79096.9    6860285
 Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1806                                   88     28030.7   70275.86     857      649412
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1821                                   88    28839.17   71452.48    2792      657172
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1841                                   85    38780.45   102935.3    4465      935261
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1861                                   87     58251.8   184675.9    5139      1696141
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1881                                   88    73552.09   245154.9    6749      2269023
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1901                                   88    98459.64   311575.6    7065      2714068
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1921                                   88    111380.4   353485.3    6109      2906472
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1946                                   88    122694.7    367106     6010      2725374
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1968                                   88    158219.7   441138.5    9331      3224442
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1982                                   88    154265.8   427001.5    9282      3370085
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 1999                                   88    155334.1   428480.4    9109      3427738
Population of Chef-Lieu of Departement 2006                                   88    154276.4   435911.3    8681      3479900
 Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15
Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15 1876                  86     0.013      0.005      0.004      0.029
Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15 1881                  86     0.013      0.006      0.004      0.054
Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15 1886                  85     0.013      0.004      0.004      0.028
Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15 1891                  84     0.011      0.004      0.003      0.021
Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15 1896                  86     0.014      0.006      0.003      0.029
Ratio of schools to male and female population age 5-15 1901                  86     0.016      0.006      0.004      0.033
 Infrastructure and Spending on Infrastructure
Roads in Departement’s Territory 1881 (in percent)                            86     12.53       3.46      5.00       21.20
Roads in Departement’s Territory 1900 (in percent)                            86      5.47       1.86      2.34       12.86
Roads in Departement’s Territory 1913 (in percent)                            86     12.70       3.53      1.81       20.65
Area Covered by Railroad withiin Departement’s Territory 1881 (in percent)    85      0.62       0.70      0.14        5.97
Area Covered by Railroad withiin Departement’s Territory 1901 (in percent)    85      0.84       0.53      0.25        4.55
Area Covered by Railroad withiin Departement’s Territory 1913 (in percent)    85      1.00       0.65      0.32        5.91
Total Spending on Road Maintenance 1881                                       86    3101386    1962050    335044    16200000
Total Spending on Road Maintenance 1900                                       86    1624075    1062873    218520     7595945
Total Spending on Road Maintenance 1912                                       86    2757364    1466609    353330     8948850
 Contracts Sealed by Notaries
Contrats Sealed by Notaries 1861                                              88    40001.82   18805.45    8644      139690
Contrats Sealed by Notaries 1901                                              85    31436.32   22222.62    6157      179727
Contrats Sealed by Notaries 1931                                              88    33577.77   35862.64    4662      306451
 Total Value of Loans from Savings Banks
Total Value of Loans from Savings Banks 1875                                  86     3132973    2964086   300374    18500000
Total Value of Loans from Savings Banks 1881                                  86     5864920    5311230   716117    37400000
Total Value of Loans from Savings Banks 1900                                  85    13200000   15800000   2360311   139000000




                                                             90
