                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DYNAMIC TRADE, ENDOGENOUS INSTITUTIONS AND THE COLONIZATION OF HONG KONG:
                   A STAGED DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK

                                          T. Terry Cheung
                                          Theodore Palivos
                                             Ping Wang
                                           Yin-Chi Wang
                                           Chong K. Yip

                                        Working Paper 23937
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23937


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2017




   We thank Ying Bai for sharing his data on opium trade. We are grateful for valuable comments
   and suggestions to Rick Bond, Mario Crucini, Gerhard Glomm, Boyan Jovanovic, Derek Laing,
   Douglass North, Pietro Peretto and Ray Riezman, as well as participants of the Summer Meetings
   of the Econometric Society and the Midwest Macro Meetings. Financial support from Academia
   Sinica, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and the National Science Council (NSC 98-2911-
   H-001-001), which enabled this international collaboration, is gratefully acknowledged. Jian
   Tang, Long Ho Wong and Jianpo Xue provided excellent research assistance. Needless to say, the
   usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
   necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
   peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
   official NBER publications.

   © 2017 by T. Terry Cheung, Theodore Palivos, Ping Wang, Yin-Chi Wang, and Chong K. Yip.
   All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
   explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dynamic Trade, Endogenous Institutions and the Colonization of Hong Kong: A Staged Development
Framework
T. Terry Cheung, Theodore Palivos, Ping Wang, Yin-Chi Wang, and Chong K. Yip
NBER Working Paper No. 23937
October 2017
JEL No. E02,E65,F54,O11

                                          ABSTRACT

To explore the interplays between trade and institutions, we construct a staged development
framework with multi-period discrete choices to study the colonization of Hong Kong, which
served to facilitate the trade of several agricultural and manufactured products, including opium,
between Britain and China. Based on the historical data and documents that we collected from
limited sources, we design our dynamic trade model to capture several key features of the
colonization process and use it to characterize the endogenous transition from the pre-Opium War
era, to the post-Opium War era and then to the post-opium trade era, which span the period
1773-1933. We show that while the low opium trading cost and the high warfare cost initially
postponed any military action, the high valuation of the total volume of bilateral trade, the rising
opium trading cost and the anticipated increase in the demand for opium eventually led the
British government to declare the Opium Wars, legalizing opium trade via the colonial Hong
Kong. We also show that, in response to a drastic drop in opium demand and a rising opium
trading cost, it became optimal for the British government to abandon opium trade soon after the
founding of the Republic of China.

T. Terry Cheung                                               Yin-Chi Wang
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis                            Chinese University of Hong Kong
St. Louis, MO 63130                                           Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
cheung.t@wustl.edu                                            ycwang@cuhk.edu.hk

Theodore Palivos                                              Chong K. Yip
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
Athens University of Economics and Business                   Chinese University of Hong Kong
Athens, Greece                                                Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
tpalivos@aueb.gr                                              chongkeeyip@cuhk.edu.hk

Ping Wang
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1208
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu
              “Attempting to understand economic, political, and social change ... requires a fun-
          damental recasting of the way we think. Can we develop a dynamic theory comparable
          in elegance to general equilibrium theory? The answer is probably not. But if we can
          achieve an understanding of the underlying process of change then we can develop some-
          what more limited hypotheses about change that can enormously improve the usefulness
          of social science theory in confronting human problems” (North 2006, p. vii).


1          Introduction

The discovery of the New World and the navigation route to Asia around the Cape of Good Hope
in the late …fteenth century were followed by the birth and rise of maritime powers and the cross-
Atlantic and Europe-Asia trade. The rising opportunities for international trade shaped both po-
litical and economic institutions, from political regime and sovereignty, to contracting, property
rights protection and other trading laws and regulations. Such newly established institutions then
fed back to in‡uence upon the activities and outcomes of trade.1 These interactions generated in
turn long-term consequences for economic development, leading to the observed “great divergence”
across countries. The primary purpose of this paper is to further advance our understanding of the
interplays between trade and institutions by providing a thorough investigation of the historical
case of colonial Hong Kong.
        In spite of its rich economic history, the miraculous development of Hong Kong that unfolded
over the past two or three centuries remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we highlight the role
played by Hong Kong, prior to World War II (WWII), as the pearl of the Britain-China trade. It was
this unique and distinctive role in facilitating international trade that helped pave Hong Kong’s path
of phenomenal development, making it one of the most successful newly industrialized economies in
the world.2 Although the case of Hong Kong is highly controversial regarding the colony selection
process, an integrated study over the entire two-century horizon is as yet lacking. Interestingly,
however, once we put together a theory to explain the dynamic process of the colonization of Hong
Kong, good documentation can be achieved and quality data can be collected and organized to
con…rm our testable hypotheses.
        To ful…ll the purpose of this study, we deviate from the commonly used political economy ap-
proach and instead propose a staged development framework with multi-period discrete choices to
endogenize institutions. The conventional wisdom in political economy does not suit for the com-
    1
        This is best summarized by Engerman and Sokolo¤ (2008), who write: “The key connection between appropriate
institutions and economic growth is that institutions reduce the costs of production and distribution, allowing private
agents more scope to bene…t from specialization, investment, and trade.”
   2
     Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005a) remark that, among Western European countries, Atlantic traders grew
much faster and in a more sustainable manner than nontraders. In this regard, the colonization of Hong Kong was
also signi…cant in contributing to British development.




                                                          1
plicated colonization process of Hong Kong, which was centered on the trading relation between the
main power in the West (Britain) and the main power in the East (China), without any noticeable
feedback to the choice of political regimes.3 Our approach is not only suitable for the study of this
intriguing colonization process, but also analytically tractable, allowing us to conduct stage-by-stage
comparative statics that can be veri…ed by historical data and documents.
       To study this trade-induced colonization, it is most relevant to understand the historical devel-
opment of Hong Kong between the years 1709, when Britain authorized the East India Company
(EIC) to organize its trade with China, and 1941, when Japan occupied Hong Kong. In our paper,
however, we start with the year 1773, when the o¢ cial recording of opium trade began, and end
with 1933, the last year in which consistent trade data are available. We divide the chronicle of this
historical time span in the following three distinct subperiods (referred to as Phase I, II and III).

(i) The pre-Opium War era (1773-1839). Throughout almost this entire subperiod EIC essentially
         monopolized the Britain-China bilateral trade. With the British government valuing both the
         volume of trade and the induced net silver ‡ow, opium trade became gradually so important
         that eventually turned the British trade de…cit into a surplus. Moreover, during this subperiod
         we observe an upward trend in both the quantity and the price of opium.

(ii) The post-Opium War era (1861-1917). After the Opium Wars and the colonization of Hong
         Kong (1840-1860), opium trade became legal.4 The share of opium in British exports to China
         rose sharply over the next three decades following the last war, subsequently decreased gradu-
         ally over the period 1892-1906 and …nally dropped to zero a few years after the establishment
         of the Republic of China, which formally took place in 1912.

(iii) The post-opium trade era (1918-1933). With all parts of the opium complex being regulated,
         the bilateral trade between Britain and China gradually diminished; nevertheless, Hong Kong
         continued to play its signi…cant role as the pearl of the Britain-Orient commerce.

       In his classic book, Rostow (1960, p.110) o¤ered a punchy description of colonialism: “Colonies
were founded ... not mainly as a purposeful goal of national policy in pursuit of power, but ...
because some economic group wanted to expand its purchases or sales ... [by means of] organizing
   3
       There are two other strands of literature that are much more remote from our study. One strand is the early
trade literature that investigates how trade opportunities a¤ect contracting and property rights institutions. By 1750,
however, both Britain and China, despite the fact that the latter was rather not an open economy, had already well-
established institutional structures that supported long-distance trade. Another strand focuses on modern trade in a
strategic setting, examining tari¤ wars and the formation of trading blocs. These issues, however, were not present
over the period that this study analyzes.
   4
     The colonization of Hong Kong and the legalization of opium trade were among the provisions of the Treaty of
Nanking (1842), the Treaty of Tiensin (1858) and the Convention of Peking (1860) (see below).


                                                          2
a suitable political framework to ensure, at little cost [emphasis added], the bene…ts of expanded
trade.” Quite the opposite, however, the Hong Kong colony was not founded at little cost: it could
have not been founded without a series of costly wars (including the two major Opium Wars in
1840 and 1856) and continual diplomat …ghts (including The Treaties of Nanking and Tientsin and
many other localized negotiations) for selling the then-called devil’s good –opium –to Qing China.
   Given the aforementioned distinctive historical features and the strong implications for later
economic development, there is no doubt that a thorough study of the dynamic process of Hong
Kong colonization is interesting. Yet, the big question is whether it is possible to develop a dynamic
theory that endogenizes the institution and takes into account economic, political and social changes
in this historic event. Despite North’s pessimism about such an endeavor (see North 2006 and
the quote before the Introduction), the political economy frameworks for endogenous institutions
constructed in Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2001, 2008) have convincingly shown the feasibility of
meeting this challenge (see also the survey by Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005b). Viewing
di¤erent institutions across countries as outcomes of collective choices of di¤erent interest groups
in societies, the political economy approach treats institutions as a result of political equilibria.
   Recent studies, however, illustrate that the political economy approach may not be the universal
framework applicable to all the cases concerning the development of economic institutions in history.
For instance, based on the actual experience of Venice in 800-1350, Puga and Tre‡er (2012) adopt
instead the occupational choice model of Banerjee and Newman (1993) to explain how long-distance
trade a¤ects institutional dynamism. To be fair, their work can be regarded as a transition of moving
away from the political economy approach because they still “add in coercive political economy
consideration”(p.15) into their model. Nevertheless, the important point is that, depending on the
subject of study, the appropriate analytical model may have to be able to capture the key elements
of the evolution of the historical events.
   Upon incorporating the historical background of colonial Hong Kong, we contribute to the liter-
ature by proposing a staged development framework with multi-period discrete choices to endogenize
institutions in a tractable manner. In this regard, we follow the work of Tsiang (1964) and Mat-
suyama (2002) on the analysis of the Rostovian stages of development. In this literature, a dynamic
model is adopted to understand the transition of the macroeconomy from one development stage into
another. In Tsiang (1964), the Solow growth model is extended with a general saving function to
mimic the growth experience from underdevelopment to takeo¤. In Matsuyama (2002), the process
toward the …nal Rostovian stage of development (known as “the age of high mass-consumption”)
generates the “‡ying geese” pattern that a number of markets taking o¤ sequentially.
   To be more speci…c, this paper constructs a dynamic model with the staged development of the
colonization of Hong Kong captured in the aforementioned three phases. Based on the economic
data collected from limited sources and many historical documents, we take the following steps to
capture the key features of the colonization process:

                                                   3
(i) In addition to a composite good, we explicitly model opium production and trade.

(ii) We regard the British government and the East India Company (EIC) as the two main orga-
          nizations in action and permit the institutions to change over the three phases. The major
          institutions considered include the barriers that Britain faced in trading opium, the British
          government’s subsidy rule to EIC, the declaration of wars, and the decision on banning opium
          trade after the founding of the Republic of China.5

(iii) We allow the British government to value both the volume of trade with China and the
          resultant net silver in‡ow. Moreover, we take into account both the resource cost involved in
          the war and the moral cost associated with trading opium.

(iv) Given the addictive nature of opium, we model its demand as being not too sensitive to its
          relative price. Also, given the observed comovement between the quantity and the relative
          price of opium, we allow for the presence of an opium demand shock.

(v) Finally, given the evolutionary nature of history, we solve a multi-period discrete choice problem
          and characterize the transition from Phase I (the pre-Opium War era), to Phase II (the post-
          Opium War era), and then to Phase III (the post-opium trade era).

For theoretical tractability, the declaration of wars and the decision on banning opium trade are both
modeled as discrete choices, through which the endogenous transition from one phase to another
can be fully characterized.
        Our main …ndings concerning the colonization of Hong Kong are three-fold. First, due to high
warfare and low opium trading costs initially, Phase I lasted for a long period of almost 70 years
(1773-1839). Second, due to high valuation of the total volume of trade, high opium trading costs
and the expectation of a continuously rising opium demand, the war was declared. This led to
the transition to Phase II, during which the Hong Kong colony was established and opium trade
became legal. Finally, due to a signi…cant drop in opium demand and a rising opium trading cost,
opium trade was abandoned, causing the transition to the post-opium trade era (Phase III). In the
remainder of the paper, we shall elaborate on these underlying factors that drove the two critical
transitions and account for them theoretically, using comparative-static analysis, as well as o¤er
empirical support to the various channels with historical data and references to existing documents.


2        Historical Background

We …rst provide a brief chronicle of the historical development of Hong Kong from 1773 to 1933
and then highlight three important observations that will guide the design of our model.
    5
        Following North (1994), we regard “organizations” as the players who are made up of groups of individuals with
common objective and “institutions” as the rules of the game.
                                                            4
2.1       A Chronicle of the Development of Hong Kong

While there has been a long history of exchange between Britain and China, the high volume and
more organized form of trade between these two giants started after the turn of the seventeenth
century. Established in 1600 and merged with a new “parallel” company in 1709, EIC served as
“a means of regulating international trade” (Gull 1943, p. 3).6 The EIC era was terminated in
1833. Soon after, in 1840, there was the outbreak of the …rst Opium War. After …erce military and
political …ghts that lasted for two decades, the post-treaty period began; from 1860 and onward,
opium trade was fully legalized until 1917, that is, several years into the Republic of China era,
which formally began on January 1, 1912.7

The Pre-Opium War Era: 1773-1839

       The British involvement, through EIC, in the trade of opium started in Canton in 1773 and is
estimated at 1000 chests per year (Gull 1943, p. 13).8 Throughout this era, the shipments of opium
rose. While the price of opium went up slightly from late 18th century to the eve of the Opium
War, the shipments of opium increased drastically. More speci…cally, between 1811 and 1835, the
annual average number of chests of opium exported to China rose more than …ve times indicating
that opium trade had become relatively more signi…cant over time (see Chart 1).9 For example,
based on the record of EIC in 1828, opium accounted for more than 55% of the total export value
to China. In addition, in ten-years’time, from 1828 to 1838, the opium shipments to China rose by
almost threefold, from around 10,000 to 30,000 chests.

The Opium Wars and the Treaties: 1840-1860

       The …rst Opium War formally began on June 9, 1840. Nevertheless, even before that day, it
was well recognized by British merchants that a settlement of their own was needed to establish
themselves “under the British ‡ag, besides safe and unrestricted liberty of trade at the principal
marts of the Empire” (Tuck 2000, vol. 9, p. 212). In fact, for the British, the Opium War was
beyond opium trade. It was for “the future mode of conducting the foreign trade in China” (Tuck
2000, vol. 9, p. 212).
       The …rst Opium War lasted for more than two years and led to the Treaty of Nanking, which
was signed on August 29, 1842. Among others, the treaty stipulated that (i) Hong Kong should
   6
       Both James Mill and John Stuart Mill worked for EIC and eventually both became head of the o¢ ce at East
India House in London.
   7
     Opium imports from India (a British colony at the time) came to an end by 1917 under the agreement of the
British and Chinese governments. Historians often relate this date to the year after the death of the President of the
Republic of China, Shikai Yuan, in 1916.
  8
    Details on all units of measurement are given in the Data Appendix.
  9
    Gull (1943) also documents large increase in opium import: “[b]etween 1811 and 1821 the annual average of chests
imported ... was under 5,000." Also, "between 1828 and 1835 the annual average import was over 18,700” (p. 15).


                                                          5
become a British colony; (ii) Cohong (the Chinese counterpart of EIC) was to be abolished; (iii)
…ve coastal cities, namely, Amoy, Canton, Foochow, Ningpo and Shanghai, were to open as Treaty
Ports; and, (iv) there should be a decrease from 65% to 5% in the rates of duty on major trade
items, such as, silk, cotton, and woollens (but not tea); opium was not mentioned (Tuck 2000, vol.
9, p. 214).
       The Treaty of Nanking changed the framework of foreign trade and gave Britain a most-favored-
nation status.10 Naturally, after the treaty, there was still a strong resentment against foreigners
in Canton. As a result, the terms of the treaty were not respected and the hostility between the
Chinese and the British started growing again. Eventually this led to the outbreak of the second
Opium War in October 1856, which ended with the Treaty of Tientsin in 1858.11 According to the
terms of this treaty: (i) Kowloon was ceded to Britain; (ii) ten new Treaty Ports opened; and most
importantly, (iii) opium trade was legalized (Nield 2010, pp. 130-132).
       The two decades of the Opium Wars de…ned a transitional stage, which started with the prohi-
bition of opium trade and ended with its full legalization. In the interest of this paper, we will not
discuss this era in our model; instead, we will regard it simply as a transition point.

The Post-Opium War Era: 1861-1917

       With the Treaty of Tientsin (1858) and the Convention of Peking (1860), opium trade was
legalized; consequently, opium imported to China reached a high level both in absolute quantity
and continued to be high as a share of total imports (more than 50%) in the two decades following
the Opium Wars (see Chart 2). Starting in the mid-1880s, it gradually began to drop and eventually
was reduced to zero a few years after the establishment of the Republic of China (see Chart 1).12
Nevertheless, the price of opium was quite stable for most of the period, both in absolute and in
relative terms.
       The overall Britain-China trade diminished by the end of the nineteenth century due to the fact
that the trade of opium declined (see Chart 2). One of the main reasons for this decline is that the
legalization of opium trade led to a rapid increase in the domestic production of opium in China.
This Chinese production started in the provinces of Yunnan, Guizhou, and Sichuan, which together
contributed over 60% of the total domestic production of opium. Between 1866 and 1894, the total
area of plantation of opium, as a percentage of the total agricultural area, rose by more than seven
times, from 0.2% to 1.5%. The table below presents the consumption and production of opium
  10
       The previous system, known as the Canton System because it required that all foreign trade be conducted through
the port of Canton, had been in force since 1760.
  11
     The second Opium War was a joint e¤ort of Britain and France; the French joined the British troops with the
excuse that one of their missionaries was killed in Canton. Also, the Treaty of Tientsin was rati…ed by Emperor
Hsien-Feng in the Convention of Peking in 1860.
  12
     Because of di¤erent measurement units, the pre- and post-Opium War data series are not directly comparable.
That is why we present each subperiod separately.


                                                           6
between 1879 and 1906 (the data are from Zhong 2010; the units of measurement are piculs – see
Data Appendix for the de…nition).

                                   Item                        1879       1906
                                   domestic production       334,300    587,300
                                   import                     82,927      54,117
                                   consumption               417,227    641,417
                                   self-support rate          80.12%     91.56%
                                   import rate                19.88%      8.44%

It indicates that, over the years, imported opium was replaced by domestic production (see also the
discussion in Zhong 2010, p. 148). Further evidence can be established using the customs and dues
(known as likin) collected from opium. Speci…cally, while the likin collected from imported opium
fell from more than 6.5 to less than 3.5 million taels over the period of 1888-1909, the likin from
domestic opium rose from below 1 to over 1.5 million taels, thus indicating a signi…cant shift from
imported to domestically produced opium.13
       The decline of imported opium can be attributed to two reasons: (i) the international opposition
to opium trade based on moral judgement and value (see “The Moral Cost of Opium Trade,” in
Subsection 2.2) and (ii) the Britain’s reduced incentives for promoting opium exports to China,
since exporting opium was no longer necessary for ensuring British tea imports from China. Not
only did British tea imports from China drop from 96% to 10% between 1866 and 1903, as tea
was then produced in India and Ceylon, but also the openings of the Treaty Ports after the Opium
Wars led to the increase in the consumption of western products (such as clocks, watches, matches,
lamps, etc.) by the Chinese.
       As a colony of the United Kingdom, Hong Kong acted as an important entrepot (Gull 1943,
pp. 49-52). From 1854 to 1889, almost half of the British exports to China passed through Hong
Kong. This proportion was gradually reduced but still amounted to about 1/3 during the period
1890-1913 (Gull 1943, p. 52). In addition, between 1865 and 1886, the imports of opium from Hong
Kong exceeded the total combined imports of opium from all other Treaty Ports. From 1880 to
1913, the proportion of Hong Kong-China trade remained at 29%, even though the Britain-China
trade, as a proportion of China’s total trade, decreased from 76% to 48%. As a result, the share of
Britain-China trade contributed by Hong Kong rose sharply from 38% in 1880 to over 60% in 1913
(Gull 1943, p. 56). Overall, Hong Kong served as the main center in the trade of opium between
Britain and China. Nevertheless, by 1917, British opium exports from India to China had ceased,
albeit the overall Chinese consumption of opium remained at a high level even in the twentieth
  13
       It should also be noted that the likin imposed on imported opium was twice the amount imposed on the domes-
tically produced one.


                                                         7
century.

The Post-Opium Trade Era: 1918-1933

       Although the use (and production) of opium resurfaced in China in this period, the trade of
opium between Britain and China basically disappeared from the international arena. In the 1920-30
period, UK’s exports of wool to China dropped signi…cantly and were replaced by rice. Also, in 1929,
China raised tari¤s from the level of 5% that was established in the Treaty of Nanking to a range of
7.5%-22.5% (Gull 1943, p. 115). Throughout this era, Britain’s relative role in China’s international
trade declined and the composition of trade between them underwent signi…cant structural changes.


2.2       Three Important Observations

Based on historical documents, we would like to highlight three important observations that will
be incorporated in our theoretical framework in an attempt to understand the colonization of Hong
Kong as a crucial stage in the diachronic development of the Britain-China trade.

The British Objective

       As documented in the preface and various chapters of Gull (1943), China was regarded by the
British government as the main target for its trade in Asia. The ultimate goal of Britain was to
facilitate such trade in a laissez faire manner. Moreover, it was emphasized that Britain and China
derived mutual bene…ts from trade; thus, it seems that there was value put to both exports and
imports (see, for example, Tuck 2000, vol. 2, Appendix G). Put di¤erently, the motive of the British
colonization was to do business: “there is little doubt that the spirit of commercial enterprise was
the leading motive of the British colonial policy, and it was the British pursuit of trade in the East,
which brought China and Britain into confrontation” (Bard 2000, p. 7).
       To illustrate the long-run trend and characteristics of the Britain-China trade volume, we must
construct the real trade series based on limited data from various sources. For the period before
the nineteenth century, there are no import and export price level data available. However, as we
will model behavior of EIC and the British government, price index in England, and later UK, will
be used. To obtain real trade statistics, we therefore de‡ate the data of total British exports and
imports to and from China using the computed prices. These are exhibited in Chart 3. We can see
that real imports and exports increased sharply, especially in 1780s.14 Although the magnitude of
trade was small when compared to the post Opium War, such increase in trade volume before the
19th century motivated Britain to pay more attention to its commercial relations with China. For
the post-Opium War period, we are able to cover most of our sample period by Sauerbeck-Statist’s
overall price index (Mitchell 1988). Chart 4 presents the results we obtained using the overall price
  14
       Recall that opium trade started being o¢ cially recorded in 1773. This highlights the prominent role played by
opium in the development of the Britain-China trade around this year.


                                                           8
index.15 Again, this chart points to the important fact that trade between Britain and China rose
over time during the post-Opium War period.
       With regard to the composition of the Britain-China trade in the pre-Opium War period and
especially before 1800, tea and silk were the two major British import items from China; they
accounted for more than 70% of the total British imports from China. On the export side, there
were three major items, wool, cotton and opium; these accounted for more than 80% of the total
British exports to China with Opium consistently accounts for around 50% of the total exports (see
Chart 2). In the …rst two decades of the post-Opium War period, tea and silk continued to be the
two major British import items, accounting together for about 80% of total imports. However, this
pattern changed after the turn of the twentieth century. For example, in the 1920s these two items
accounted for around a quarter of the total British imports. This was mainly due to the successful
policy of substituting imports from China with tea produced in India and Ceylon. Similarly, opium
was still the major export item of Britain, accounting for over 50% of total exports, in the …rst two
decades of the post-Opium War period; nevertheless, its trade was essentially eliminated after 1917.
       Throughout the eighteenth century, Britain su¤ered a large and rising trade de…cit in its trade
with China. This de…cit was covered with silver purchased from continental Europe, as Britain had
been on the gold standard since the mid-eighteenth century. Chart 5 provides more details about
the British silver out‡ows and its net export during the pre-Opium War period. In order to stop
this trade imbalance, the EIC began to smuggle opium into China in the middle of the eighteenth
century. In fact, the traded volume of opium rose so drastically in the next few decades (see Chart 1)
that the British trade de…cit and the silver out‡ows were initially mitigated and eventually reversed.
       To facilitate the Britain-China trade, it was recommended “to obtain a grant of a small tract
of ground or detached Island, but in a more convenient situation than Canton, where our present
Warehouse are at a great distance from our Ships”(Tuck 2000, vol. 2, p. 237). In 1834, Lord Napier
recommended Hong Kong as the base for China trade: “if the lion’s paw is to be put down on any
part of the south side of China, let it be Hongkong”(Gull 1943, p. 20). In 1839, there were further
discussions about the choice of a base for the Britain-China trade. According to J. Matheson, the
cofounder of the conglomerate Jardine, Matheson & Co., “the advantage of Hongkong would be
that the more the Chinese obstructed the trade of Canton, the more they would drive trade to
the new English settlement. Moreover, Hongkong was admittedly one of the …nest harbours in the
world” (Tuck 2000, vol. 9, p. 213). Indeed, as mentioned in the previous section, these views
were vindicated, since in the post-Opium War era Hong Kong became the most important entrepot
of trade between Britain and China. In short, the British colonization of Hong Kong was mainly
  15
       Alternatively, we computed the aggregate export and import price indices as Cobb-Douglas aggregators, using
the expenditure shares as weights. Then, using these price levels, we de‡ated the trade statistics to obtain the
corresponding real measures. The results were similar to those in Chart 4.



                                                         9
driven by its geographical advantage in the promotion of trade.16

The Barrier to Opium Trade

       The attitude of the Chinese o¢ cials towards opium was consistent over time: they regarded it as
evil and unjusti…ed. The …rst Imperial edict, which prohibited the sale and the opening of opium-
smoking houses, was issued in 1729 (Rowntree 1905, p.11-12). Despite that, there was growing
consumption of opium, which raised the awareness and concerns, regarding its devastating e¤ects,
of the Chinese high-ranking administrators even more. In 1799, another Imperial edict prohibited
the importation of the drug (Rowntree 1905, p.12-13).17 The situation was out of control by the
time of Emperor Daoguang (1821-1850). For this reason, there was a proposal for legalizing opium
trade and turning it into public pro…t. However, such a proposal was rejected by the Emperor
who replied: “It is true, I cannot prevent the introduction of the ‡owing poison; gain-seeking and
corrupt men will for pro…t and sensuality, defeat my wishes; but nothing will induce me to derive
a revenue from the vice and misery of my people” (Bard 1993, p. 30).
       In September of 1836, the Imperial Government of China together with the Viceroy of Canton
started a campaign for the eradication of opium. According to William Jardine, an opium merchant
and a cofounder of Jardine, Matheson & Co., the Canton drug market was entirely closed down by
June 1837. In March 1839, Tse-hsu Lin, the recently appointed Chinese Commissioner in Canton,
ordered the immediate surrender of all opium brought to China. The loss of opium, because of this
new Chinese anti-opium campaign, was 20,283 chests, which was worth £ 2.4 million at that time
(Tuck 2000, vol. 9, pp. 202-3). In response, Chief Superintendent Charles Elliot proposed to the
British government to compensate the merchants for the full value of their opium loss. By then the
British government was directly drawn in (Tuck 2000, vol. 9, pp. 203-4). In May 1839, the Chinese
o¢ cials issued an edict that commanded all the foreigners to leave China unless they agreed to
sign an opium bond “assuming full responsibility before Chinese law for all ships consigned to their
charge”(Tuck 2000, vol. 9, p. 203). In June 1839, “Matheson and the other British merchants were
expelled from Canton for refusing to obey the orders of the Chinese Government” (Tuck 2000, vol.
9, p. 206). After that, the diplomatic relations between Britain and China became extremely tense.
As Tuck writes, “The greater the recourse to illicit trading from the receiving-ships at Lintin and
along the coast, the greater the danger of the Chinese Government stopping the trade ... After Lord
Napier’s unsuccessful attempt to force a change, Jardine observed that the Chinese seemed more
determined than ever to maintain the system ... It was now realised even in London that no change
  16
       In a broader aspect, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2000) emphasize the interplay between geography and
institutional development.
  17
     An even stricter edict followed in 1813. Also, in 1809 the Governor of Canton “ordered all incoming ships to be
searched and for the captain of each ship to …le bonds declaring that there was no opium in the cargo. But the British
ignored the order” (Nield 2010, p. 67).



                                                         10
was possible without a show of force, which might lead to war” (Tuck 2000, vol. 9, pp. 196-7).
       All the aforementioned documents highlight the fact that a barrier to opium trade was rising
over time prior to the Opium Wars. After the Opium Wars, the anti-opium attitude of the Chinese
government did not change. For example, an Imperial edict, which was issued in 1906, forbade the
sale of the drug (Hanes and Sanello 2002, p. 295). Moreover, the campaign that followed planned
to eliminate opium consumption in China within ten years.

The Moral Cost of Opium Trade

       Although exporting opium to China helped Britain balance its trade de…cit from tea imports
quickly, this was done with reluctance, disgrace and sinfulness, which will be referred to as the
“moral cost” of opium trade. In fact, the pressure on the British government to stop the tra¢ c of
opium on moral grounds came from two di¤erent sources: British o¢ cials and citizens, and other
Westerners.18
       Several British o¢ cials were aware of the harmful e¤ects of opium smoking. In fact, the British
government was reluctant to initiate a war for securing opium trade: “if it should be made a positive
requisition ... that none of that drug (opium) should be sent by us to China, you must accede to
it rather than risk any essential bene…t by contending for a liberty in this respect, in which case
the sale of our Opium in Bengal must be left to take its chance in an open market” (Tuck 2000,
vol. 2, Appendix G, Instructions to Lord Macartney, Sept. 8, 1792 by Henry Dundas, p. 239).
Also, Charles Elliot, the Chief Superintendent at Canton from 1836 to 1841, detested opium trade:
“Elliot saw it as a disgrace and a sin and the blackest stain on the British character. It has even
been suggested that Elliot, under instructions to protect the opium traders - a task he resented
- deliberately disobeyed his orders and demanded less from the Chinese than the Government at
home had ordered him to do” (Bard 2000, p. 12).
       In 1840, a bill of censure that condemned the government’s military action to the opium crisis
in China, which was introduced by Sir Robert Peel, the leader of the Tory opposition, was defeated
in the House of Commons by a close vote of 271 to 262.19 Later in 1857, when another bill of
censure was introduced to condemn the behavior of government o¢ cials in the second Opium War,
  18
       Although we emphasize the “moral” cost of opium trade in the paper, we regard it as a general indirect way of
modelling the dissatisfaction brought by opium trade to the British government, whose public image was damaged
because of it. Moreover, as Yan (2012) argues, in addition to the moral cost, the structural change in Britain’s
domestic production caused by the Industrial Revolution was another important factor leading to the termination of
opium trade, as that became an obstacle for British industrial capitalists to expand their exports to the Republic of
China.
 19
    During the debate on Peel’s motion, the thirty-year-old Tory MP, William Gladstone, the future Prime Minister,
delivered a powerful speech against the trade of opium. Gladstone’s zealousness came from personal acquaintance
with the drug’s harmul e¤ects; his sister had been prescribed laudanum to help her cope with a painful illness and
had become addicted to it (see Hanes and Sanello, 2002).


                                                          11
a coalition of Radical and Tories (Conservatives) won the vote with 263-247, leading to the fall of
Palmerston’s government (see Hanes and Sanello, 2002).
   Also, after the British victory in the …rst Opium War and the Treaty of Nanking, Lord Shaftes-
bury, Anthony Ashley Cooper (1801-1885), declared, “I cannot rejoice in our successes; we had
triumphed in one of the most lawless, unnecessary and unfair struggles in the records of history”
(Bard 2000, p. 13). Another example of a British o¢ cial who was fully aware of the devastating
e¤ects of opium is Lord Elgin, the British negotiator in the Treaty of Tientsin (1858). He had
“supreme power, clear instructions, and strong backing, yet could not bring himself to tell the
Chinese that the time had come when they must legalise this lucrative, but demoralising tra¢ c”
(Rowntree 1905, p. 87). Finally, “In April 1906, a private member’s motion put by Liberal MP
Theodore Taylor again condemned the opium trade as ‘morally indefensible’and called on the new
government to take measures to bring it to a speedy end” (Blue 2000, pp. 40-41).
   There was an even stronger anti-opium sentiment in the British public opinion. The best sum-
mary is perhaps found in Blue (2000, pp. 37-42), who writes “If before 1895 the international
balance of power allowed British authorities at home and in Asia to turn a deaf ear to protests
in China, successive governments in London were steadily subjected to denunciation by the vocal
anti-opium movements in Britain and the United States” (p. 37). Here we mention just a few
examples of this opposition from other sources. An editorial in The Times on December 3, 1842,
upon receiving the news of the Treaty of Nanking wrote that “the moment had come for Britain to
extricate herself from her involvement with opium ... some moral compensation was owed to China
for pillaging her towns and slaughtering her citizens in a quarrel which could never had arisen if
we had not been guilty of an international crime” (Bard 2000, p. 12-13). Also, in England, after
the Pharmacy Act of 1868, opium, along with other drugs, could be sold only by “pharmaceutical
chemists” and not without being labeled “poison.” Finally, a few years later, in November 1874,
an organization, called “The Anglo-Oriental Society for the Suppression of the Opium Trade,” was
founded in London, having as its main purpose to make the British parliament to outlaw the deeply
immoral opium trade with China. For almost forty years (1874-1916), this organization waged an
unrelenting and …nally successful campaign against opium tra¢ c in China (see Brown 1973).
   Opium trade was viewed as immoral by many other Westerners besides the British. Most
foreign companies trading with China during the same period did not engage in opium trade. The
American …rms Olyphant & Co. and Nathan Dunn & Co. were two leading examples. This was
due to the fact that they were Quaker disciples and their strict moral principles prevented them
to participate in opium trade. In fact, the two most important anti-opium trade conferences in
the early twentieth century, the 1909 International Opium Commission held in Shanghai and the
1912 International Opium Convention signed at the Hague, were outcomes of the American zeal
against manufacturing and trading drugs. In sum, there was a rising anti-opium movement, based


                                                12
on moral grounds, against opium trade, particularly after the turn of the twentieth century and
the establishment of the Republic of China. The pressure on the British government from this
world-wide movement resulted in what we call “the moral cost of opium trade.”


3         The Basic Model

In this section, we build a dynamic model with staged development to describe the three phases of
the colonization of Hong Kong. The model incorporates the three important observations delineated
in the previous section.
         As mentioned in the previous section, during the second half of the eighteenth and the …rst half
of the nineteenth century (before the Opium War), the three most important export items from
Britain to China were opium, cotton and wool. The major import goods from China to Britain,
on the other hand, were tea and silk. Over this period, opium rose to become the single most
important trade item.20 It is therefore essential to separate opium from all other goods in the
model-economy constructed below. It should also be noted that the trade between Britain and
China was essentially monopolized by EIC until 1833 when the “free trade” regime emerged. To
ease the analysis, we shall group EIC and private traders together as a producer-trader entity.
Moreover, we shall consider a central-planner problem: given production and trading technologies
as well as the asset accumulation equation faced by the representative producer-trader, the British
government, who cares about the total volume of trade and the net silver in‡ow resulting from its
bilateral trade relations with China, seeks to optimize.21
         Let Y o denote the output of opium and Y c the output of a composite consumption good com-
prising all other goods in the economy; this composite good is taken to be the numeraire and the
relative price of opium is denoted by p. Further, denote the exports from Britain (including British
India) to China and the imports from China to Britain as Xt and Mt , respectively. The total volume
of trade (Tt ) is then:
                                                    Tt = Xt + Mt :                                    (1)

During the pre-Opium War period, Britain incurred regularly a sizable de…cit in its trade with China,
which was covered with silver. In fact, the British government often injected bullion to subsidize
severe silver out‡ows su¤ered by EIC.22 This trade subsidy to the representative producer-trader is
denoted by St and takes the form of injection of bullion. The British government’s net silver in‡ow
from trading with China (Rt ) equals its trade surplus net of its subsidy to the EIC:

                                               Rt = Xt    Mt    Z T St ;                              (2)
    20
       See Section 2.2 above for the related evidence.
    21
       See Section 2.2 under “The British Objective.”
    22
       See Chart 5 for related evidence.


                                                         13
where Z T is an indicator of trade de…cit that takes on the value one if a de…cit occurs and zero
otherwise; accordingly, a subsidy is provided only when a trade de…cit occurs. We specify the trade
subsidy in terms of the following two possible rules:
                      8
                      < St             under a …xed subsidy rule (FSR)
                 St =                                                                                                  (3)
                      : s (M      Xt ) under a proportional subsidy rule (PSR).
                              t

In the main text, we restrict our attention only to the FSR and relegate the analysis under the PSR
to the Appendix, where we show that our main …ndings remain qualitatively unchanged.
                                                                                                             2
       The production cost of each output is given by a standard quadratic function: qi Yti                      =2, where
i = c; o. In addition, fund (F ) and labor (L) are required for trading and marketing each product.
We denote the fund requirements per unit of opium and per unit of the composite good by                                  o

and      c;   respectively, where   o   >   c;   that is, in line with historical documentation, we assume that
opium trade requires relatively more fund for networking and marketing due to the presence of legal
barriers.23 On the other hand, purely for convenience, we assume that the labor unit requirements
for the two goods are the same and we denote them by . Thus, Fti =                     i Y i and Li = Y i ; i = c; o:
                                                                                          t        t    t
Total fund and labor demands are then given by Ft = Ftc + Fto and                           c    o
                                                                                   Lt = Lt + Lt , respectively.
       Let At denote the total assets accumulated by the representative producer-trader and rt and
wt denote, respectively, the real interest rate and the real wage rate. Then, the evolution of At is
governed by,
                                                                                 qc           qo
                 At+1 = (1 + rt ) At + (Xt         M t ) + Z T St   wt Lt   Ft      (Ytc )2      (Yto )2 ;             (4)
                                                                                 2            2
that is, the sources of asset accumulation include gross interest, trade surplus and government trade
subsidy, net of production, trading, networking and marketing costs.
       Let Z o be an indicator of opium production that takes on the value one if opium is produced
and zero otherwise. Since opium is a “bad” to the Chinese civilians, its import is o¢ cially banned
by the Chinese government (even though the ban may not be fully e¤ective). Thus, there must be
legal barriers associated with opium trade and the outbreak of an opium war can e¤ectively lower
such barriers. We capture this unit cost of barriers in opium trade using the term (1                   Z w ) , where
Z w takes on the value one if a war has occurred in the past and zero otherwise; moreover,
                   8
                   <     before the Opium Wars when there existed trade barriers
                =
                   : 0 after the Opium Wars when there existed free trade.

That is, had a war never been initiated (Z w = 0), the cost barrier per unit of opium would be                       > 0;
after a war has occurred (Z w = 1), this unit-cost barrier takes the value of zero. Since we will divide
  23
       In the 1830s, opium was the largest British export item to China (see Section 2.2 for supporting evidence). As
Nield (2000) wrote, “Opium had by now overtaken cotton as the most valuable import to China, and was therefore
well worth the considerable investment being made in its shipment and distribution” (p.70; italics added).


                                                             14
the time interval between the end of the Opium Wars and the end of our analysis into two periods
(the post-Opium War period and the post-opium trade period), it is necessary to employ both the
indicator function Z w and the measure of the size of such legal barriers                    (to be discussed in the
next section). Britain’s exports to China then can be written as

                               Xt = Ytc + Z o pt Yto [1   (1    Z w ) ] = Ytc + (pt )Yto ;                        (5)

where       (pt )   [1    (1   Z w ) ] Z o pt represents the e¤ective relative price of opium.
       Based on the historical documents (see Section 2.2 under “The British Objective”), the period-
by-period objective of the British government is speci…ed as: (1                 ) [U (Rt ) + H (Tt )], where both
U and H are concave functions with positive but diminishing marginal utilities,                  > 0 and    2 (0; 1).
The interpretation of the ‡ow utility is as follows. First, the British government gets utility directly
from having net silver in‡ows, as captured by the term U (Rt ). Second, as emphasized in internal
correspondence and documents (see "The British Objective" above), other things equal, the British
government prefers a larger trade volume and this is indicated by H (Tt ). The parameter                   measures
the weight that the government puts on the volume of trade relative to that of silver in‡ows. Third,
since opium is an addictive with detrimental socioeconomic consequences, its production and trade
are considered immoral (see Section 2.2 under “The Moral Cost of Opium Trade”). We use                             to
measure the unit moral cost of selling opium (if it is produced), at which rate the overall ‡ow utility
is discounted. It is obvious that, with greater self-awareness upon establishing national identity
and dignity in China, the unit moral cost associated with exporting opium to China rises.24 For
simplicity, we normalize the unit moral cost of trading opium to zero for the period before the
establishment of the Republic of China (when all opium imports from British India ceased) and
denote with         the di¤erential unit moral cost during the Republic of China period. We thus have
the following speci…cation:
                                      8
                                      <     during the Republic of China regime
                                  =
                                      : 0 before the Republic of China regime.

       We can now write the Bellman equation associated with the value function of the British gov-
ernment as:
                                                                                1
                         V (At ) = max f(1      Z o ) [U (Rt ) + H (Tt )]g +      V (At+1 ) ;                     (6)
                                                                               1+
subject to (4), where          is the time discount rate of the British government. Substituting (2), (1),
(5) and the associated production/trading costs of opium into (4) and (6), we can then write the
  24
       Under pressure from the international community “in 1913 Britain signed the Hague anti-opium treaty, committing
itself to the eventual elimination of the worldwide opium trade. The Hague treaties tied Great Britain to a new vision
of cooperative internationalism” (Baumler 2007, p. 82).




                                                           15
central planner’s optimization problem as:
                                                                                                                V (At+1 )
       V (At ) =maxf(1-Z o ) U Ytc + (pt )Yto -Mt -Z T St + H (Ytc + (pt )Yto +Mt ) g+                                    ;
                                                                                                                  1+

                                                                                                   q c (Ytc )2 +q o (Yto )2
        s.t. At+1 = (1+rt ) At +Z T St -Mt + (1-    c
                                                        - wt ) Ytc + [ (pt )-   o
                                                                                    - wt ] Yto -                            ;
                                                                                                               2
and Mt           0; St   0; Ytc    0; Yto     0; where the optimization is performed with respect to
Mt ; St ; Ytc ; Yto :
     We note that viewing Britain’s behavior as the outcome of the central planner’s optimization
problem speci…ed above is realistic given the documented cooperative relation between the British
government, on the one hand, and EIC/private traders, on the other (see Section 2 above). For
brevity, we present all …rst-order and the Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions in the Appendix.
     To close the model, we let Do (p; ) be the Chinese demand for British opium, where                                         is an
autonomous component that stands for an increase in the opium demand function. The introduction
of    facilitates the capture of the observed positive comovement between opium price and quantity
(see Section 2.1, under “The Pre-Opium War Era: 1773-1839”). Let also DM (I) be the British
demand for import goods from China, where I is the exogenously given income of the British. We
follow common practice and assume that @Do (p)=@p < 0 and @DM (I)=@ I > 0, that is, the demand
for opium slopes downward (with price) and the British demand for importables rises with British
income. Equilibrium in the market of each of the two goods requires equating the demand with the
corresponding supply:
                                                   Do (pt ) = Yto ;                                                               (7)

                                                   DM (It ) = Mt :                                                                (8)


4      Equilibrium Analysis

We focus on the addictive nature of opium and assume:

Assumption 1: "op < 1.

That is, the demand for opium is not very sensitive to changes in its relative price.
     Following the historical background delineated in Section 2.1, we shall divide the whole period
of pre-WWII Britain-China trade into three phases (see Figure 1 for the time line):

(i) Phase I (the pre-Opium War era): Z T = 1; Z w = 0; Z o = 1;                        = 0;       =     > 0:

(ii) Phase II (the post-Opium War era): Z T = 0; Z w = 1; Z o = 1;                        = 0;        = 0:

(iii) Phase III (the post-opium trade era): Z T = 0; Z w = 1; Z o = 0;                        =       > 0;     = 0:



                                                            16
Phase I captures the pre-Opium War era of 1773-1839. Speci…cally, during this phase, opium trade
was undertaken (Z o = 1) either with local resistance or in an illegal environment, thereby implying
higher trading barriers ( =          > 0). In this phase, Britain had a de…cit in its trade with China
(Z T   = 1), which required injections of silver bullion. Phase II captures the post-Opium War era of
1861-1917. In Phase II, the British trade balance with China was reversed (Z T = 0). Moreover,
the Opium Wars (Z w = 1) forced the legal trade of opium (Z o = 1 with                     = 0). Finally, Phase
III captures the post-opium trade era of 1918-1933. In Phase III, the British trade surplus with
China continued (Z T = 0). At the same time, during the Republic of China regime, a period when
trading addictive goods incurred a higher moral cost ( =                     > 0), opium trade ceased (Z o = 0).
The assignment of values to Z T is suggested by Charts 3 and 4, and to Z o by Charts 1 and 2.
   Next, we provide a characterization of the stationary equilibrium for each of the three phases.


4.1     Phase I: The Pre-Opium War Era

Substituting the parameter values that describe this phase (Z T = 1; Z w = 0; Z o = 1;                      = 0;
  =     > 0) into the stationary version of the …rst-order and market-equilibrium conditions under
FSR, we can obtain two critical relations concerning the outputs of the composite good and opium
(recall that   (p)   [1   (1     Z w ) ] Z o p):
                                             c
                                                 + w + q c Y c = 4;                                          (9)
                                        o
                                            + w + q o Do (p) = 4 (p) ;                                      (10)

The …rst expression pins down the output of the composite good right away; notice that it does not
depend on the opium price p. The second equation together with the opium market-equilibrium
condition (7) yields a …xed-point mapping in the (relative) price of opium, p:
                                                       1        o
                                p=     (p)                  [       + w + q o Do (p)] ;                     (11)
                                                 4 1
where      (0) > 0 and d =dp < 0: We thus have:

Lemma 1: (Equilibrium Price in Phase I) Under Assumption 1, there exists a unique relative price
of opium p that solves         (p ) = 0 in stationary equilibrium.

Proof: All proofs are relegated to the Appendix.

   Utilizing (11), we can obtain the comparative static e¤ects on the relative price of opium p :

Lemma 2: (Characterization of the Equilibrium Price in Phase I) Under Assumption 1, the relative
price of opium in stationary equilibrium is increasing in the e¤ ective barrier                ; the wage cost of
opium trade (w) and the production cost of opium (q o ).

Intuitively, the relative price of opium goes up to re‡ect the increased costs resulting from the
tightening of the banning restriction              or from the higher values of w and q o : Focusing on the

                                                           17
e¤ect of barriers, an increase in       shifts up the downward-sloping …xed-point mapping               (p), thereby
leading to a higher …xed point of the relative price of opium.
       To complete the analysis in this phase, we solve for the stationary equilibrium values of trade
subsidy and of the producer-trader’s assets using:

                           1                                             qc             qo o 2
                     A=      DM (I)      S + 3Y c + 3 (p) Do (p)            (Y c )2       D (p) ;                 (12)
                           r                                             2              2
                    U 0 Y c + (p)Do (p)       DM (I)      S = H 0 [Y c + (p)Do (p) + M ] =2;                      (13)

where the notation “ 0 ”denotes total derivative. Note that equation (13) yields: S(p) = S. Next, we
de…ne       U      RU 00 =U 0 as the elasticity of marginal utility of net silver in‡ow and         H        T H 00 =H 0
as the elasticity of marginal utility of total trade. We then impose:
                       R
Assumption 2:          T
                           H
                           U
                               > 1.

Under Assumption 2, the curvature of the H function is su¢ ciently high compared with that of U .
We can then obtain:

Lemma 3: (Characterization of Equilibrium Trade Subsidy and Producer-Trader’s Assets in Phase
I) Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the trade subsidy in stationary equilibrium is negatively related to the
relative price of opium, whereas the producer-trader’s assets in stationary equilibrium are positively
related to the opium price.

The intuition is straightforward. If the demand for opium is price inelastic (Assumption 1) and
the curvature condition of the ‡ow utility is met (Assumption 2), then an increase in p will raise
the British net silver in‡ow. Hence, the subsidy for o¤setting the trade de…cit can be reduced.25
The e¤ects of a change in opium price on producer-trader’s assets involve both a cost e¤ect and
a silver in‡ow e¤ect, where the latter depends on the price elasticity of the opium demand. First,
when the price of opium goes up, the quantity demanded is reduced and hence more assets can be
accumulated due to cost saving. Moreover, if opium demand is inelastic (Assumption 1), then the
net silver in‡ow from exporting opium increases so that asset accumulation is even higher.


4.2       Phase II: The Post-Opium War Era

Given the terms that describe this phase (Z T = 0; Z w = 1; Z o = 1;                  = 0;   = 0, implying    (p) = p
and S = 0), we can manipulate the …rst-order and market-equilibrium conditions in stationary
  25
       The prediction of Lemma 3 seems to be consistent with the existing empirical evidence. For instance, in the
pre-Opium War era (1773-1833), the correlation coe¢ cient between the average opium price and the British silver
out‡ows (net exports to China) is -0.783 (0.777). It may be recalled that the trade subsidy is supposed to take the
form of bullion injection (silver ‡ows) and is inversely related to net exports.




                                                           18
equilibrium to obtain:
                                   o   + w + qoY o                                  U 0 + H0
                                                        1=          (p; Y c ; )               ;                        (14)
                                         p                                           U 0 + H0
                                                            o + w + qoY o
                                                   p=       c + w + qcY c
                                                                          :                                            (15)

Using (14), we can write Y c as a function of p and further apply (15) to derive a …xed-point mapping
in p:

                                            Y c = Y c (p)                                                              (16)
                                                    o + w + q o D o (p)
                                             p =    c + w + q c Y c (p)
                                                                                     (p)                               (17)

Concerning now the composite good output schedule given by (16), Figure 2 gives the graphical
representation of Y c (p) in relation to the opium price. Under the realistic assumption of opium
demand being inelastic (Assumption 1), Y c is decreasing in p so that the supply curve of Y c is
downward sloping in the relative price of opium. Furthermore, producer-trader’s assets in stationary
equilibrium are given by:
               1                                                                         qc           qo o
        A=         DM (I) + (1          c
                                              w) Y c + (p       o
                                                                        w) Do (p)           (Y c )2     [D (p)]2 :     (18)
               r                                                                         2            2

       De…ne the price elasticity of the composite good supply as                   c=     (p=Y c )(@Y c =@p): The following
                                                                                    p
condition then imposes unity as an upper bound on this supply elasticity:

Assumption 3:            c    1.
                         p

We then obtain:

Lemma 4: (Equilibrium Price and Output of Opium in Phase II) Under Assumptions 1 and 3,
there exists a unique relative price of opium p that solves                         (p ) = 0 in stationary equilibrium.
Moreover, the supply of the composite good is decreasing in the relative price of opium and increasing
in the opium trading cost          o,   whereas the equilibrium opium price rises with the opium trading cost.

The intuition of Lemma 4 can be understood with the help of Figure 2. A rising trading cost of
opium in this period lead to an upward shift of both the opium (Y o ) and the composite-good (Y c )
supply curves. Hence, a new equilibrium resulted with a higher opium price and a larger quantity
of the composite good.26
       There are two possible cases in steady state, depending on the slope of the …xed-point mapping.
The …rst case is         p   < 0, where we have a downward sloping curve                          (p). The second case is
1>        p   > 0, which yields an upward sloping curve                  (p) ; but with a slope less than unity. Both
cases give us a unique p .
  26
       As a matter of fact, the correlation coe¢ cient between the opium price and the output of the composite good for
the period of 1867-1917 is 0.56, which supports our …ndings.


                                                                19
4.3   Phase III: The Post-Opium Trade Era

We …nally turn to the derivation of the key stationary equilibrium equations in Phase III, when
Z T = 0; Z w = 1; Z o = 0;        = 0;     =    > 0 and hence with the opium supply and trade completely
          o
banned Y = 0 (and with the relative price p eliminated throughout):

                                                      1     2 H0
                             Yc =         (Y c ; w)                            c
                                                                                     w ;                         (19)
                                                      qc    H0 U 0
                                         1                                         qc
                             A =           DM (I) + (1          c
                                                                      w) Y c          (Y c )2 :                  (20)
                                         r                                         2

Consider the following regularity condition,

Assumption 4:        (0; w) > 0 and @ =@Y c < 1.

We can then establish:

Lemma 5: (Equilibrium-Composite-Good Output in Phase III) Under Assumptions 1 and 4, there
exists a unique composite-good output Y c that solves Y c =                    (Y c ; w) and is decreasing in the cost
of labor w.

Since the …xed-point mapping             (Y c ; w) is upward sloping but ‡atter than the 45 line, in response
to a higher wage and hence a higher trading cost, the output of the composite good must fall.


5     Phase Transitions

We can express the value function (6) in stationary equilibrium as:
                             1+
      V (Z w ; Z o ; ; ) =         f(1-Z o ) U Ytc + (pt )Yto -Mt -Z T St + H (Ytc + (pt )Yto +Mt ) g

where (pt )     [1   (1      Z w ) ] Z o pt , and both R and T on the RHS take on their optimized values.
In each phase, this value function becomes:

                                               VI ( ; )         V (0; 1; ; ) ;                                   (21)
                                            VII ( ; )           V (1; 1; ; ) ;                                   (22)
                                           VIII ( ; )           V (1; 0; ; ) :                                   (23)

    From the information on the historical background (see Section 2.1), we know that the e¤ective
barrier on opium trade imposed by the Chinese government varied during the …rst phase. In
particular, it has been recognized that in the early stages of Phase I, the e¤ective barrier on opium
trade was very low, as the Chinese o¢ cials were bribed so that they did not take any banning
action in local communities. Toward the end of Phase I, however, the Ching Dynasty government
decided to take serious action by appointing Commissioner Lin to eradicate opium trade. This led


                                                           20
to a sharp increase in the e¤ective barrier. After the Opium Wars, opium trade was legalized and
the e¤ective barrier was removed. Based on the historical situation, we summarize the phases in
transition in terms of the binary parameterization of ( ; ) as follows:

                                                           Imperial China         Republic of China
                       Before Opium Wars                              ;0                            n.a.
                       After Opium War                           (0; 0)                             0;

                               Note: n.a. stands for non-applicable.
     Let G denote the British war expenses. We de…ne the net welfare change from moving from
Phase i to Phase j as      i   j;   i = I; II and j = II; III. Then, we conduct two counterfactual
experiments as follows. First of all, if there is no Opium Wars, then the value function of phase II is
VI    ; 0 . With Opium Wars, then instead the value function becomes VII (0; 0)                                      G: Thus we have

                                     I    II         = VII (0; 0)           G    VI       ;0 :

Secondly, as long as opium trade continues, the value function of phase III is VII 0;                                     . But when
opium trade ceases, then instead the value function becomes VIII 0;                                        : So the net welfare change
due to opium trade is
                                     II    III         = VIII 0;                VII 0;          :

     We now formulate multi-period discrete choices in our staged development framework to endog-
enize institutions. Speci…cally, for any given pair of di¤erentials in opium trade barriers and moral
costs,    ;    , we fully characterize how changes in economic primitives may cause an endogenous
regime switch in institutions, captured by the transition from one phase to another. Based on the
existing historical data and documents, the primitives that we analyze include government objec-
tives (especially the preference parameter ) and warfare expenses (G), as well as the opium trading
cost (   o)   and demand shocks ( ).


5.1      From Phase I to II: The Colonization of Hong Kong

The transition from Phase I to Phase II can be accounted for by the existence of a (unique) critical
level of trade barriers, denoted as            c;   such that     I    II   ( c ) = 0: To show this, we must examine the
e¤ects of the trade barriers        on the welfare gain from moving from Phase I to Phase II. Consider,

Assumption 5: G < VII (0; 0)              VI (1; 0).

The interpretation of Assumption 5 is that the gain from moving from no trade to free trade in
opium is larger than the cost of wars. We can then plot the                           I    II   ( ) schedule in Figure 6, which
is upward sloping with     I   II   (0) < 0 <          I    II   (1). The …rst inequality comes from the fact that
VI (0; 0) = VII (0; 0) and the second follows Assumption 5. We therefore obtain:

                                                                  21
Proposition 1: Under Assumptions 1-5, there exists a unique critical level of trade-barriers                                             c

such that, for any          2 ( c ; 1), a war is instigated and Phase II emerges.

The intuition is clear. When the e¤ective barrier is absent, there is no need to start a war. When
the e¤ective barrier is at its maximum, so that all opium trade is banned, the war is unavoidable.
Thus, it is to the bene…t of Britain to initiate an opium war as long as the e¤ective trade barrier on
opium is above the threshold level               c.   In particular, a decrease in the threshold                   c;   which is caused
by a change in the primitives G; ;                o;   or , is more likely to induce an institutional change and to
lead eventually to the colonization of Hong Kong and the legalization of opium trade.


5.2   From Phase II to III: The Abandonment of Opium Trade

The transition from Phase II to Phase III can be accounted for by the existence of a critical level
of moral cost denoted as            c   and de…ned by equation             II   III   ( c ) = 0: To show this, we analyze the
e¤ects of the di¤erential moral cost                  on the welfare gain from moving from Phase II to Phase III.
Figure 7 depicts the         II   III   ( ) schedule, which is increasing in                with     II   III   (0) < 0 <II     III   (1).
The …rst inequality comes from the intuition that opium trade is preferred in the absence of moral
cost and the second is due to the fact that VII (0; 1) = 0. This leads to:

Proposition 2: Under Assumptions 1-4, there exists a unique critical level of moral cost                                         c   such
that, for any        2 ( c ; 1), all opium trade ceases and Phase III emerges.

Intuitively, when the moral cost is absent, there is no incentive for moving into Phase III, because
it is strictly dominated by Phase II. When the moral cost is at its maximum, opium trade is not
conducted, since it does not yield any utility; thus, Phase III is the only choice. Hence, as long as
the moral cost exceeds the critical value                  c,   it is to Britain’s bene…t to move into Phase III and
abandon opium trade. Summarizing, a decrease in the threshold                                   c;   caused by a change in the
primitives ;        o;   or ; is likely to induce an institutional change that will result in the abandonment
of opium trade.


6     Comparative Statics

In the comparative-static exercises performed below, we consider the following categories of shocks
on the critical levels of the transitional parameters                       c   and    c:   (i) a shock in the cost of warfare
(a change in G); (ii) two structural shocks: a preference shock (a change in ) and a funding
requirement shock to opium supply (a change in                      o );   and (iii) an autonomous opium demand shock
(an increase in ). To evaluate the changes in                       c   and      c   resulting from these shocks, we totally
di¤erentiate    I    II   ( c ) = 0 and    II   III   ( c ) = 0; respectively.



                                                                  22
6.1     A Shock in the Cost of Warfare

Since the transition from Phase II to III does not involve G, the e¤ect of a change in G falls only
on the critical level of e¤ective barrier   c.   We can establish:

Proposition 3: Under Assumptions 1-3, an increase in the warfare cost delays the transition from
Phase I to Phase II.

Graphically, a change in the military spending G shifts down the     I      II   ( ) locus by the same mag-
nitude as depicted in Figure 6. Thus, an increase in G raises the critical level of ; i.e., for a given
value of ; as war becomes more costly, it is less likely for it to occur; hence,       c   goes up.


6.2     Changes in Structural Parameters

We consider two types of structural shocks, one to preferences and another to opium trade cost.


6.2.1    A Preference Shock

We analyze the e¤ects of a preference shock in favor of the volume of trade, i.e., an increase in :
We assume that the total volume of trade rises in the Republic of China regime, which is consistent
with the data (compare the total volume of trade before and after 1917 in Chart 4); that is,

Assumption 6: TIII > TII .

We then obtain:

Proposition 4: Under Assumptions 1-6, a preference shift toward the volume of trade speeds up
the transition from Phase I to Phase II as well as from Phase II to Phase III.

In Figure 6, we illustrate the e¤ect of a rise in ; which rotates the   I   II   ( ) locus counterclockwise.
Thus,   c   decreases. As we put more weight on the volume of trade in the preference function, the
critical trade barrier is more likely to decrease. Consequently, for any given ; we are more likely
to enter Phase II. In Figure 7, we depict the e¤ect of a rise in ; which shifts the          II   III   ( ) locus
up; thus,    c   decreases. As we put more weight on the volume of trade in the preference function
(an increase in ), less emphasis is put on opium trade due to its declining share in total trade.
This is also in accord with the actual experience. For instance, opium share was more than 40% in
total British exports to China in the mid nineteenth century, but declined to less than 10% in the
beginning of the twentieth century. As a result, for any given level of the moral cost ; we are more
likely to enter Phase III of no opium trade.


6.2.2    A Funding Requirement Shock to Opium Supply

We consider a funding requirement shock to opium supply for a proxy of the incentive measure of
conducting opium trade. This is designed by taking an increase in            o    (a higher funding require-

                                                      23
ment) to represent a deterioration of the business environment within which opium is supplied. We
assume that the direct price e¤ect is stronger than the cross-market spillover e¤ect via consumption
substitution; that is,
                         @Y c       @Y c              @D   o   dpII
Assumption 7:            @ o    +   @pII   + Do + pII @p II    d o    < 0.

We can now establish:

Proposition 5: Under Assumptions 1-5 and 7, a rise in the funding requirement of opium trade
delays the transition from Phase I to Phase II, but speeds up the transition from Phase II to Phase
III.

The intuition goes as follows. As the business environment within which opium is traded deteriorates
due to higher funding requirement (                o   increases), there is less incentive to conduct opium trade.
So the British government is reluctant to put further e¤ort (as mirrored by a war) into expanding
opium trade and the likelihood of starting an opium war diminishes, which is re‡ected in an increase
in     c.   Similarly,   c   falls when the production cost of Y o increases. As     o   goes up, the opium trading
environment deteriorates, and hence the cost of stopping opium trade is lower. Thus, for any given
level of the moral cost ; we are more likely to enter Phase III of no opium trade.


6.3         An Autonomous Opium Demand Shock

Finally, we analyze the e¤ects of an autonomous demand shock to opium trade, which in terms of
our model is captured by an increase in . Consider,

Proposition 6: Under Assumptions 1-3, an autonomous increase in opium demand speeds up the
transition from Phase I to Phase II, but delays the transition from Phase II to Phase III.

The intuition is readily understood. If opium demand increases, then it is worth putting more e¤ort
(e.g., initiating a war) to expand opium trade; hence, for any given ; we are more likely to enter
Phase II of the legal opium trade period . On the other hand, if the demand for British opium drops,
as a result of the sharp increase in the domestic opium supply, there is less incentive to maintain
opium trade. Hence, for any given level of the moral cost ; we are more likely to enter Phase III
of no opium trade.


7       Toward Understanding the Colonization of Hong Kong

Before proceeding further in the analysis, we tabulate our comparative-statics results.




                                                                24
                         Comparative     Critical Value      Transition
                         Statics           c          c   I to II   II to III

                             G"           +      n.a.     slower      n.a.

                                "                         faster     faster
                                o   "     +               slower     faster

                                "                 +       faster     slower

   Using the comparative statics above, we would like to investigate the “alternative” history as
suggested in the following quote by Bard (2000, p. 13):

     “The facts of history cannot be altered. Is there then any pro…t in speculating what might
     have happened if certain events had or had not taken place? Perhaps, if there are lessons
     to be learned from such speculations for, after all, events of today will become history
     tomorrow, next year, or a century later.”

More speci…cally, we are now ready to introduce the following three hypotheses, which suggest how
the course of history might have been altered:

[Hypothesis 1] Due to high warfare and low opium trading costs, Phase I lasted for a long period
     of 70 years (1773-1842).

[Hypothesis 2] Due to high valuation of the total volume of trade, high opium trading costs and
     the expectation of continuously rising opium demand, the Opium Wars were declared and the
     Hong Kong colony emerged, leading to a transition to Phase II.

[Hypothesis 3] Due to a signi…cant drop in opium demand and a rising opium trading cost, opium
     trade was abandoned, leading to a transition to Phase III.

These hypotheses are readily corroborated by our model, which is built to capture the historical
environment and some important observations of the particular era before and after the Opium Wars.
Of course, due to data limitation, it is impossible to formulate econometric tests of our hypotheses.
Nonetheless, the existing historical data and documents support the proposed underlying factors
driving the two transitions based on our theoretical model. They also indicate how opium trade
“had determined the course of history of that period and region, and how easily that course might
have been altered, preventing the con‡ict, and possibly subsequent imperialist policy of western
nations in China” (Bard, 2000, p. 14).
   Next we present a selected sample of the existing evidence, found either in the data or in
historical documents, which provides support to our hypotheses. More speci…cally, according to our

                                                 25
hypotheses, there are seven cases where the shocks that we consider played a pivotal role. These
cases are tabulated below and are labeled D-1 to D-7.

               Supporting Evidence    Hypothesis 1      Hypothesis 2   Hypothesis 3

                          G             high (D-1)          n.a.           n.a.
                                           n.a.          high (D-3)        n.a.
                           o            low (D-2)        high (D-4)     high (D-6)
                                           n.a.          high (D-5)     low (D-7)

(D-1) This case refers to the role played by the cost of conducting a war (G). Morse (1910)
     described the mission of William John Napier, the …rst Chief Superintendent of trade at
     Canton, as follows: “The chief superintendent was instructed that every e¤ort was to be made
     to conform to all Chinese regulations and to consider all Chinese prejudices, and at the same
     time was forbidden to call in the aid of the armed forces of the Crown” (p. 121). We take
     this quote to indicate that Britain had no intention of initiating a war against China because
     warfare was high. Britain would prefer to maintain the status quo (Phase I).

(D-2) Although the Chinese government banned opium trade right from the beginning, this did not
     lead to a prohibitively high trading cost of opium. The reason is that the banning acts were
     never seriously implemented by local Chinese o¢ cials, who were bribed by British merchants.
     This is re‡ected in the rising opium shipments shown in Chart 1.

(D-3) As documented in Charts 3 and 4, the total real Britain-China trade was rising over time
     during both the pre- and post-Opium War periods. This expansion of trade was one of
     Britain’s important objectives. As Pritchard has pointed out, the basis of British-Chinese
     relations was “the commercial intercourse”(Pritchard 1970, Preface). Moreover, according to
     the instructions given to Lord Macartney by the Secretary of State for War Henry Dundas in
     1792, in order to facilitate trade with China, the British government had been looking for “a
     more convenient situation than Canton, where our present Warehouse are at a great distance
     from our Ships” (Tuck 2000, vol. 2, p. 237). Naturally, the bene…t from such a settlement
     increased with the volume of trade.

(D-4) As depicted in Chart 5, opium trade reversed the British silver out‡ows. Thus, opium
     trade had been a very important component of Britain-China trade. However, the growing
     consumption of opium raised the awareness and concerns regarding its devastating e¤ects of
     the Chinese high-ranking administrators. In 1839, Commissioner Tse-hsu Lin ordered the
     immediate surrender of all opium brought to China. This raised the opium trading cost to a
     historically high level. Consequently, “It was now realised even in London that no change was
     possible without a show of force, which might lead to war” (Tuck 2000, vol. 9, pp. 196-7).

                                                  26
(D-5) The expectation of a continuously rising opium demand, captured by the positive demand
     shock (increase in ), is supported by the positive comovement between opium quantity and
     price during Phase I. Using the data on opium price and shipments in the period 1773-1838,
     we computed the correlation coe¢ cient to be 0:12; which veri…es our claim.

(D-6) The cost of trading opium rose drastically following the success of the 1906 imperial edict
     that banned opium. As Blue (2000) pointed out, the success “re‡ected the intensi…cation in
     China over the previous decade of aversion to the drug. The aversion was part of the rise in
     nationalist sentiment at the turn of the century, stimulated by such factors as the 1895 defeat
     at the hands of Japan, the subsequent new imperialist incursions by other powers, and the
     humiliation delivered by the anti-Boxer expeditionary forces in 1900” (p.40). “The edict also
     re‡ected new concepts of citizenship ... creating a new category of people who would be left
     out of the modern concept of citizenship”(Baumler 2007, p. 56). Eventually, in 1911, Britain
     agreed to stop all opium exports from India into China within seven years.

(D-7) In the post-Opium War period, the rapid increase in the domestic production of opium in
     China led to a signi…cant decline in the demand for imported opium. In terms of our model,
     this negative shock on imported opium demand seen in the data can be understood as an
     increase in the supply of opium. In other words, an increase in domestic supply is equivalent
     to a decrease in import demand; thus, there should be a negative comovement between opium
     quantity and price during Phase II. Indeed, the correlation coe¢ cient between opium price
     and quantity in the period 1867-1917 is    0:82; which is consistent with our analysis.

In sum, while high warfare (D-1) and low opium trading costs (D-2) were the primary factors
preventing initially the breakout of the Opium Wars, in the end the wars and the consequential
colonization of Hong Kong were mainly driven by the British government’s high valuation of the
total volume trade with China (D-3), the rising opium trading cost (D-4) and the anticipated
increase in China’s demand for opium (D-5). Also, as a result of the anticipated increase in the
opium trading cost (D-6) and the sharp drop in opium demand under the Republic of China regime
(D-7), opium trade was abandoned and a period of more conventional trade with China began.


8   Concluding Remarks

We have constructed a staged development framework with multi-period discrete choices to study
the trade-induced colonization of Hong Kong and the history of opium trade between Britain and
China. The framework has enabled us to characterize each of the three phases involved, namely,
the pre-Opium War era, the post-Opium War era and the post-opium trade era. We have also
illustrated theoretically how the transition between two phases emerged in response to some key

                                                27
underlying factors. For the …rst transition, these factors included the British government’s high
valuation of the total volume of trade with China, the warfare cost, the cost of trading opium
and the expectation of a rising opium demand. For the second transition, the key factors were a
decrease in China’s import demand for opium and the British government’s moral cost of opium
trade. Thus, we are able to explain why Britain instigated the Opium Wars and colonized Hong
Kong in mid-nineteenth century (…rst transition) as well as why it abandoned opium trade a few
years after the turn of the twentieth century (second transition). Finally, we have put together
historical data and documentation that provide support to our theoretical results. With these data,
it is possible for us to calibrate the model and to draw meaning numerical conclusions.
   While our model is speci…cally designed to capture the historical observations of the Britain-
China trade during the period 1773-1933 and the colonization of Hong Kong, the general method-
ology and framework can be readily modi…ed to study the establishment of other colonies, such
as Korea, Macao and Taiwan, where trade also played a signi…cant role. For example, over the
long period of 442 years (1557-1999), Macao was under Portuguese occupation and served as an
important center for Portuguese trade with China and Japan. During the sixteenth century and
from 1848 to early 1870s, it was also a tra¢ cking point for slaves from Southern China to Portugal
or South American ports.
   Moreover, following the assassination of the Korean Empress Myeongseong by Japanese agents
in 1895 and the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905, Korea came under Japanese rule with the
Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty. This occupation lasted from 1910 to 1945. It formally ended with
Japan’s defeat in WWII. While imperialistic expansion to Northeast and Central Asia was one of
the primary factors leading to this colonization, its role for trade with China, Russia and, through
this, Europe was also important.
   Similarly to the colonization of Korea, Taiwan was ceded to Japan from 1895 to 1945 with the
Treaty of Shimonoseki, which ended the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894. The primary reason
for the establishment of this colony was again Japan’s imperialistic expansion, only this time to
Southeast and South Asia. Yet, potential trade with Southern China and Southeast Asia played a
non-negligible role.
   The development experiences of these colonies are also of particular interest. Although Macao
is just a short distance from Hong Kong and was also a colony of a Western European country, its
development has been drastically di¤erent from that of Hong Kong. Among others, Macao lacked
signi…cantly in terms of growth compared to Hong Kong. On the contrary, Korea and Taiwan,
who were both under an entirely di¤erent Imperial Japanese rule, have grown rapidly during the
post-WWII period and joined Hong Kong in the group of the newly industrialized Asian Tigers.
Despite such noticeably disparate development patterns, to the best of our knowledge, there is no
systematic study of these colonial episodes. We regard this as a potentially avenue for future work.


                                                28
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2000) “Reversal of Fortune: Ge-
     ography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 117, 1231-1294.

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development,” American Economic Review, 91, 1369-1401.

 [3] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005a), “The Rise of Europe:
     Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth,” American Economic Review,
     95, 546-579.

 [4] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2005b) “Institutions as a Funda-
     mental Cause of Development,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of
     Economic Growth, Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 386-347.

 [5] Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2000) “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise?
     Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective,”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     115, 1167-1199.

 [6] Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2001) “A Theory of Political Transitions,”Ameri-
     can Economic Review, 91, 938-963.

 [7] Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2008), “Persistence of Power, Elites, and Institu-
     tions,” American Economic Review, 98, 267-293.

 [8] Bai, Ying, and James K. Kung (2016), "Opium, Silver, and the Decline of Late Imperial China,
     1789-1910," Working Paper.

 [9] Bard, Solomon (1993), Traders of Hong Kong: Some Foreign Merchant Houses, 1841-1899,
     Urban Council, Hong Kong.

[10] Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Andrew F. Newman (1993), “Occupational Choice and the Process
     of Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101 (2), 274-298.

[11] Bard, Solomon (2000), “Tea and Opium,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Hong Kong
     Branch, 40, 1-19.

[12] Baumler, Alan (2007), The Chinese and Opium under the Republic: Worse than Floods and
     Wild Beasts, State University of New York Press, Albany, NY, USA.

[13] Blue, Gregory (2000), “Opium For China: The British Connection,”in Opium Regimes, ed. by
     Timothy Brook and Bob Tadashi Wakabayashi, University of California Press, Berkeley and
     Los Angeles, CA, USA.

[14] Brown, J. B. (1973), “Politics of the Poppy: The Society for the Suppression of the Opium
     Trade, 1874-1916,” Journal of Contemporary History, 8, 97-111.

[15] Clark, G. (2010). "The macroeconomic aggregates for England, 1209–2008," Research in Eco-
     nomic History, 51-140.



                                               29
[16] Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤ (2008), “Debating the Role of Institutions
     in Political and Economic Development: Theory, History, and Findings,” Annual Review of
     Political Science, 11, 119-135.
[17] Gull, Edward Manico (1943), British Economic Interests in the Far East, Oxford University
     Press, London, UK.
[18] Hanes, W. Travis III and Frank Sanello (2002), Opium Wars, Sourcebooks Inc., Naperville,
     Illinois, USA.
[19] Hsiao, Liang-Lin (1974), China’s Foreign Trade Statistics, 1864-1949, Harvard University Asia
     Center.
[20] Matsuyama, Kiminori (2002), “The Rise of Mass Consumption Societies,” Journal of Political
     Economy, 110 (5), 1035-1070.
[21] Mitchell, B.R. (1988), British Historical Statistics, Cambridge University Press.
[22] Morse, Hosea Ballou (1910), The International Relations of the Chinese Empire, vol.1, Long-
     mans, London, U.K.
[23] Nield, Robert (2010), The China Coast: Trade and the First Treaty Ports, Joint Publishing
     (H.K.) Co., Ltd, Hong Kong.
[24] North, Douglass C. (1994), “Economic Performance Through Time: The Limits to Knowledge,”
     American Economic Review, 84, 359-368.
[25] North, Douglass C. (2006), Understanding the Process of Economic Change, Princeton Univer-
     sity Press, Princeton, USA.
[26] Pritchard, E.H. (1970), Anglo-Chinese Relations During the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Cen-
     turies, Octagon Books, New York, U.S.
[27] Puga, Diego and Daniel Tre‡er (2012), “International Trade and Institutional Change: Me-
     dieval Venice’s Response to Globalization,” NBER Working Paper 18288, Cambridge, MA,
     USA.
[28] Rostow, Walt W. (1960), The Stages of Economic Growth, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
     bridge, U.K.
[29] Rowntree, Joshua (1905), The Imperial Drug Trade, Methuen and Co, London, U.K.
[30] Tsiang, S.C. (1964), “A Model of Economic Growth in Rostovian Stages,” Econometrica, 32
     (4), 619-648.
[31] Tuck, Patrick J.N. (2000), Britain and the China Trade, 1635-1842, Routledge, New York,
     USA.
[32] Yan, Se (2012), “Gentry Benevolence or Pursuit of Self-interest: The End of the Sino-British
     Opium Trade (Shenshi de Cibei Haishi Liyi de Zhuizhu? Zhongying Yapian Maoyi Zhongjie
     Guocheng de Yanjiu)”, The Qing History Journal (Qingshi Yanjiu; in Chinese), No. 3, pp
     88-99.
[33] Zhong, Wei-Min (2010), Tea and Opium: China in the Process of Economic Globalization in
     the Nineteenth Century, SDX Joint Publishing Company, Beijing, China (in Chinese).

                                                 30
Chart 1. Quantity of Opium Exported to China (1761-1933) in ’000 chests.
Source: See Data Appendix.
              100
              80
   Quantity ('000 chests)
  20       40 0     60




                      1761   1811               1861                1911
                                         Year

                             Quantity           11-year moving average
Chart 2. Opium Export as a Share Total Export to China (1761-1933). Source:
See Data Appendix
       1
       .8 .6
    Share
  .4   .2
       0




           1761             1811                  1861                1911
                                           Year

                          Opium Share               11-year moving average
Chart 3. Pre Opium War Real Total British Exports and Imports to and from
China (1765-1800). Source: See Data Appendix.
  2
  1.5
  1
  .5
  0




    1765      1770         1775      1780            1785    1790       1795         1800
                                              Year

                     Real Export                            Real Import
                     Moving Average: Export                 Moving Average: Import
Chart 4. Post Opium War Real Total British Exports and Imports to and from
China (1867-1933). Source: See Data Appendix.
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10




       1870                   1890                   1910                    1930
                                            Year

                   Real Export                          Real Import
                   Moving Average: Export               Moving Average: Import
Chart 5. Net Export and Silver Flow to China (1765-1833) in million of pound.
Source: see Data Appendix
          2
          1
  Million of Pound
           0
          -1
          -2




                1760     1780                 1800             1820                1840
                                              Year

                        Net Export to China              Silver Outflow to China
         1773                    1840-1860                               1917-1918                   1933
Phase:                  I                              II                                III
                                                                                                            Time

            Z T  1, Z w  0, Z o  1        Z T  0, Z w  1, Z o  1         Z T  0, Z w  1, Z o  0
                    0,   0                    0,   0                      0,     0

           Pre - Opium - War                 Legal - Opium - Trade               Post - Opium - Trade
                 Period                              Period                              Period




                                        Figure 1: The Time Line
       Π

                                         45°




                                          Π( p)
       0                                          p
                          p*

                   Figure 2: Phase I


 p                             p
                                                      YO


                               p*
p*


                     YC                               DO

            *
                          YC                               Y O , DO
       YC


     Figure 3: Goods Market Equilibrium in Phase II
Ψ

                                45 °



                                    Ψ (Y C )




0                                              p
                          *
                     p
        Figure 4: Phase II
    Φ

                              45°



                               Φ(Y C )




0                    C*
                                         YC
                 Y

        Figure 5: Phase III
   I   Δ II (δ      )
                                                        O
                                               θ ↑, α       ↓, κ ↑




                                                              G ↑

       0                                                              δ
                           δ C′′   δC   δ C′
                                                        1

   −G
   − G′


Figure 6: Comparative Statics on the Transition from Phase I to II

       II   Δ III

                                                              O
                                                    θ ↑, α        ↑, κ ↓


   V III


        0
                        ζ C′       ζC
                                                                  ζ
                                                   1




Figure 7: Comparative Statics on the Transition from Phase II to III
                                            Appendix
                (A major portion of the Appendix is not intended for publication)

    In this Appendix, we summarize data sources, currency exchange rates and weight measure-
ments. We also provide the mathematical details of the results established in the main text. Finally,
we present the results under an alternative subsidy rule, namely the case of the proportional subsidy
rule (PSR), where St = s (Mt Xt ).
A. Summary of the Data
   There are various sources, including scattered data, in Hsiao (1974) and Tuck (2000) and long
term opium quantity and value data from Bai and Kung (2016, henceforth BK). We use Clark
(2010) and Mitchell (1988) to construct the time series of price index.
A1. Opium Trade
    Opium. We use the data series of BK from 1789 to 1910 as main data source. By incorporating
scattered data from Tuck and relatively complete data from Hsiao, the time series can be extended
from 1766 to 1932.
    Quantity. The time series of quantity is constructed from 3 data sources: 1) Scattered chest
exported to China from 1761-1815 by Tuck; 2) Time series of chest exported from 1789-1910 by
BK; and 3) The Opium Quantity from 1864-1949 by Hsiao.
    The quantity in the year 1766 is 150 while that in the year 1796 is 4172. We interpolate the
value in between assuming constant geometric growth rate of e0:1073 . The data from Hsiao and BK
tracks each other quite well (correlation: 0.813). We assume that they are di¤erent only up to a
ratio and to extend the series after 1910 by multiplying Hsiao to that factor (to convert the unit of
picul into chest). The result is Chart 1.
    Volume. The time series of volume come from the same source as quantity. The treatment is
also similar to quantity. For 1766 to 1789, we …rst use common data from both BK and Tuck to
construct ratio to de‡ate our data series. Then we assume a constant geometric growth rate e0:06465
between 1766 and 1790. To extend the ratio after the year 1910, we take ratio between 1897 and
1910 (from BK and Hsiao). The unit used is taels. The result is plotted in Chart A1.
    Price. Price is a ratio of Volume and Quantity. The result is plotted in Chart A1.
A2. Goods Trade
    The goods trade data come from mainly Hsiao (1974) and Tuck (2000). From 1761-1800, the
time series of import and export data are from Tuck (2000). Between 1817-33, the data are also
from Tuck summing up private and company (EIC) trade. As the currency unit used is Spanish
dollar, we follow Tuck and use the conversion rate of 1 Spanish dollar = 0.72 taels. Data from
1864-1933 are from Hsiao. We only consider trades between China and Britain (namely, Britain,
Hong Kong and India). The result is shown in Chart A2.
A3. Precious Metal
    The precious metal net ‡ow is from Hsiao (1974) and Tuck (2000). Net ‡ow of precious metal
to Canton is available in Tuck from 1761-1800. For the year 1817-33, silver export from Canton
by private merchant and EIC is available. Again, the exchange rate is set to be a constant rate
of 1 Spanish dollar = 0.72 taels. From the year 1864-1933, the data from Hsiao are total precious
metal (gold and silver) import and export from and to China. So we use weight: (total trade with


                                                  i
UK/total trade with all trading partners) to calculate the share of precious metal ‡ow into China
from the UK. The result can be found in Chart A3.
A4. Exchange Rate and Price Index
    Exchange Rate. From 1862-1933 the exchange rate between UK currency and tael can be found
in Hsiao (2000). The exchange rate involves converting s. (shilling) and d. (penny) into pound.
The system is that: 1 pound = 20 shilling and 1 shilling = 12 pence. For the data before 1862, we
follow the assumption of Tuck and assume that 1 tael is roughly 1/3 pounds.
    Price Index. 3 di¤erent index are used to cover the relevant time period that we are interested
in: 1) Clark (2010) is used before 1800; 2) Rousseaux’s Overall Index is used from 1801 to 1845;
and 3) Sauerbeck-Statist’s Overall Index is used after 1846. All 3 indices are very comparable. So
we only need to match their average value. The result is reported in Chart A4.
A6. Units
    The following is a list of de…nition of units used in the paper.
    There were three major currencies used: the tael, the British pound and the Spanish dollar.
These were converted in the following manner: (i) the basic unit of Chinese currency is the tael
(tls), known as “Yuan Pao” (silver sycee), which was worth 1:208 oz. of pure silver; and, (ii) 1 tael
= $1=3 or $1:388 (Spanish dollar).
    Also, there were several weight measurements with the following conversion rates: (i) the chest
was used as the basis for measuring opium weight; one chest of opium contained around 135 pounds
of the substance; (ii) tael was also used as a weight measurement unit in China with 1 tael = 1 13
oz., 16 taels = 1 catty (Chinese kg) or 1 13 lbs; and, (iii) other weight measurement units include, 1
picul = 133 13 lbs, 1 long ton = 16:8 piculs, and 1 short ton = 15 piculs.
B. Optimization under FSR
   Under …xed subsidy rule (FSR), the …rst-order conditions with respect to M; S; Y c and Y o are:
                                                                 1
                             (1        )     U 0 + H0              V0       0; M       0;                  (B1)
                                                               1 + +1
                         8
                         <        (1       ) U0 +    1    0
                                                         V+1    0; S       0; if Z T = 1
                                                    1+
                                                                                                           (B2)
                         : S = 0;                                               if Z T = 0
                                                 0
                                               V+1
                   (1    ) U 0 + H0 +              (1           c
                                                                       w    qcY c)    0; Y c     0;        (B3)
                                               1+
                                                     0
                                                   V+1
              (1    ) U 0 + H0             (p) +       [ (p)        o
                                                                            w     qoY o]     0; Y o   0;   (B4)
                                                   1+
with complementary slackness, where the subscript “+1” indicates the variable in the next-period.
While the last two conditions regarding the levels of outputs are standard (they equate the marginal
bene…t of production with the respective marginal cost), the …rst two deserve further comments.
Concerning (B1), high imports, on the one hand, lower the British net silver in‡ow and reduce the
representative producer-trader’s asset accumulation, but, on the other, raise the total volume of
trade. Imports are optimized when the marginal cost and marginal bene…t are equalized. In the
case where a trade de…cit occurs, (B2) indicates that the optimal level of the government subsidy
to the representative producer-trader is to equalize the losses from the current net silver out‡ow


                                                           ii
to the gains from the higher assets accumulated in the future. Also, the Benveniste-Scheinkman
equation is:
                                              1+r 0
                                        V0 =       V :                                     (B5)
                                              1 + +1

C. Proofs of Lemmas and Propositions
Proof of Lemma 1: Substituting the restrictions associated with Phase I into the …rst-order condi-
tions (B1)-(B4) and focusing on the interior solution, we have that in stationary equilibrium:
                                                            1
                                           U 0 + H0           V 0 = 0;                                                    (C1)
                                                           1+
                                                         1
                                                 U0 +      V 0 = 0;                                                       (C2)
                                                        1+
                                                V0
                             U 0 + H0 +            [1              c
                                                                       w            q c Y c ] = 0;                        (C3)
                                               1+
                                                  V0
                         U 0 + H0        (p) +       [ (p)              o
                                                                                     w     q o Y o ] = 0:                 (C4)
                                                 1+
Evaluating the Benveniste-Scheinkman equation (B5) in a stationary equilibrium yields r =                                    ,
whereas the asset evolution equation implies:
                                                                                         qc             qo
     rA     M + S + (1       c
                                      w) Y c + [ (p)           o
                                                                       w] Y o               (Y c )2        (Y o )2 = 0:   (C5)
                                                                                         2              2
Combining (C1) and (C2), we have:

                                                     1      H0
                                            U0 =       V0 =    :                                                          (C6)
                                                    1+      2
Then (C3) and (C6) together yield (9). Also, (C4) and (C6) together give
                                           o
                                               + w + q o Y o = 4 (p) :                                                    (C7)

Combining (7) and (C7), we obtain (10), which can be manipulated to get (11). Finally, it is
straightforward to obtain the following properties of (p): (0) = 4 11 [ o + w + q o Do (0)] > 0
                                                                  ( )
     d       qo  @Do (p)
and dp = 4 1             < 0.
            ( ) @p
Proof of Lemma 2: Straightforward di¤erentiation yields

                         dp    @ =@       p                                     1
                            =         =                                                              > 0;                 (C8)
                         d    1 @ =@p   1                  1+          o+
                                                                                qo Do
                                                                                              "op
                                                                                 w+q o Do

where "op is the price elasticity of opium demand. The other comparative statics follow in a similar
manner.
Proof of Lemma 3: Equation (C6) can be manipulated to yield (13). Substituting (7), (8), (9), and
(C7) into (C5), we get (12). Straightforward di¤erentiation implies:

                     R   H            p @Do                                          R    H
     S 0 (p) =   1               1+               (1     ) Do =             1                       1   "op (1   ) Do ;   (C9)
                     T   U            Do @p                                          T    U


                                                         iii
                                 dA                  @Do      R             H
                             r      =           qo       + 2+                           1        "op (1           ) Do :                     (C10)
                                 dp                   @p      T             U

From (C9), it is clear that under Assumption 1, 1 "op > 0 and under Assumption 2, 1 R   T U < 0.
                                                                                          H

                                                                                      o
Hence, S 0 (p) < 0. The result regarding the producer-trader’s assets follows from @D
                                                                                    @p < 0 and
Assumption 1, which imply, respectively, that both the …rst and the second term in (C10) are
positive.
Proof of Lemma 4: Substituting the restrictions associated with Phase II into the …rst-order condi-
tions and focusing on an interior stationary equilibrium, we obtain:
                                                                        1
                                                      U 0 + H0            V 0 = 0;                                                           (C11)
                                                                       1+
                                                         V0
                                   U 0 + H0 +               (1              c
                                                                                        w        q c Y c ) = 0;                              (C12)
                                                        1+
                                                             V0
                                   U 0 + H0 p +                 (p              o
                                                                                            w       q o Y o ) = 0;                           (C13)
                                                            1+
                                                           qc         qo
                rA   M + (1             c
                                                 w) Y c + [p  (Y c )2
                                                                   o
                                                                         (Y o )2 = 0:
                                                                                    w] Y o                                                   (C14)
                                                           2          2
Also, the Benveniste-Sheinkman equation yields r = . From (C11), we have:
                                                                             1
                                                        U 0 + H0 =             V 0:                                                          (C15)
                                                                            1+
Then (C13) together with (C15) yield (14), while (C12) together with (C13) give (15). Substituting
(7) and (8) into (C14), we get (18). Also, under Assumptions 1 and 2, straightforward di¤erentiation
of (p; Y c ; ) yields the following:
                                   @      2 H 0 U 00                                R       H
                           p   =      =                              1                              1       "op Do > 0;
                                   @p   ( U 0 + H 0 )2                              T       U

                                                @        2 H 0 U 00                             R       H
                                    Y       =        =                                  1                     > 0;
                                                @Y c   ( U 0 + H 0 )2                           T       U

                                        @              2 H 0 U 00                       R       H           @Do
                                   =             =                              1                       p       > 0:
                                        @            ( U 0 + H 0 )2                     T       U            @
                                                                                                            dY c            +               dY c
Substituting (7) and           (p; Y c ; ) into (14), we obtain (16), where                                  dp        =     Y
                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                                                                                     < 0,    d     =
 1   qo   @Do         dY c
 Y   p @          ,   d o= p 1Y > 0, and                                o   + w+ 1+                      o
                                                                                                        "p q D o
                                                                                                            o          =p2 > 0. Next, substi-
tuting (7) and (16) into (15), we get (17), where
                                   @                      qo Do                                          qcY c
                       p     =        =              o + w + qo Do
                                                                                        "op +       c + w + qcY c
                                                                                                                                c
                                                                                                                                p;
                                   @p
                                                    qo Do                                          qcY c
                 1     p     = 1+                o + w + qo Do
                                                                "op                             c + w + qcY c
                                                                                                               c
                                                                                                               p:


Then, under Assumptions 1 and 3, we have two alternative cases: either p < 0 or 1 > p > 0. In
either case, a unique …xed point in p is ensured. Finally, totally di¤erentiating (17), we obtain:
                                   dp       1                      1                                         qc
                                      o
                                        =                    c + w + q c Y c (p)
                                                                                                    1              :
                                   d      1             p                                                     Y


                                                                   iv
                                                                      c                              dY c
Combining (7), (14), (15) and (17), we have: dY
                                              dp = q c
                                                       p
                                                         Y
                                                           . Since                                    dp     < 0 under Assumption 1, we
               c                                  o
conclude that q < Y , which in turn yields dp =d > 0.
Proof of Lemma 5: Substituting the restrictions associated with Phase III into the …rst-order
conditions and focusing on an interior stationary equilibrium, we obtain:
                                                                               1
                                                           U 0 + H0              V 0 = 0;                                            (C16)
                                                                              1+
                                                               V0
                                        U 0 + H0 +                (1              c
                                                                                          w    q c Y c ) = 0;                        (C17)
                                                              1+
and (20). Also, the Benveniste-Sheinkman equation yields r = . From (C16), we have
                                                                                   1
                                                             U 0 + H0 =              V 0:                                            (C18)
                                                                                  1+
Substituting (C18) in (C17) yields (19). Then direct di¤erentiation of                                        (Y c ; w) yields the following
partial derivatives:
                                                       @           2 H 0 U 00                  R     H
                                    Y         =             =                             1                 > 0;
                                                       @Y c   q c ( H 0 U 0 )2                 T     U
                                                       @
                                    w         =            =       < 0:
                                                       @w      qc
Since a rise in the wage cost should reduce production (other things equal), we can conclude from
(19):
                                @Y c       w
                                     =         < 0 =) 1     Y > 0;
                                @w     1     Y
So (Y c ; w) has a positive slope in Y c that is less than unity. This together with the other half of
Assumption 4, namely that (0; w) > 0; ensures the existence of a unique …xed point.
Proof of Proposition 1: It is clear that,

                                          I       II   (0) = VII (0; 0)       G       VI (0; 0) =        G

Also, if the war expenses G are not too high, so that Assumption 5 is met, then

                                              I    II   (1) = VII (0; 0)          G    VI (1; 0) > 0

since VII (0; 0)        VI (1; 0) > 0. In addition, we can derive:
                   dI    II   ( )              dVI ( ; 0)
                                    =
                        d                         d
                                              1+             R                H       p"op (   o   + w + 2q o Do )
                                    =             U 0 Do 2 +                          o
                                                                                                                       > 0:
                                                             T                U           + w + 1 + "op q o Do

Thus, the I II ( ) schedule is monotone (positively sloped) with I II (0) < 0 < I II (1). By the
Mean Value Theorem, there exists a unique critical value c 2 (0; 1) such that I II ( c ) = 0.
Proof of Proposition 2: It is easily seen that

                               II   III   (0) = VIII (0; 0)                   VII (0; 0) < 0
                               II   III   (1) = VIII (0; 0)                   VII (0; 1) = VIII (0; 0) > 0:

                                                                          v
Moreover, we have:
                                 dII    III     ( )          dVII (0; )   1+
                                                      =                 =                     (U + H) > 0:
                                       d                        d
Straightforward application of the Mean Value Theorem proves the existence of a unique critical
value c 2 (0; 1) such that I II ( c ) = 0.
Proof of Proposition 3: Recall the de…nition of the critical transitional parameter                                       c:


     I   II   ( c ) = VII (0; 0) G VI ( c ; 0)
                      1+                                                             1+
                    =        [U (RII ) + H (TII )]                           G                [U (RI ) + H (TI )]
                           1+
                      =              [U (Y c + pII Y o             M ) + H (Y c + pII Y o + M )]                 G                          (C19)
                                1+
                                       fU [Y c + (1                c )pI Y
                                                                             o
                                                                                     M    S] + H [Y c + (1           c )pI Y
                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                   + M ]g
                      = 0:

In response to a change in G, the endogenous variables Y c ; p and S remain all unchanged. Hence,
it follows from (C19) that
                                  dI II ( c )   @I II ( c )
                                              =             = 1;
                                     dG            @G
which proves the proposition.
Proof of Proposition 4: Totally di¤erentiating (C19) yields,

                          d c              @I    II ( c ) =@
                                 =
                          d                @I    II ( c ) =@
                                                     H (TII )           H (TI ) + U 0 (RI ) S
                                 =                                                             o+
                                                                                                                 < 0;
                                                                                 R              w+2q o Do
                                           U 0 (RI ) pI Do "op 2 +               T
                                                                                     H
                                                                                     U          ( p)
                                                                                          o + w+ 1+"o q o D o



where S = H 0 (TI ) =2U 00 (RI ) > 0 and H (TII ) H (TI ) > 0 due to the fact that Phase II is the
free-trade regime after the Opium Wars and hence the trade volume is expected to increase.
    Next, recall the de…nition of the critical transitional parameter c :

         II    III   ( c ) = VIII (0; 0) VII (0; c )
                             1+                                                          1+
                           =        [U (RIII ) + H (TIII )]                                    (1    c ) [U   (RII ) + H (TII )]
                                 1+
                            =              [U (Y c         M ) + H (Y c + M )]                                                              (C20)
                                     1+
                                                (1        c ) [U   (Y c + pII Y o         M ) + H (Y c + pII Y o + M )]
                            = 0:

Totally di¤erentiating (C20) gives,

                                       d   c              @II III ( c ) =@
                                                =
                                       d                  @II III ( c ) =@
                                                          H (TIII ) (1     c ) H (TII )
                                                =                                       < 0;
                                                             U (RII ) + H (TII )

                                                                         vi
where the numerator is positive because, under Assumption 6, TIII > TII .
Proof of Proposition 5: Totally di¤erentiating (C19), taking into account the …rst-order conditions
in each phase, we …nd:
               d                     @I           ( c ) =@        o                                @I           ( c ) =@           o
                   c                       II                                                              II
                   o
                        =                                                                                                                                        ;
               d                     @I        II ( c ) =@        c       1+
                                                                               U 0 (RI ) pI Do "op 2 +               R    H
                                                                                                                                         o+  w+2q o Do
                                                                                                                     T    U                  ( p)
                                                                                                                                       o + w+ 1+"o q o D o



so that
                                                                      d   c                           @I    II   ( c)
                                                        sign              o
                                                                               =      sign                       o
                                                                                                                               :                                     (C21)
                                                                      d                                    @
The expression of @I                           ( c ) =@       o   can be written as:
                                          II

                   @I       II   ( c)                                                  @Y c    @Y c    @Do dpII
                                 o
                                                =        U 0 (RII ) + H 0 (TII )            + Do + pII
                                                                                                    +
          1+            @                                                              @pII    @ o     @pII d o
                                                                                         @Do dpI                 dpI
                                                  -(1- c ) U 0 (RI ) + H 0 (TI ) Do +pI           o
                                                                                                    +U 0 (RI ) Sp o
                                                                                          @pI d                  d
                                                                             @Y   c    @Y c            @D  o   dp II
                                                = U 0 (RII ) + H 0 (TII )           +       + Do + pII
                                                                              @ o      @pII            @pII d o
                                                                                       R H dpI
                                                  -U 0 (RI ) (1        o
                                                                   c )D (1   "op ) 2 +            :
                                                                                       T U d o
If the direct price e¤ect of the supply shock to opium demand dominates the spillover e¤ects on Y c ;
so that Assumption 7 holds, then @I @IIo( c ) < 0 and, from (C21), dd co > 0.
    Similarly, di¤erentiating (C20) yields:

               d                          @II            ( c ) =@         o
                   c                                III
                   o
                            =
               d                          @II        III ( c ) =@         c
                                                                                           h                                                                 i
                                                          0                                    @Y c         @Y c                    @D          o     dpII
                                      (1            c ) [U (RII )         + H 0 (TII )]        @ o    +     @pII         + Do + pII @p II             d o
                            =                                                                                                                                    ;
                                                                                 U (RII ) + H (TII )
which is negative under Assumption 7.
Proof of Proposition 6: Totally di¤erentiating (C19), we get:

                            d    c                   @I      II ( c ) =@
                                          =
                            d                        @I      II ( c ) =@
                                                                       [U 0 (RII ) + H 0 (TII )]                     II
                                          =                                                                          o+
                                                                                                                                               < 0;
                                                        1+                                     R                     w+2q o Do
                                                             U 0 (RI ) pI Do "op      2+       T
                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                      U              ( p)
                                                                                                               o + w+ 1+"o q o D o


                q       o     dpII    o
                    @D
where II      pII Y @       Y d
                                   > 0.
   Similarly, total di¤erentiating (C20) implies:

                                                d   c                @II III ( c ) =@
                                                          =
                                                d                   @II III ( c ) =@ c
                                                                  (1          0          0
                                                                        c ) [U (RII ) + H (TII )]                         II
                                                          =                                                                        > 0;
                                                                          U (RII ) + H (TII )
which completes the proof.

                                                                                     vii
D. The Case of PSR
   Under PSR, St = s (Mt            Xt ). The …rst-order conditions with respect to M; s; Y c ; Y o are:
                                                                          1 s 0
                            (1      )       (1 + s)U 0 + H 0                  V                          0; M      0;                      (D1)
                                                                          1 + +1
                        8               h                                  i
                        >
                        < (M       X)        (1        ) U0 +      1    0
                                                                       V+1    0; s                       0; if Z T = 1
                                                                  1+
                                                                                                                                           (D2)
                        >
                        : s = 0;                                                                             if   ZT   =0
                                                             0
                                                           V+1
                (1      ) (1 + s)U 0 + H 0 +                   (1         s         c
                                                                                                 w        qcY c)        0; Y c   0;        (D3)
                                                           1+
                                                    0
                                                  V+1
    (1    ) (1 + s) U 0 + H 0            (p) +        [(1           s)        (p)            o
                                                                                                         w      qoY o]      0; Y o    0;   (D4)
                                                  1+
with complementary slackness. The Benveniste-Scheinkman equation is the same as the one in
the FSR case (see equation (B5)). Substituting the restrictions that describe this phase (Z T = 1;
Z w = 0; Z o = 1; = ; = 0;) into (D1)-(D4) we have
                                                                             1 s 0
                                            (1 + s) U 0 + H 0                    V = 0;                                                    (D5)
                                                                             1 + +1
                                                                 1
                                                       U0 +        V 0 = 0;                                                                (D6)
                                                               1 + +1
                                                          0
                                                        V+1
                           (1 + s) U 0 + H 0 +              [1           s          c
                                                                                                 w        q c Y c ] = 0;                   (D7)
                                                        1+
                                                         0
                                                       V+1
                     (1 + s) U 0 + H 0       (p) +         [(1            s)        (p)              o
                                                                                                             w     q o Y o ] = 0;          (D8)
                                                       1+
   Also, the asset accumulation equation is:
                                                                                                 c
                        A+1 = (1 + r) A                (1     s) M + (1                 s              w) Y c +                            (D9)
                                                                                            qc           qo
                                   [(1       s)   (p)         o
                                                                         w] Y o                (Y c )2      (Y o )2 :
                                                                                            2             2
Combining (D5) and (D6), we have:

                                                             1       H0
                                                  U0 =          0
                                                               V+1 =    :                                                                  (D10)
                                                            1+       2

Then (D7) together with (D10) yield,
                                                       c
                                                           + w + q c Y c = 4:                                                              (D11)

Also, (D8) and (D10) give,
                                                  o
                                                      + w + q o Y o = 4 (p) :                                                              (D12)
   In the steady state, we have A+1 = A: Substituting (7), (8), (9) and (C7) into (D9), we get:

                                                                                                 qc          qo
     rA    (1        s) DM (I)     (3 + s) Y c         (3 + s)         (p) Do (p) +                 (Y c )2 + Do (p)2 = 0:                 (D13)
                                                                                                 2           2

                                                                  viii
Notice that (C6)-(C7) are identical to (D10)-(D12), so our equilibrium analysis for p , Y c and s is
the same as the one under the FSR. Thus, proposition 1 is valid under both FSR and PSR.
   Next, we write (D10) as:

            U 0 (1 + s) Y c + (p)Do (p)      DM (I)        = H 0 [Y c + (p)Do (p) + M ] =2;

which yields s = s(p): Direct di¤erentiation shows that
                                              R
                              0
                                       1+s    T
                                                  H

                             s (p) =              U
                                                       1    "op   1    Do :                   (D14)
                                        M    X
Consider Assumption 20 , which is analogous to but stronger than Assumption 2.
                  R
Assumption 20 :   T
                      H
                      U
                          s > 1.
Then we can establish the results of Lemma 3, namely that under Assumptions 1 and 20 , the trade
subsidy in stationary equilibrium is negatively related to the relative price of opium, whereas the
producer-trader’s assets in stationary equilibrium are positively related to the opium price. The
former result follows directly from equation (D14). To obtain the latter, di¤erentiate (D13) to
obtain exactly the same expression as in the case of FSR, namely equation (C10).




                                                  ix
                                                                           8
                40




                                                                           6
                30




                                                            Price per Chest ('000 taels)
   Volume (million of taels)




                                                                               4
                20




                                                            2
                10
                0




                                                                           0



                         1750   1800   1850   1900   1950                            1750   1800   1850   1900   1950
                                       Year                                                        Year




Chart A1. Volume and Price of Opium Exported to China.
                 40         30
  Volume (million of taels)
    10          20
                 0




                           1750   1800        1850              1900          1950
                                              Year

                                     Volume          11-year moving average




Chart A2. Norminal Volume of Export to and Import from China (in million
of taels).
                           60                    40
  Precious Metal Flow into China (million of taels)
          -40      -20        0        20




                                              1750          1800               1850     1900              1950
                                                                               Year

                                                      Precious Metal Flow into China   11-year moving average




Chart A3. Net Flow of Precious Metal into China (positive indicates net ‡ow
into China, million of taels).
                                                                          300
                    .4




                                                                          250
                    .3
   Exchange Rate (1 tael to pound)




                                                                               200
                                                                   Price Index
                       .2




                                                                 150
      .1




                                                                          100
                                                                          50
                    0




                              1860   1880   1900   1920   1940                  1750   1800   1850   1900   1950
                                            Year                                              Year




Chart A4. Exchange Rate and Price Index in UK.
