                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EDUCATIONAL CHOICE, RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                           Pei-Ju Liao
                                           Ping Wang
                                          Yin-Chi Wang
                                          Chong Kee Yip

                                       Working Paper 23939
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23939


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2017



 We are grateful for comments from Kaiji Chen, Chang-Tai Hsieh, B. Ravikumar, and Michael
 Song, as well as participants at the AREUEA-ASSA Annual Meetings, the Asian Meetings of the
 Econometric Society, the Conference on Chinese Economy at Tsinghua University, the Asian
 Bureau of Finance and Economic Research Conference, the Midwest Macro Meetings, the Public
 Economic Theory conference, the Society for Advanced Economic Theory Conference, the
 Symposium on Growth and Development at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Academia
 Sinica-Center for Chinese Economic Research joint workshop, and the annual meeting of the
 Society for Economic Dynamics, and seminar participants at Academia Sinica, Chinese
 University of Hong Kong, National Taiwan University and National Sun Yat-sen University, and
 Washington University in St. Louis. Travel support from the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
 Tsinghua University, the Center for Dynamic Economics of Washington University, and the
 Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan are greatly appreciated. We wish to express
 special thanks to Suqin Ge and Dennis Tao Yang for providing the data on the skill premium in
 China. Needless to say, the usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the
 authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
 research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23939.ack

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2017 by Pei-Ju Liao, Ping Wang, Yin-Chi Wang, and Chong Kee Yip. All rights reserved.
 Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
 provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Educational Choice, Rural-urban Migration and Economic Development
Pei-Ju Liao, Ping Wang, Yin-Chi Wang, and Chong Kee Yip
NBER Working Paper No. 23939
October 2017
JEL No. O15,O53,R23,R28

                                         ABSTRACT

Observing rapid structural transformation accompanied by a continual process of rural to urban
migration in many developing countries, we construct a micro founded dynamic framework to
explore how important education-based migration is, as opposed to work-based migration, for
economic development, urbanization and city workforce composition. We then calibrate our
model to fit the data from China over the period from 1980 to 2007, a developing economy
featuring not only large migration flows but major institutional reforms that may affect work and
education based migration differently. We find that, although education-based migration only
amounts to one-fifth of that of work-based migration, its contribution to the enhancement of per
capita output is larger than that of work-based migration. Moreover, the abolishment of the
government job assignment for college graduates and the relaxation of the work-based migration
have limited effects on economic development and urbanization. Furthermore, the increase in
college admission selectivity for rural students plays a crucial but negative role in China's
development, lowering per capita output and worsening the high-skilled employment share in
urban areas.


Pei-Ju Liao                                        Yin-Chi Wang
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
National Taiwan Unversity                          Chinese University of Hong Kong
Taipei, Taiwan                                     Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
pjliao@ntu.edu.tw                                  ycwang@cuhk.edu.hk

Ping Wang                                          Chong Kee Yip
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis                 Chinese University of Hong Kong
Campus Box 1208                                    Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
One Brookings Drive                                chongkeeyip@cuhk.edu.hk
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu
1        Introduction

During the post-WWII period, many developing countries have experienced rapid structural trans-
formation from traditional agricultural societies to modern economies. Accompanied by industri-
alization is a continual process of rural to urban migration, with labor force shifting toward more
productive sectors in cities. Its importance has led to a renewed interest in studying structural
change induced rural-urban migration, almost four decades after the celebrated contribution by
Todaro (1969) and Harris and Todaro (1970). This newer literature has restricted the attention
to work-based migration, with one noticeable exception by Lucas (2004) who emphasizes that the
reason for migration is to accumulate human capital when working in a city (i.e., work-based mi-
gration with educational purposes). In the real world, we have seen parents sending children to
urban areas for better quality of education or taking city jobs for their children to bene…t from
the urban provision of education. That is, the education-based migration may take place prior to
the participation in the job market. Moreover, as stressed by Heckman (1976) and Rosen (1976),
schooling not only leads to higher initial human capital at the entry to the job market but also
improves the e¢ cacy of on-the-job learning. That is, those sent by parents to take higher education
in cities are expected to accumulate human capital at higher rates than low-skilled migrant workers
under the learning mechanism elaborated by Lucas (2004).
        Yet, this “education-based migration”channel has been completely overlooked in the literature.
Just how important is the role played by education-based migration in economic development,
urbanization and city workforce composition and how signi…cant is this channel compared to work-
based migration? To address these questions, we develop a micro-founded dynamic framework
in which rural to urban migration is an integral part of economic development and structural
transformation and in which the two distinct channels of migration, work versus education based,
are both incorporated.
        While the framework we plan to construct is general, to quantify the causes and consequences of
the two distinct channels of migration requires disciplining the model to an economy of particular
interest. We choose to explore the issues for the case of China. This is not only because of its large
migration ‡ows but also its speci…c institutions that may a¤ect work and education based migration
di¤erently. Such institutions include, particularly, the zhaosheng system, the hukou system and
the college admission reforms, which we will further elaborate below.1 A natural question arises
    1
        We will brie‡y discuss the institutional backround and reforms in Section 3 when we calibrate our model to …t


                                                           1
immediately: What are the e¤ects of various institutions on the two channels of migration and the
resulting changes in economic development, urbanization and workforce composition? Moreover,
despite its rapid structural transformation and economic growth, China has experienced over the
past three decades much faster migration of low-skilled workers compared to the education-based
high-skilled. So what are the causes to the relative slowdown in the education-based channel and
the imbalanced migration between the skilled and the unskilled, and what are its consequences for
the process of development and urbanization?
    Before turning to our modeling and calibration strategies, we would like to begin by summariz-
ing some key observations using data from China from its open-door reform to the arrival of the
worldwide Great Recession, 1980-2007. During this period, China has experienced rapid economic
growth and urbanization. Real per capita GDP has grown at an annual rate of approximately
6.0 percent, whereas the comparable …gure since Deng Xiao-Ping’s Southern Trip in 1992 is 7.6
percent. Meanwhile, as shown in Figure 1(a,b), urbanization rates (urban population shares) and
urban output shares have increased from 19.4 to 44.9 percent and from 66.7 to 87.3 percent, re-
spectively, and the migration ‡ows (proxied by changes in urban population) over rural population
have nearly quadrupled, increasing from 0.5 to 1.9 percent.2 Concurrently, more rural students were
attending colleges because of the college expansion in the late 1990s, while empirical studies have
pointed out the phenomenon that fewer rural students were admitted to top universities. The above
observations motivate us to develop a theory to better understand the roles of skill development
and educational choices in the decision of rural to urban migration.
    Since most of the high quality universities are located in large metropolises in China, we consider
cities as places for higher education to take place.3 This compliments Lucas (2004) who views cities
as places for immigrants to accumulate human capital when working. In so doing we explore a po-
tentially important, education-based channel of rural to urban migration, which is called zhaosheng
in China. Under the strict internal migration control in China, zhaosheng has become a unique
channel that mitigates migration barriers: Students attend colleges by passing the National College
Entrance Examination, gaokao, to migrate to cities. This institutional migration channel enables us
to examine the role of the education-based migration in the development of China and to compare
the Chinese economy. Detailed discussion of the institutional background in China is relegated to Appendix A.
   2
     For urban output share, urbanization rates and migration out‡ows, the correlations range from 0.71 to 0.96.
   3
     See Appendix A for the detailed information on the rural-urban disparities in college admission rates and the
inequality in the distribution of educational resources in China.



                                                           2
the importance of this channel to that of work-based migration. Moreover, due to the college expan-
sion and the facts that most universities are located in cities and urban high-skilled jobs are much
better paid, one would expect that there shall be more youngsters migrating to cities for higher ed-
ucation. However, as shown in Table 1, the number and the annual growth rate of work-based (job
transfer, job assignment and work or business) migration far outweighed those of education-based
(studying or training). Therefore, it is worth to examine the factors that shaped rural youngsters’
migration patterns and the causes leading to the growing di¢ culty for rural students to attend top
colleges in urban areas.
   To answer the aforementioned questions, we construct a dynamic equilibrium model that includes
intergenerational migration decisions based on education. It allows human capital accumulation
and intergenerational mobility to explore both work- and education-based rural to urban migration.
Since college education is a large investment calling for full support by parents, it is natural to
lay the framework in a two-period overlapping generations model with altruistic parents making
crucial education-migration decisions for their children. Our theoretical analysis shows that as long
as the expected net payo¤ of college education dominates the outside option inclusive of work-based
migration, parents will send their children to cities to attend college. Parents will be more willing
to send their children to attend colleges whenever their children are more talented, the college
admission is less selective, the college education becomes cheaper, the job opportunities in urban
areas improve, and the work-based migration cost increases. However, the e¤ect of an increase in the
education-based migration cost on parent’s willingness to invest in college education is ambiguous.
   We then calibrate the model to Chinese data during the period from 1980 to 2007. To properly
capture some key policy changes, we separate our sample period into two regimes, 1980-1994 and
1995-2007. Such changes include the abolishment of the government job assignment (GJA) in 1994,
the relaxation of hukou-induced migration barriers since the mid-1990s, as well as the rise in college
tuition and the expansion of college admission in the 1990s.
   Our quantitative analysis investigates the in‡uences of both types of migration on development
and urbanization, and captures such institutional changes and reforms during the sample period.
We then further decompose the e¤ects of these various factors on China’s development and ur-
banization. Policy experiments on these institutional factors are also conducted. Our quantitative
analysis suggests that the contribution of education-based migration is larger than that of work-
based migration, accounting for 6.3 and 4.5 percent, respectively, of changes in per capita output



                                                  3
during the sample period. Interestingly, even in the sub-sample period of 1995–2007, we obtain a
similar pattern for the comparable contributions of education- and work-based migration (8.0 and
5.9 percent, respectively), although on average education-based migration only amounts to one-…fth
of that of work-based migration as shown in Table 1. This …nding suggests that without examining
the education channel, the picture of rural to urban migration in China could be severely misleading.
   Another important result is that total factor productivity (TFP) growth and the improvement
in human capital together account for about two-third of changes in per capita output, while the
impact of the termination of GJA and the relaxation of the work-based migration is limited. Last
but not least, the increase in admission selectivity for rural students plays a crucial but negative
role in China’s development. Although the college expansion policy introduced in 1996 has pro-
vided broader access to students from rural areas, increasing admission selectivity for rural children
lowers per capita output and seriously worsens the high-skilled employment share in urban areas.
Therefore, rising admission selectivity not only makes the education-based migration slower but also
hurts the skill-enhanced development in China.

Related Literature

   The older literature on migration is mostly empirical adopting reduced-from approach or theo-
retical under static or partial equilibrium setting. One exception is Glomm (1992), which develops
a dynamic general equilibrium model with persistent urbanization along the equilibrium path; an-
other is Lucas (2004) which rests the analysis in a continuous time framework. Our paper adopts
a dynamic macroeconomic model to study a new, namely, education-based, channel of rural-urban
migration in China. It can therefore be compared with the recent, dynamic model based studies on
job-related internal migration.
   Bond, Riezman and Wang (2015) examined the e¤ects of reductions in trade and migration
barriers on China’s growth and urbanization, focusing on China’s accession to the World Trade
Organization in 2002. Both Bond, Riezman and Wang (2015) and Restuccia, Yang and Zhu (2008)
highlight migration barriers as a main driver for the surplus labor and low productivity in rural areas.
Laing et. al (2005) construct a dynamic search equilibrium model to study the macroeconomic
consequences of illegal migrants in China (the so-called mangliu or pleasant ‡ood) due to the
presence of surplus labor. Garriga, Tang and Wang (2015) studied the structural transformation and
the consequent reallocation of labor from rural to urban areas in China. They found that two-thirds
of the increases in housing prices can be attributed to this urbanization and development processes.


                                                   4
Tombe and Zhu (2015) quanti…ed the e¤ects of opening the domestic market to international trade
on migration and regional income di¤erences in China and found that e¤ects of migration barrier
reduction are much stronger than international trade liberalization. As rural to urban migration
depends crucially on the trade o¤ between rural land productivity versus urban wage premium and
fringe bene…ts, Ngai, Pissarides and Wang (2016) showed that land policy is a major barrier on
industrialization in China.4
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and conducts
the theoretical analysis. The calibration strategy, simulation, decomposition analysis on education-
and work-based migration as well as the policy experiments are given in Section 3. Finally, Section
4 concludes the paper.


2        The Model

We develop a dynamic spatial equilibrium model with education and location choices to study the
continual process of rural-urban migration and to evaluate the policies that govern it. We use (i; j; k)
to denote three consecutive generations. There are two geographical regions, rural (R) and urban
(U ). Our optimization problem focuses only on the decision of rural parents (generation i) to send
their children to urban areas to have their education. Assume that there is an initial mass of workers
in urban areas given by (NH ; NL ), where NH (NL ) denotes the total number of workers with high
(low) skills. To focus on rural-urban migration, we only allow for exogenous reverse migration from
urban to rural areas. The residences of urban households are assumed to pass from one generation
to another. To simplify the analysis, we assume zero population growth so that the total population
in rural and urban areas is constant over time.


2.1        Production

In urban areas, output is produced from the following non-homothetic CES production function:

                                            YU = AF f(NH + ) h; NL g ;                                           (1)
    4
        There are other studies adopting computable general equilibrium frameworks or numerical simulation methods to
investigate the relationship between migration barriers and rural to urban income inequality in China. These studies
usually consider static or partial equilibrium settings with di¤erent research approaches.




                                                           5
where A > 0 is the technology scaling factor in urban areas (also called the urban TFP; hereafter,
we will use these two terms interchangeably),            is a constant endowment that resides in urban areas,
and h is the level of human capital possessed by high-skilled workers. The outcome of education is
the acquisition of h, which is assumed to be a constant level.5 The presence of                    allows …rms to
produce positive output even if there are no high-skilled workers.
       As it is well documented, the skilled labor wage of planning economies is commonly depressed.6
To capture the distortion, we introduce a distortionary wedge                  2 ( 1; 1) faced by urban …rms
when hiring high-skilled workers. Denoting wH as the e¤ective high-skilled wage received by high-
skilled workers and wL as the low-skilled wage, we obtain the urban wage rates as follows:
                                                             @YU
                                      (1 + ) wH    =                  = AFH ;                                    (2)
                                                        @ [(NH + ) h]
                                                        @YU
                                             wL =            = AFL ;                                             (3)
                                                        @NL
where FH = @F=@ [(NH + ) h] and FL = @F=@NL . Then, the skilled-unskilled wage ratio is:
                                                  wH h     h FH
                                                       =        :                                                (4)
                                                   wL    1 + FL
       Rural production uses only raw (or unskilled) labor, and constant returns requires a linear
production technology:
                                                     YR = BNR ;                                                  (5)

where NR is the number of raw laborers in the rural area and B is the technology scaling factor in
the rural area. A competitive labor market implies that the rural wage rate is:

                                                       wR = B:                                                   (6)


2.2       Rural households

Rural households (generation i) are altruistic and derive utility from both their own consumption
(ci ) and their children’s consumption (cj ). Each adult agent gives birth to a child. Assuming
the utility function u ( ) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, the representative household’s
objective is:
                                  i
                                      Ij jIi = 0; Ik ; xj = max u ci + EX u cj ;                                 (7)
                                                               Ij
   5
       We can think of h as an index on labor quality or human capital that results from the total number of years in
higher education.
   6
     For instance, see Maurer-Fazio (1999) for a discussion of the case of China.


                                                           6
where   is the altruistic factor on children, and Ij is an indicator function of migration such that7
       8
       < 0 if the household does not send generation j (children) to college in an urban area
  Ij =
       : 1 if the household sends generation j (children) to college in an urban area.

There are two types of costs in raising children. First, there is a basic requirement for resources,
                                                                                            i
which we assume to be a constant child-rearing cost, denoted by                                 . Second, there are costs to
improve the child’s quality, which we can summarize as education costs. Since talent matters for
education because people who are more talented study more e¢ ciently, we assume that part of the
education costs depend on the talent of the child. Speci…cally, we denote the education cost as xj ,
which is a random variable that consists of two parts; one part is inversely related to the talents of
the child z j and the college admission selectivity a, whereas the other part is a constant for basic
education expenses b:
                                                                1
                                                        xj          + b:                                                 (8)
                                                               az j
We note that z j is drawn from a distribution with cumulative distribution function denoted by
G z j . Finally, as the education of children takes place only in urban areas, there is a constant
migration cost for education denoted by                 e   which captures the basic moving expenses.8 Thus, the
budget constraint for a rural parent is:

                                              ci + Ij       xj +       e   +   i
                                                                                   = wR :                                (9)

       Children who are sent to urban areas become skilled workers after receiving their education.
They can obtain jobs that need high (low) skills in urban areas, earning a wage wH (wL ) with
probability       H   (   L );   otherwise, they are forced to move back to rural areas, earning a rural wage
wR . Children that remain in the rural area do not incur any cost in education or migration for their
parents. When these children turn adults, they either get recruited as low-skilled workers in urban
areas and earn wL (with probability               ) or work in a rural area and earn wR . Here,                   should be
   7
       Because most tertiary schools in China are located in cities, we ignore the possibility of parents sending children
to rural colleges. According to the data from the Chinese Ministry of Education, up to 2015, there are 2553 junior
colleges, colleges and universities in China, and only 12 of them (0.47%) are located in county-level cities. The rest
(99.53%) are located in prefectural-level cities or municipalities.
   8
     The migration costs can be interpreted as the costs of obtaining the legal right to stay in cities, transportation
costs between hometowns and cities and urban living costs. As college students usually enjoy cheaper housing provided
by the universities, we di¤erentiate migration costs into education-based and work-based migration costs.




                                                                   7
regarded as “net”rural-urban migration for low skilled workers (i.e., migration in‡ows to cities net
of out‡ows).9 Their income (generation j) in the adulthood is given by:

              W j = Ij [   H wH h      +    L wL    + (1         H       L ) wR ]     + 1      Ij [(1             ) wR + (wL                    w )] ;            (10)

where            w   is the constant work-based migration cost for the low-skilled workers. Then, the children’s
budget constraint is given by:

                           cj + Ik         Ij (1         H       L)   + 1         Ij (1       )        xk +       e   +     j
                                                                                                                                = W j;                            (11)

where
          8
          < 0 if children do not send generation k (grandchildren) to college in an urban area
       k
      I =
          : 1 if children send generation k (grandchildren) to college in an urban area


and xk is the education cost of grandchildren going to college in cities. When households of genera-
tion i decide Ij , xk is unknown. We use X to denote the random variable of education cost in their
value function                 i.   For illustration purposes, we plot the timeline of the model in Figure 2.
          An agent’s discrete choice problem is to decide whether to send his or her child to an urban area
to attend college (Ij = 1 versus Ij = 0). That is, the agent compares                                             i   1j0; Ik ; xj to           i       0j0; Ik ; xj
                                                                                                                                                              i
and chooses the highest value between the two. By substituting ci = wR                                                          Ij    xj +          e             and
                                                                                                             j
cj = W j              Ik       Ij (1       H        L)   + 1         Ij (1        )    xk +       e              into the value functions, where
W j is given by (10), we have:
                           i
                                1j0; Ik ; xj        = u wR            xj          e
                                                                                       i

                                                                      0                                                                     1
                                                                             H wH h +       L wL + (1                 H         L ) wR
                                                          + EX u @                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                      j
                                                                             Ik   (X) (1          H          L ) (X   +     e)

and
                                                          h                                                                                                           i
  i
           0j0; Ik ; xj = u wR                 i
                                                    + EX u (1                ) wR + (wL                 w)       Ik (X) (1            ) (X +             e)
                                                                                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                                                                                          :

De…ning the net gain in value for sending children to urban areas to continue their education as
 i        Ik ; xj          i    1j0; Ik ; xj         i    0j0; Ik ; xj , we obtain:
          i
               Ik ; xj     = u wR              xj         e
                                                                 i
                                                                        u wR           i
                                                                                                                                                               (12)
                                         8                                                                                                                    9
                                         < u                                                             k                                                j   =
                                                         H wH h+ L wL + (1- H - L ) wR -I                    (X) (1-      H - L ) (X+ e ) -
                                    + EX                                                                                                                        :
                                         :                    -u (1- ) wR + (wL -                     k (X) (1                              j                 ;
                                                                                            w ) -I                        ) (X+      e) -

      9
          This is true from the macro perspective. Net ‡ows from rural to urban areas have always been positive.


                                                                               8
Further, we de…ne n        (NH + )h=NL to be the high-skilled to low-skilled labor ratio. Then, the

high-skilled and low-skilled e¤ective wage in (2) and (3) can be rewritten as:

                           (1 + ) wH = Af 0 (n) ;   wL = A f (n)    nf 0 (n) ;

where Af (n) = AF [n; 1] = YU =NL . With wH (wL ) is decreasing (increasing) in n, the skilled-
unskilled wage ratio is decreasing in n. De…ning ns such that wH h=wL = 1 when n = ns , we impose
the following condition:

Condition S wH (ns ) h = wL (ns ) > B +       w.


If Condition S holds, then any urban job pays (net of the work-based migration cost) better than
the rural job. To better understand Condition S, we plot the high- and low-skilled wages against n
in Figure 3. Condition S requires that urban wages, net of work-based migration costs, are higher
than rural wages. It is a condition to guarantee that, as long as children can …nd a job in cities,
rural parents will send them to urban areas to attend college. Our next concern is the likelihood
of …nding a job in the urban area. We impose an assumption on the probabilities of acquiring an
urban job: the probability of …nding an urban job via education must be higher than that of …nding
one through other channels.

Assumption 1      H   +    L   > .

Assumption 1 states that the probability of securing an urban job after receiving a college education
cannot be lower than the probability that a rural worker …nds an urban job through non-educational
channels. Thus, Condition S and Assumption 1 together imply that the expected urban wage
income is higher than the rural wage income. Since urbanization and development depend on
the composition and relative size of the urban workforce, Condition S and Assumption 1 simply
highlights the fact that urban jobs are more attractive than rural jobs to the household. As a result,
rural parents will consider sending their children to cities to attend college.

   Although our framework is general, we can easily connect our model to the institutions in
China. First of all, the relaxation of internal migration restrictions that has raised migrants’chance
to get urban jobs is summarized by the probability parameters         H,   L     and   . The changes in
these three parameters represent the e¤ects of policy reforms including the GJA and the loosened
control on work-based migration. Next, changes in the education policy that alter the value of
the education-based migration are given by the admission selectivity parameter a and the basic

                                                    9
expenditure parameter b in the education cost variable xj . These education parameters provide a
short cut to study the e¤ects of the gaokao system as well as the reforms like the college education
expansion and increases in college tuition since 1996. Finally, the resulting reduction in the moving
costs of rural-urban migration is captured by           e   and   w.



2.3       Comparative statics

To have a better understanding of the comparative statics, we separate the e¤ect of migration of
(12) into two parts:

                               i
                                   Ik ; xj   = u wR         xj    e
                                                                               i
                                                                                   u wR    i
                                               |                          {z                   }
                                                         direct consumption e¤ect
                                                     n                             o
                                                 + EX u cjU               u cjR      :
                                                  |        {z                      }
                                                     intergenerational e¤ect

The direct consumption e¤ect is always negative because parents’consumption is lower due to the
education and migration costs, whereas the intergenerational e¤ect is ambiguous. Condition S and
Assumption 1 together assure that the intergenerational e¤ect is positive which is necessary for
parents to send their children to cities to attend college:10

Proposition 1 Under Assumption 1 and Condition S, the intergenerational e¤ ect of migration is
positive.

       The intuition of the above proposition is straightforward. If the probability of …nding an urban
job via education is reasonably high (Assumption 1) and rewarding (Condition S), then the higher
expected urban wage provides an incentive for parents to pay the educational and migration costs
of their children’s education via altruism. Otherwise, this choice would not be a good “investment”
from the parents’perspective. Thus, we conclude

Corollary Under Assumption 1 and Condition S, if the positive intergenerational e¤ ect dominates
the negative direct consumption e¤ ect, then parents will send their children to cities to attend college.



       We then examine how the net gain in education                  i    Ik ; xj responds to changes in the para-
meterization, i.e., we examine whether the “marginal” parent (a parent who is indi¤erent between
sending her child to attend college in an urban area or keeping the child in the rural area so that
  10
       All the proofs are relegated to Appendix B.


                                                            10
  i    Ik ; xj = 0) will send her child to receive an education. Based on the straightforward computa-
tion of comparative statics, we obtain the following proposition:

Proposition 2 Under Condition S and Assumption 1, more parents will be willing to send their
children to urban areas to attend college

      1. when their children become more talented ( zj "), or when education becomes cheaper ( b #).

      2. when the chances that their children can obtain an urban job are higher (                     H   ",   L   ").

      3. when the chance of being low-skilled workers decreases (                    #).


Finally, to examine how changes in migration costs (                    e   and     w)   a¤ect parents’decisions, we …rst
compute the e¤ects of         e:


                d   i    Ik ; xj                     n                                                   o
                                 =   uicU       EX         ujcU (1      H     L)     ujcR (1     ) Ik (X) :
                        d e
The …rst term on the RHS highlights the standard negative direct e¤ect of an increase in the
education-based migration cost on parents’ consumption. However, once the child is sent to the
urban area, the higher future education-based migration cost of the grandchild can be saved. This
indirect or intergenerational positive e¤ect on the education-based migration cost is captured by
the second term on the RHS (which is shown to be positive below). However, for the work-based
migration cost      w,   its e¤ect only works through the intergenerational channel:

                                            d    i       Ik ; xj
                                                                   =    ujcR > 0:
                                                     d    w

This is intuitive since a rise in the work-based migration cost makes education investment relatively
more attractive to the parents. Thus, we can conclude the following:

Proposition 3 Under Condition S and Assumption 1, if the intergenerational e¤ ect dominates the
direct consumption e¤ ect, then more parents will be willing to send their children to attend college in
urban areas when the education-based migration cost increases. For the work-based migration cost,
its increase always makes parents willing to send their children to attend college.

      We have studied the rural-urban migration decision as an outcome of two opposing e¤ects: a
negative direct consumption e¤ect on the parents and a positive intergenerational e¤ect on the
o¤springs. If the latter dominates the former, then education-based migration takes place. Our

                                                                   11
comparative statics …t some salient features of the Chinese rural-urban migration experience. Specif-
ically, we analyze the abolishment of the GJA policy as a fall in                       H;   the changes in college admission
selectivity or the easiness for rural students to attend colleges as changes in a; the rising college
tuition since 1992 as an increase in b; the loosening control over rural unskilled migrant workers in
the 1990s as both an increase in           and a fall in the work-based migration cost                      w.   We will quantify
our model to study the impacts of the changes in these parameters on the threshold talents – the
education-based migration –as well as the important economic variables of China.


2.4   Evolution of workers

In this section, we study the population dynamics of rural-urban migration. Recall that adult agents
supply labor to the market and that each agent gives birth to only one child, so the entire adult
                                                  t ; N t be the skilled and unskilled workers in
population participates in the labor market. Let NH    L

the urban area and NRt be the rural labor force, all at time t. Denote J; K = fH; Lg as the type of
jobs for generation-j and generation-k urban workers. Let                          JK   be the transitional probability for
an urban generation-k worker born to a generation-j urban worker with job J, working as a type
K worker in an urban area. Thus,            JK   captures job mobility across generations in the urban areas.
In general, we expect that       JJ   >    JK    for J 6= K, implying that the child is more likely to work as
a type-J worker when the parent is a type-J worker. Under the assumption that the residences of
urban households are passed from one generation to another, we have:
                                                          X
                                                                JK   = 1:                                                       (13)
                                                          K

Then, the populations of skilled, unskilled and rural laborers evolve according to the following law
of motion equations:
                                                 Z
    t+1            t               t
   NH     =    HH NH   +       LH NL   +   NRt        Ij z j ; Ik     H dG(z
                                                                               j
                                                                                   );                                           (14)
                                                  Z                                     Z h                      i
   NLt+1 =         t
               HL NH +
                                   t    t
                               LL NL + NR              Ij z j ; Ik           j
                                                                       L dG(z ) +             1   Ij z j ; Ik         dG(z j ) ;(15)

   NRt+1 = (1        HH
                                      t
                                HL ) NH    + (1           LH
                                                                          t
                                                                    LL ) NL
                       Z                                                    Z h                        i
              +NRt         j
                           I     j
                                z ;I   k
                                           (1         H
                                                                       j
                                                               L ) dG(z ) +    1         Ij z j ; Ik       (1        ) dG(z j ) ;(16)




                                                                12
                                                               0 ; N 0 and N 0 , respectively. Using
where the initial urban and rural labor forces are denoted by NH    L       R

(13), we can simplify (14)–(16) as follows:
                                                                           Z
              t+1               t                            t
             NH     =       HH NH      + (1            LL ) NL   +   NRt       Ij z j ; Ik H dG(z j );                       (17)
                                                                                  Z
             NLt+1 = (1                    t
                                     HH ) NH       +        t
                                                        LL NL    + NRt          + Ij z j ; Ik ( L            ) dG(z j ) ;    (18)
                                                   Z
             NRt+1 = NRt (1                    )        Ij z j ; Ik (      H   +    L        ) dG(z j ) :                    (19)

Finally, combining (17) and (18), we can see that the residences of urban households are passed
from one generation to another:
                                                             Z
                         NUt+1   =   NUt   +   NRt       +       Ij z j ; Ik (       H   +   L      ) dG(z j ) ;

where NUt        t + N t denotes the total urban workforce at time t.
                NH    L

    Figure 4 plots the ‡ows of workers in the model economy. For the quantitative analysis in the
next section, we will focus on the case where all high-skilled parents produce high-skilled children,
i.e.,   HH   = 1.


2.5     Equilibrium

In equilibrium, all labor markets clear under the factor prices fwH ; wL ; wR g given by (2), (3) and
(6):
                                                     NJdt = NJt ;      J = H; L; R;                                          (20)

where NJdt denotes labor demand of type J. In addition, there is the overall population restriction
for each period:
                                                         t
                                                        NH + NLt + NRt = N;                                                  (21)

where N is the constant population size in each period.
    To conclude this section, we de…ne the competitive equilibrium for our model.

De…nition. A dynamic competitive spatial equilibrium (DCSE) of the model consists of mi-
gration choice      Ij    and wage rates fwH ; wL ; wR g, such that
(i) (Optimization) given wage rates fwH ; wL ; wR g, Ij                            solves (7) subject to (9), (10) and (11);
(ii) (Market clearing) wage rates fwH ; wL ; wR g satisfy (2), (3) and (6), and labor markets clear
according to (20); and
(iii) (Population identity) given the initial population                            0 ;N 0 ;N 0
                                                                                   NH               and the distribution of talent
                                                                                        L    R

G(z j ), the population evolves according to (17)–(19) and is restricted by the identity (21).

                                                                     13
3         Quantitative Analysis

We are interested in studying the contribution of the education-based migration to the Chinese
economy within the post-reform regime but before the …nancial tsunami, namely, the 1980–2007
period. Because the GJA policy was eliminated in 1994, it is natural to break the entire period into
two sub-periods: Regime 1, spanning from 1980 to 1994, and Regime 2, ranging from 1995 to 2007.11
We …rst conduct the two-regime calibration by …tting the model to the Chinese data. Based on
the two-regime calibration, annual urban TFPs and distortions                    are drawn out. We then simulate
the model annually, from 1980 to 2007, based on the calibrated parameters. Finally, the simulated
economy is taken as our benchmark model and we proceed to perform analyses on decomposition
and policy experiments to examine the roles of education-based migration in China’s development.


3.1         Calibration and simulation

Because reverse migration of education-based is negligible in practice, we rule it out in our calibra-
tion. Below we brie‡y describe how we calibrate the model, while relegating calibration details and
data sources to Appendix C.


3.1.1         Two-regime calibration

A model period is 25 years. Total population is normalized to one in every period. Urban (rural)
population in the model is equal to the share of urban (rural) to total population and is computed
using the data on populations by rural and urban residence. We term workers with educational
attainment of college and above (below) as high (low)-skilled. Then, using the data on urban
employment by educational attainment and the share of urban population, we compute the stocks
of high- and low-skilled workers.
         The utility function is assumed to take the standard CRRA form:

                                                         c1 " 1
                                               u (c) =          ;     " > 1;
                                                           1 "

where " is the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS). In the literature, the
Pareto distribution is commonly associated with wealth and income, which are believed to be closely
    11
         Analogous to our theoretical model, we consider the whole Chinese economy to be two geographical regions, rural
and urban, and dismiss the di¤erentiation of within- and cross-provicial migration.




                                                             14
related to one’s talent. Therefore, we assume that children’s talents z j follow a Pareto distribution,
with the CDF given by:
                                                       zmin
                                      G zj = 1                 ;   zj    zmin ;
                                                        zj
where zmin and       are the location and shape parameters of the Pareto distribution, respectively. Be-
low, we …rst describe the preset common parameters and then the preset regime-speci…c parameters.
Then we elaborate on the methods of identifying the remaining parameters.
      China is well known for its high saving rates and low annual time preference rates. We thus set
the annual time preference at 1 percent, which is close to Song et al. (2011). The parental altruistic
factor for children      is hence equal to 0.7798. The inverse of the EIS parameter " is set at 1.5, which
is common in the literature. There is no nationwide survey of child-rearing costs for rural China.
We follow the estimate in the literature to set         such that the percentage of the child-rearing cost to
rural household income ~ is 17.4 percent in both regimes. For the Pareto distribution parameters,
we set zmin to one according to the literature on …rm size distribution, productivity and international
trade.12 Since talents are unobservable but are found to be correlated with income levels, we set
to 2.5 using rural household net income data from the Chinese Household Income Project (CHIP).
Our value is close to the estimate for the United States. The last preset common parameter is the
elasticity of substitution between high- and low-skilled labor 1= (1              ). As pointed out by previous
studies, the estimated values for Asian economies are usually larger, mostly falling between 2 and 7,
than those for developed countries, ranging from 1 to 3. We thus choose the elasticity of substitution
between high- and low-skilled labor to be 3 so that            equals 0.6667.
      Denote ~ e (~ w ) as the education-based (work-based) migration cost as a percentage of rural
household income. Considering work-based migration cost as urban living costs and the required
costs for moving to urban areas, we compute ~ w from CHIP 2002 and obtain a value of 55.54%
and 30.79% of rural household income for regimes 1 and 2, respectively. Education-based migration
cost includes the costs of food and dormitory for a college student. Assuming that a student stays
in college for four years and adjusting for model periods, we obtain the education-based migration
cost ~ e to be 0.1021 for regime 2. The data on education-based migration cost prior to 1996 is not
available, so we compute ~ e for regime 1 by assuming that ~ e and ~ w grow at the same rate across
the two regimes and obtain ~ e =0:1841 for regime 1.
      The main spirits of China’s education reforms are captured by the endogenous threshold in
 12
      See, for example, Ghironi and Melitz (2005), Bernard et al. (2003), and Eaton and Kortum (2002).



                                                         15
talents and parameters controlling admission selectivity and cost of college education, a and b. We
will address the pinning down of the threshold talent and a using model equations later. College
education was almost free of charge before 1990. Thus, b in regime 1 only includes stationary,
materials and textbooks while b in regime 2 further includes tuition costs. Using Urban Household
Survey (UHS) 2007 and 2008, b equals 0.48% and 5.28% of rural household income in regimes 1 and
2. The sharp change in b re‡ects the increase in college tuition in the late 1990s of China.
      Under the linear rural production technology, the scaling factor B is equal to the rural wage rate.
Being interested in the relative economic positions of rural and urban China and understanding
how regional technological disparities shape individuals’ migration decisions, we normalize rural
per capita income in 2007 to 1. Then we compute the rural per capita income over 1980–2007.
The average of B is 0.3685 and 0.7177 for regimes 1 and 2, respectively. It is notable that such
normalization of rural per capita income together with zmin = 1 imply that only parents with
relatively talented children can a¤ord to send their children to college. This is because rural parents
have to maintain their own consumption and pay the child-rearing cost in addition to costs of college
education and education-based migration.
      We now turn to the rates at which college graduates …nd jobs and the migration probability
for rural workers. All the job …nding probabilities are the ones facing by each cohort. During
the years of the GJA policy (1951–1994), a college graduate was assigned a stable job (either in
the government or in state-owned enterprises), usually in an urban work unit. In contrast, after
the termination of the GJA policy, jobs for college graduates were no longer guaranteed. In line
with the GJA policy, we set             H   = 1 and          L   = 0 in regime 1, meaning that college graduates
from rural China are fully employed (                H   +   L   = 1). For regime 2, the data on the employment
rate of college graduates from rural China is not available. We thus use urban employment rates
from CHIP in 1995, 2002 and 2007 to proxy for the employment rate of college graduates from
rural areas. The average value, 0.9209, is set to be the employment rate in city districts for college
graduates in regime 2. Note that             L   is the job mismatching rate for college graduates, which we
do not have information for. We set              L   to 0.05, and      H   is thus solved as 0.8709 in regime 2.13 For
the probability capturing the rate of work-based net migration ‡ows , as there is no nationwide
survey on rural-urban migration in China during the periods under examination, we use changes
in urban population as a proxy for rural-urban migration ‡ows and compute                         based on migration
 13
      The calibration results are not sensitive to our choice of      L.




                                                                 16
‡ows due to employment to rural population ratio.14 As reported in Table 2, the average migration
probabilities for rural workers         in regime 1 and regime 2 are 0.0036 and 0.0083, respectively.15
       The next one is the human capital possessed by high-skilled workers relative to low-skilled
workers, h. We …rst compute the average years of schooling for high- and low-skilled workers
and take Mincerian coe¢ cients from the literature for the two regimes. Following the Mincerian
method, we then compute the regime-speci…c h and obtain 1.3529 and 1.5928 for regimes 1 and 2,
respectively. The last preset regime-speci…c parameters are intergenerational mobility. Assuming
that the residences of urban households are passed from one generation to another and allowing
upward mobility, we have         HH   = 1,   HL   = 0 and    LH + LL     = 1 in both regimes.16 The probabilities
of remaining low-skilled workers across generations (            LL )   in the two regimes are calibrated to match
the NH =NL ratios using (17)-(19) and the zhaosheng ‡ows data (computed in the same way as that
for migration ‡ows due to employment as reported in Table 2).                 LL   thus equals 0.9996 and 0.9883 in
regimes 1 and 2, respectively.17 The decreasing             LL   shows that intergenerational mobility in China
has improved over 1995–2007.
       The regime-speci…c distortions faced by urban …rms when hiring high-skilled workers, the urban
TFPs A in the two regimes, the CES production high-skilled labor share                    and the non-homothetic
term        are calibrated to match the regime average skill premiums (wH h=wL ), urban premiums
(wL =wR ) and urban output shares (YU =Y ). Note that                      > 0 in the CES production function
implies decreasing returns to scale technologies, and              can be perceived as an urban infrastructure
or producer rent that is used to facilitate production in cities. The targets of urban output shares
thus contain additional information in addition to employment and wage measures and can serve to
calibrate both        and . The calibrated         and      are equal to 0.8461 and 0.0618, the regime-speci…c
distortions       are 7.1103 and 5.4763, and the urban TFPs in the two regimes are equal to 5.3877 and
11.0573, respectively. Our results show that urban TFP is growing faster relative to rural TFP: the
  14
       Although Longitudinal Survey on Rural Urban Migration in China provides migration information, it only starts
in 2008 which is not the period that we examine in this paper.
  15
     We notice that migrants with di¤erent hukou status would have di¤erent urban bene…ts. However, our focus
is the overall contribution of work-based migration compared to that of education-based. Our calibration is thus
employment-based, rather than hukou-based. Considering workers’hukou status will not change our main results.
  16
     The average years of schooling in China for people aged 15 and over have increased from 4.86 years in 1980 to
7.51 years in 2010, showing an overall pattern of upward mobility in education.
  17
     We have matched the NH =NL data series and considered xiagang when computing urban employment rate. Thus,
the reform of xiagang is being taken care of.



                                                            17
implied annual urban TFP growth rate is 5.47 percent. In addition, the distortion                faced by urban
…rms in regime 2 is reduced by more than 22 percent compared to that in regime 1, indicating that
the market distortions due to the planned economy have been greatly alleviated.
      Denote z^ the threshold in children’s talent such that when a child is equipped with the talent
z^, his parents are indi¤erent between sending him to college or keeping him at home. When a
child is talented such that z j               1= a xj   b     z^, his parents will de…nitely send him to colleges
(    i (Ik ; xj )    0 ). The endogenous threshold z^ therefore dichotomizes the “destiny”of rural children.
                   ~ t as the zhaosheng ‡ow at time t. N
Speci…cally, de…ne N                                      ~ t can be written as:
                    E                                      E
                                    Z
                           ~t = Nt                                zmin
                          N E     R   Ij z j ; Ik dG(z j ) = NRt         :                                  (22)
                                                                    z^
                           ~ t )1= and z^ can be obtained using the zhaosheng ‡ows data. The
Therefore, z^ = zmin (NRt =NE

computed average z^ for regimes 1 and 2 are equal to 17.7632 and 13.1391, respectively. The decrease
in z^ captures the college expansion in China: more rural students are going to colleges. With z^,
we can solve the last parameter a by the indi¤erence boundary equation (12). The calibrated a are
1.1489 and 0.4701 for regimes 1 and 2. The decrease in a re‡ects the fact of the draining in rural
talents so that college admission is becoming more selective for rural students. This is consistent
with the data that it becomes more di¢ cult for rural students to attend top universities in China.
Table 3 reports the calibration results. Based on the above parameters, our next step is to calibrate
the annual urban TFP and distortions for 1981-2007 and to perform a simulation to serve as our
benchmark model.


3.1.2         Calibration of the annual urban TFP and distortions

To calibrate the annual urban TFP and , we …rst need the annual NR , NH and NL based on the
model. Following the same method in the two-regime calibration, we compute the annual zhaosheng
‡ows. Together with the data on NR , NH and NL in 1980 and the calibrated parameters (including

    H,   L,    ,    HH ,   HL ,   LH ,   LL   and ), we solve the threshold z^ of 1980 based on (22). The 1980–
1981 work-based migration ‡ows are also solved according to the equation: Work-based migration
             h             i
‡owt = NRt 1 1 (zmin =^ z ) . Furthermore, from the evolution of workers equations (14)–(16), we
compute the model implied NR , NH and NL for 1981. We then repeat this procedure to obtain
annual series for z^, NR , NH , and NL . Assuming that the annual growth rate of human capital is
constant over 1980–2007, we compute the annual series of h so that the average human capital in


                                                             18
regimes 1 and 2 are exactly equal to those in the two-regime calibration. Finally, with the time
series data on rural per capita income, the annual urban TFP A and distortions                       are solved to
match the urban premium (wL =wR ) and skill premium (wH h=wL ).
       Figure 5 plots the calibrated urban TFP and rural TFP for 1981–2007. It can be observed that
the urban TFP grows relatively faster than the rural TFP after 1985, corresponding to China’s
economic reform, the privatization of state-owned enterprises and the deregulation of price controls.
As reported in Table 3, the relative urban-rural TFP growth rate over our sample period is approx-
imately 0.39 percent per year. Figure 6 provides a comparison between the model and the data
on urban per capita output and total output per capita.18 We de…ne the urbanization rates in the
model as the shares of urban workers. Figure 7 compares the model to the data on urbanization
rates and the stocks of urban high- and low-skilled workers. Our model shows a lower urbanization
rate and a smaller stock of low-skilled workers than the data do, with the discrepancies between the
model and the data widening over time. The gaps can be explained by the migration ‡ows inputted
when we calibrate the model. Because our model only considers two channels of migration, the
data on migrants who migrated for non-educational and non-employment reasons (accounting for
approximately 50 percent of total migration) are thus excluded in the calibration. However, these
migrants could migrate due to other reasons but became low-skilled workers later. As a result, our
model underestimates the stock of low-skilled workers and the urbanization rate. As the model
generates fewer workers in urban areas, especially fewer low-skilled workers, the urban per capita
output in the model is slightly higher than that observed in the data. Additionally, as there are
more rural workers in the model and rural technology is less productive, total output per capita in
the model is slightly lower than that observed in the data.
       This calibrated economy serves as our benchmark model for the decomposition analysis and
for the policy experiments. Table 4 summarizes the annual averages of important macroeconomic
variables in the benchmark model for regimes 1 and 2 as well as for the entire sample period. As
expected, total output per capita in regime 2 is more than double that in regime 1, urban output
shares increase, and urban employment shares increase. These imply that urban production becomes
more important in regime 2. Furthermore, our model shows that the high-skilled employment shares
in urban areas in regime 2 are more than quadruple the shares in regime 1, while the skill premium
  18
       Based on equations (1) and (5), we use the NH , NL and NR data to calculate urban per capita output and total
output. See Appendix C for details.




                                                          19
still increases. These trends are all consistent with the experience of China’s development.


3.2       Decomposition: The contributions of zhaosheng and work-based migration

To identify the contribution of each migration channel and to study the total e¤ects of migration
on China’s development process, we eliminate the migration channels sequentially. The e¤ect of
the channel under study is thus the di¤erence in results between the model with the channel being
excluded and the benchmark model.
       Figure 8 plots urban per capita output, total per capita output, and urbanization rates under
the decomposition. The benchmark model and the three scenarios are plotted for comparison: (1)
work-based migration is eliminated; (2) zhaosheng is eliminated; and (3) both migration channels are
eliminated. In the …rst scenario, when the work-based migration is eliminated, the only “new”source
of low-skilled workers coming from countryside is unlucky college graduates. Consequently, there
are much fewer productive low-skilled workers in cities, resulting in a larger high-to-low skilled labor
ratio and a higher urban per capita output. Furthermore, as the migration volume via the work-
based migration is large, the urbanization rate in this scenario is much lower than the benchmark
case. In the second scenario in which zhaosheng is eliminated, once again, as the volume of migration
through the zhaosheng channel is small, the urbanization rate in this case is very close to that in
the benchmark model. This shows that the majority of rural-urban migration is work-based. With
fewer productive high-skilled workers in the cities, urban per capita output is now slightly lower
than that in the benchmark case.
       To identify the magnitude of the contribution of migration types to major macroeconomic vari-
ables, Table 5 reports the percentage change relative to the benchmark model for the above three
scenarios. Given the large volume of work-based migration, the conventional wisdom is that the
e¤ects of work-based migration on output levels should far outweigh the e¤ects of education-based
migration. However, our results in Table 5 show that the contribution of education-based migration
cannot be overlooked: zhaosheng and work-based migration explain 6.3 percent and 4.5 percent of
total output per capita in the benchmark model over the entire sample period, respectively.19 We
also …nd that zhaosheng contributes to roughly one-third of the high-skilled employment share in
  19
       Our framework does not consider spillover e¤ects in cities, as mentioned in Lucas (2004). If low-skilled workers
can bene…t from high-skilled workers in urban areas, the role of education-based migration in our model will be even
more important.




                                                           20
the benchmark model and thereby lowers the skill premium, while work-based migration reduces
the high-skilled employment share and boosts the skill premium. Furthermore, the result suggests
that zhaosheng is more important in regime 2 than in regime 1: zhaosheng in regime 2 explains
8.0 percent of total output per capita in the benchmark model, while it only explains 2.0 percent
of total output per capita in regime 1. There are several con‡icting forces in‡uencing the e¤ects
of zhaosheng: a higher skill premium, a higher human capital level and a lower education-based
migration cost in regime 2 attract more migration through the zhaosheng channel, whereas the
higher tuition cost and the termination of the GJA policy depress education-based migration. Our
quantitative results show that the three positive e¤ects dominate the two negative e¤ects. The
e¤ects of zhaosheng on total output per capita and urban employment share in regime 2 are larger
than those in regime 1.
   As shown in Table 5, our results also show rich interactions between zhaosheng and work-based
migration on the skill premium, high-skilled employment share, total output per capita, and urban
output and employment shares. It is intuitive that the interactive e¤ect is strongest on the high-
skilled employment share (accounting for 11 percent of its change over the entire sample period)
because work-based migration leads to a higher skill premium that attracts more education-based
migration. For the other variables, several con‡icting forces are involved in the resulting interactive
e¤ect. First, if work-based migration is not allowed, rural residents can still move to urban areas
via the zhaosheng channel. Second, high-skilled workers (mainly from zhaosheng) and low-skilled
workers (mainly from work-based migration) are substitutes in production. Third, when there is a
larger stock of low-skilled workers in the cities, the skill premium is boosted up. The higher skill
premium thus encourages more parents to send their children to cities to attend college. Fourth,
there exists upward intergenerational mobility. The last two forces are positive, while the …rst two
are negative. The results show that the skill premium is the dominant e¤ect; thereby, a minor but
positive interaction between zhaosheng and work-based migration is observed.


3.3   Factor decomposition

China experienced huge changes in the past decades, such as institutional reforms on education,
market intervention and migration regulation. Here we provide an eleven-factor decomposition in
regime 2 to study the contribution of each factor of our concern to the development of China. The
eleven factors refer to the abolishment of the GJA policy (lower    H   in regime 2), better work-based


                                                  21
job opportunities (higher     in regime 2), an increase in the education-based migration cost (higher
 e ),   an increase in the work-based migration cost (higher   w ),   increases in both urban and rural
TFP, an improvement in human capital h, an increase in child-rearing cost (higher ), less market
distortion (lower     in regime 2), better intergenerational mobility (lower    LL   in regime 2), rising
admission selectivity (lower a in regime 2), and an increase in college tuition (higher b in regime 2).
Each experiment is conducted by setting the corresponding parameter back to the level of regime 1,
while others remain unchanged. The percentage change relative to the regime 2 benchmark model
(as reported in Table 4) is then computed.
    The results of the factor decomposition are provided in Table 6 and are summarized below. First
of all, the TFP growth, the improvement in human capital and the better intergenerational mobility
contribute the most to the increases in the total output per capita, accounting for 52.9%, 10.8%
and 12.3% respectively, whereas the rising admission selectivity greatly damp the total output per
capita (depressed by 24.8%). Secondly, the better intergenerational mobility, the improvement in
human capital and the TFP growth also matter for the increase in urban output share, accounting
for 3.2%, 3.0% and 1.8% of the increase, respectively. However, the e¤ect is o¤set by the rising
admission selectivity (-4.9%). Third, urban employment share rises due to better work-based job
opportunities, accounting for 8.2% of the increase, but is depressed by the rising admission selectivity
(-12.4%). Fourth, intergenerational mobility and TFP growth are both important in increasing the
skilled employment share (accounting for 49.3% and 5.5% respectively), whereas the high-skilled
employment share is decreased by the rising admission selectivity, the higher college tuition and
better work-based job opportunities (-64.2%, -6.1% and -7.3%, respectively). Finally, among all
the factors, lower labor market distortion is found to be the most important factor that leads to
the increase in skill premium. Other factors contributing to the increase in skill premium include
the improvement in the quality of human capital and the rising admission selectivity, whereas the
improvement in intergenerational mobility drags the skill premium down.
    Compared with other factors, we …nd that the rising college admission selectivity plays a crucial
but negative role in China’s development during 1994-2007. Admissions are becoming more selective
for rural students. This could be due to the fact that skilled parents tend to move to cities, resulting
in the brain drain phenomenon from rural to urban areas. Since it is more di¢ cult for rural students
to attend top universities, rural parents have lower incentives to send their children for higher
education in urban areas (fewer education-based migration). This provides a possible explanation



                                                  22
to the imbalanced migrations between the skilled and the unskilled.


3.4   Policy experiments

Based on the benchmark model, we are now ready to provide policy experiments. Two experiments
are conducted in this section. The …rst one is related to the education-based migration, discussing
the scenario without the GJA policy throughout the history in China. As the GJA had been in force
in China from the 1950s to the mid 1990s, we wonder how would the economy perform if China had
not implemented the GJA policy throughout its history. The second experiment explores the e¤ect
of a more relaxed regulation on the work-based migration since 1980. Because of the hukou reforms,
the regulations on work-based migration have been gradually relaxed. We are curious what China
would look like if the government had maintained looser regulations for migrant workers. Table 7
summarizes the percentage changes relative to the benchmark model for the two experiments. The
details are given below.
   In the …rst experiment, the value of   H    in regime 1 is set to that of regime 2. That is, jobs
are not guaranteed for college graduates in regime 1 anymore. As shown in Table 7, there are two
opposite e¤ects of this policy. Without guaranteed high-skilled jobs, college education becomes
less rewarding, resulting in fewer education-based migration. However, the skill premium increases
because of the decreasing supply of high-skilled workers, which makes college education more re-
warding. Our quantitative result suggests that the former e¤ect is larger. Therefore, without the
GJA policy throughout the history, urban employment would decrease by 0.5 percentage, the share
of high-skilled employment would decrease by approximately 7 percentage, the skill premium would
increase by 0.7 percentage and the total output per capita would decline by 1.2 percentage. We
thus conclude that the impact of no GJA on China’s development is relatively small. The only more
negative e¤ect of not having the GJA is that the high-skilled employment share is smaller. The
minor e¤ect of no GJA could be due to the fact that the rate at which college graduates …nd jobs
in the benchmark model is very close to one.
   In the second experiment, the value of       in regime 1 is increased to that of regime 2. The
result in Table 7 suggests that, with a relaxed regulation on work-based migration, there would be
more work-based migrants, resulting in a larger share of urban employment and an increase in both
urban output share and total output per capita. However, the relaxation leads to a lower share
of high-skilled employment; thereby a higher skill premium. Compared with the GJA policy, the


                                                 23
regulation on work-based migration has a larger impact on China’s urbanization and development.


4    Conclusions

Economic development is usually associated with a process of structural transformation and urban-
ization. Rural to urban migration triggers the process. In this paper we have constructed a dynamic
spatial equilibrium model with a focus on a non-conventional migration channel: education-based
migration. We have then conducted quantitative analysis, taking China as an example of special
interest to examine the causes and consequences of education and work-based rural-urban migra-
tion in its development process. We have performed various decomposition analysis and policy
experiments.
    The main takeaway of our quantitative analysis is that migration indeed has an important
contribution to the development of China: rural-urban migration accounted for nearly 11 percent of
per capita output throughout the 1981-2007 period. Particularly, we …nd that the e¤ect of education-
based migration is larger than that of work-based migration, explaining 6.3 and 4.5 percent of output
per capita, respectively. Because of the considerable impact of education-based migration, ignoring
the education channel would severely under-estimate the e¤ects of migration, particularly the skill-
enhanced process of migration. This strong skill enhancing e¤ect of education is consistent with
the celebrated contribution by Heckman (1976) and Rosen (1976). Moreover, our results suggest
that TFP growth and the improvement of human capital together account for about two-thirds of
changes in per capita output. The abolishment of GJA and the relaxation of work-based migration
have limited impacts on the development. Furthermore, the more selective college admission for
rural students plays a signi…cantly negative role in the development of China, especially lowering
the high-skilled employment share seriously. It o¤sets the skill-enhanced development process in
China.
    Along these lines, it would be interesting to extend our framework to study various migration
issues in developing countries. A possible extension is to allow urban unskilled workers to accumu-
late human capital in cities, as in Lucas (2004). This will further enhance the importance of the
education-based migration channel. Another extension might examine di¤erent underlying chan-
nels of the work-based migration, in particular, the early sample stage of the zhaogong channel into
state-owned enterprises and the later stage into both state-owned enterprises and private sector
jobs. Moreover, the investment-oriented channel via the blue-stamp scheme for setting up private

                                                 24
businesses as well as investments in properties and factories is worth exploring. We will leave these
topics for future research.




                                                 25
References
 [1] Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, 2003, “Plants
     and productivity in international trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), pp. 1268-1290.

 [2] Bond, Eric, Raymond Riezman, and Ping Wang, 2015, “Urbanization and economic develop-
     ment: A tale of two barriers,” Working Paper.

 [3] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, 2002, “Technology, geography and trade,”Econometrica,
     70, pp. 1741–1779.

 [4] Garriga, Carlos, Yang Tang, and Ping Wang, 2015, “Rural-urban migration, structural trans-
     formation, and housing markets in China,”Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Working Paper
     2014-028A.

 [5] Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz, 2005, “International trade and macroeconomic dynamics
     with heterogeneous …rms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, pp. 865-915.

 [6] Glomm, Gerhard, 1992, “A model of growth and migration,” The Canadian Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 25(4), pp. 901-922.

 [7] Harris, John R. and Michael P. Todaro, 1970, “Migration, unemployment and development: A
     two-sector analysis,” The American Economic Review, 60(1), pp. 126-142.

 [8] Heckman, James J., 1976, “A life-cycle model of earnings, learning, and consumption,”Journal
     of Political Economy, Vol. 84, No. 4, Part 2: Essays in labor economies in honor of H. Gregg
     Lewis, pp. S11-S44.

 [9] Laing, Derek, Chuhwan Park, and Ping Wang, 2005, “A modi…ed Harris-Todaro model of
     rural-urban migration for China,” In: F. Kwan and E. Yu (Eds.), Critical Issues in China’s
     Growth and Development. London: Ashgate, pp. 245-264.

[10] Lucas, Robert E., 2004, “Life earnings and rural-urban migration,” Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, Vol. 112, No. S1, pp. S29-S59.

[11] Maurer-Fazio, Margaret, 1999, “Earnings and education in China’s transition to a market
     economy: Survey evidence from 1989 and 1992,” China Economic Review, 10, pp. 17-40.

[12] Ngai, L. Rachel, Christopher A. Pissarides, and Jin Wang, 2016, “China’s mobility barriers
     and employment allocations,” Working paper.

[13] Restuccia, Diego, Dennis Tao Yang, and Xiaodong Zhu, 2008, “Agriculture and aggregate
     productivity: A quantitative cross-country analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(2),
     pp. 234–250.



                                               26
[14] Rosen, Sherwin, 1976, “A theory of life earnings,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84, No.
     4, Part 2: Essays in labor economies in honor of H. Gregg Lewis, pp. S45-S67.

[15] Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2011, “Growing like China,”American
     Economic Review, 101(1), pp. 196-233.

[16] Todaro, Michael P., 1969, “A model of labor migration and urban unemployment in less
     developed countries,” American Economic Review, 59, pp. 138-148.

[17] Tombe, Trevor and Xiaodong Zhu, 2015, “Trade, migration and regional income di¤erences:
     evidence from China,” Working paper.




                                               27
                               Table 1: MIGRATION BY REASONS

        Year             Population   Job                 Job          Work or      Study or       Other
                          outflow   Transfer          Assignment       Business     Training      reasons
 Percentage
         1985          100.00              29.57           8.04           3.08        11.26         48.05
         2000          100.00              5.32            3.76          33.55        6.84          50.53
       Average         100.00              17.44           5.90          18.32         9.05         49.29
 Population (thousand persons)
         1985         10770.00           3184.23          866.43        331.75       1212.81     5174.78
         2000         21580.00           1148.73          810.36       7240.20       1475.87     10904.83
    Annual Growth      4.74%             -6.57%           -0.45%       22.82%         1.32%       5.09%
  Data source: Migration by reasons (percentage) is obtained from The 10 Percent Sampling Tabulation on
  the 1990 Population Census of the People’s Republic of China and The Tabulation on the 2000 Population
  Census of the People’s Republic of China. Migration reasons include migration due to job transfer, job
  assignment, work or business, study and training, to relative and friend, retired or resigned (1985 data
  only), moved with family, marriage, pull down and move (2000 data only) and other reasons. We categorize
  migration due to job transfer, job assignment and work or business as work-based migration, and migration
  due to study or training as migration via zhaosheng. Note: There is no available national-wide survey on
  population outflow (rural-urban migration) in China. Thus, we use changes in urban population as a proxy
  for population outflow. In the table, migrant population by reasons is computed based on the proxy for
  population outflow.




Table 2: ZHAOSHENG FLOW AND THE PROBABILITY OF WORK-BASED MIGRATION

                                Zhaosheng flow        Prob. of work-based migration
                  Regime 1        0.00058946                   0.003554486
                  Regime 2        0.00114381                   0.008281515
               Source: Authors’ calculation using the average of 1985 and 2000 migration
               reasons in Table 1.




                                                     28
                                                         Table 3: CALIBRATION
                   Parameter values        Target        Target values
                                                                          Explanation/Source
                 Regime 1 Regime 2                   Regime 1 Regime 2
      Preset
         γL               0         0.05                                  preset
        δHH               1            1                                  preset
      Calibrated: Regime-common
          β         0.7798                                                annual discount factor=1%
          ε             1.5                                               elasticity of intertemporal substitution=2/3
        zmin              1                                               standard setup in the literature
          φ̃         0.174         0.174                                  percentage of rural income.
          θ             2.5                                               computed using rural household net income data in CHIPS 1995 and 2002
          ρ         0.6667                                                elasticity of substitution between high/low skilled=3
          α         0.8461                  YU /Y      0.6922             match urban income shares
          ψ         0.0618                  YU /Y               0.8294    match urban income shares
      Calibrated: Regime-specific
          γ               -       0.9209                                  urban employment rate, using data in CHIPS 1995, 2002 and 2008
         γH               1       0.8709                                  γH = γ − γL




29
          π         0.0036        0.0083                                  probability of work-based migration in Table 2
         δLL        0.9996        0.9883   NH /NL      0.0424   0.1466    match the ratio of high-low skilled worker
          B         0.3685        0.7177                                  wR = 1 in 2007
          h         1.3529        1.5928                                  Mincerian rate of return
          A         5.3877      11.0573    wL /wR      1.7781    2.0076   match urban premium
          τ         7.1103        5.4763   wH h/wL     1.2296    1.6576   match skill premium
          ẑ       17.7632      13.1391               0.059%    0.114%    match regime average of zhaosheng flow in Table 2
         σ˜e        0.1841        0.1021                                  percentage of rural household income
         σ˜w        0.5554        0.3079                                  percentage of rural household income
          a         1.1489        0.4701                                  solved by the indifference boundary equations
          b         0.0048        0.0528                                  percentage of rural household income, using data in UHS 2007 and 2008
      Model implications
      1 − G(ẑ)    0.075%        0.160%                                   zhaosheng proportion
        A/B        14.6188      15.4071                                   urban-rural TFP ratio
        ψcost       0.6459        0.4380                                  unit cost reduced by ψ
         Ag                       5.47%                                   average annual growth rate of A in 1981-2007
       (A/B)g                     0.39%                                   average annual growth rate of A/B in 1981-2007

     Note: Calibrated results are not sensitive to the value of γL . α, ψ, A and τ are actually solved together to match the corre-
     sponding targets listed in the table.
                                     Table 4: BENCHMARK MODEL

                                                                                High-skilled
   Period                       Total output Urban              Urban           employment       Skill
                                 per capita  output          employment             share      premium
                                   Y /N       YU /Y          (NH + NL )/N      NH /(NH + NL ) (wH h/wL )
   Whole: 1981-2007               1.6206     0.7148             0.2516             0.0784       1.4571
   Regime 1: 1981-1994            0.8811     0.6585             0.2174             0.0327       1.2575
   Regime 2: 1995-2007            2.4169     0.7754             0.2883             0.1277       1.6720




                      Table 5: DECOMPOSITION - MIGRATION CHANNELS

                                                                                    Unit: Percentage change
                                                                                   High-skilled
Period                              Total output     Urban         Urban           employment       Skill
                                     per capita      output     employment            share       premium
                                       Y /N          YU /Y      (NH + NL )/N      NH /(NH + NL ) (wH h/wL )
Zhaosheng
      Whole: 1981-2007                  6.3%          1.9%          2.8%               30.8%            -3.1%
      Regime 1: 1981-1994               2.0%          1.0%          1.1%               30.6%            -1.2%
      Regime 2: 1995-2007               8.0%          2.8%          4.2%               30.8%            -4.7%
Work-based migration
      Whole: 1981-2007                  4.5%          3.3%          19.9%             -21.7%             7.2%
      Regime 1: 1981-1994               0.8%          1.7%           9.7%             -11.5%            3.5%
      Regime 2: 1995-2007               5.9%          4.8%          28.1%             -24.5%            10.2%
Interactive migration
      Whole: 1981-2007                  0.1%          0.4%          0.2%               11.0%             0.1%
      Regime 1: 1981-1994               0.0%          0.0%          0.0%                4.4%             0.1%
      Regime 2: 1995-2007               0.2%          0.7%          0.4%               12.8%             0.2%
Non-migration factors
      Whole: 1981-2007                 89.1%         94.4%          77.1%              79.9%            95.8%
      Regime 1: 1981-1994              97.3%         97.3%          89.2%              76.5%            97.6%
      Regime 2: 1995-2007              85.8%         91.8%          67.2%              80.8%            94.3%
Note: Numbers reported in the table are the percentage changes relative to the benchmark model. For example, total
output per capita is 1.6206 for the whole period in the benchmark model and 1.5178 in the scenario with the channel
of work-based migration only. Therefore, the channel of zhaosheng explains 6.3% of total output per capita in the
benchmark model.




                                                        30
                                                 Table 6: FACTOR DECOMPOSITION

                                                                                                             Unit: Percentage change
                                                                                                            High-skilled
     Factors                                                        Total output   Urban       Urban        employment        Skill
                                                                     per capita    output   employment         share       premium
                                                                        Y /N       YU /Y    (NH + NL )/N   NH /(NH + NL ) (wH h/wL )
     Abolishment of the GJA (lower γH )                                -0.9%       -0.2%       -0.4%           -2.9%          0.4%
     Better work-based job opportunities (higher π)                     1.5%        1.2%        8.2%           -7.3%         2.9%




31
     An increase in the education-based migration cost (higher σe )    -0.3%       -0.1%       -0.1%           -0.8%          0.1%
     An increase in the work-based migration cost (higher σw )          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%         -0.0%
     Increases in urban and rural TFP                                 52.9%         1.8%        1.0%            5.5%         -0.8%
     An improvement in human capital (higher h)                       10.8%         3.0%        0.3%            2.1%         9.8%
     An increase in the child-rearing cost (higher φ )                 -1.1%       -0.3%       -0.5%           -3.2%          0.5%
     Lower market distortion (lower τ)                                 1.2%         0.3%        0.6%            3.5%        21.4%
     Better intergenerational mobility (lower δLL )                   12.3%         3.2%       -0.0%           49.3%         -9.9%
     Rising admission selectivity (lower a)                           -24.8%       -4.9%      -12.4%          -64.2%          8.5%
     An increase in college tuition (higher b)                         -2.0%       -0.5%       -1.0%           -6.1%          0.9%
                           Table 7: POLICY EXPERIMENTS

                                                                    Unit: Percentage change
                                                                   High-skilled
Period                     Total output   Urban       Urban        employment         Skill
                            per capita    output   employment         share         premium
                              Y /N        YU /Y    (NH + NL )/N   NH /(NH + NL )   (wH h/wL )
No GJA in regime 1
   Whole: 1981-2007             -1.2%      -0.4%      -0.5%           -7.0%          0.7%
   Regime 1: 1981-1994          -0.7%      -0.3%      -0.3%          -10.0%          0.4%
   Regime 2: 1995-2007          -1.4%      -0.5%      -0.7%           -6.1%          0.9%
Better job oppertunities in regime 1: π1 = π2
   Whole: 1981-2007              2.8%       2.5%      14.4%           -6.6%          4.2%
   Regime 1: 1981-1994           0.9%       2.2%      12.5%          -11.1%          4.1%
   Regime 2: 1995-2007           3.6%       2.7%      16.0%           -5.4%          4.2%




                                             32
              90
              80
              70
Percentage

              60
              50
              40
              30
              20                                                           Urban value added share
              10                                                           Urbanization rate
               0
               1980           1985             1990            1995            2000            2005
                          (A) URBANIZATION RATES AND URBAN OUTPUT SHARES

               3
               2
Percentage




               1
               0
             −1
             −2
                                                                      migration outflow / rural stock
             −3
              1980            1985             1990            1995            2000            2005
                                                         Year
                                           (B) MIGRATION OUTFLOWS

                   Figure 1: URBANIZATION PROCESS IN CHINA OVER 1980-2007
             Note: Urbanization rate is defined as urban population shares out of total population. Agri-
             cultural sectors are excluded when urban output shares are computed. Because there is no
             good data on migration, we use changes in urbanization as a proxy for migration outflow.




                                                         33
              Childhood                        Adulthood

                                    {   Pr . π : go to U as NL , pay σ w
                                        Pr . 1- π : stay in R as NR
                                    Give birth
  I i=0
(Kept in R)                                              j
                                               Choose I ={0,1}
                                           {   Work, consume, rear child with cost φ
                                               Spend x j and σ e if I j=1
                                                                          Give birth
                             I j=1
                          (Sent to U)
                                                                               Pr . γ H : become N H
                                                                           {   Pr . γ L : become N L
                                                                               Pr . 1- γ H - γ L : Return to R as N R

                            I j=0
                          (Kept in R)




                           Figure 2: TIMELINE OF THE MODEL




                           Wage

                                                                           WL




              W L(n s)=W H (n s)h
                        B+σ w
                                                                                         WH h

                                                              ns                               n

          Figure 3: HIGH- AND LOW-SKILLED WAGES AND RURAL WAGE RATE




                                                 34
                                Period t                                        Period t+ 1

                                 Rural                                                Urban
                                                         1-δ ΗΗ- δ ΗL
                                   NR
                                                 1-γ H- γ L                            NH
                                                                          γΗ
                                                                                       δ HH
                                             Zhaosheng

                                                                                              δ HL
                                   NR,y                                   γL
                                                                                                        δ LH

                                                   Work-based migration
                                          1- π                                          NL
                                                              π
                                                                                                 δ LL
                                                           1-δ LΗ- δ LL


                                        Figure 4: FLOWS OF WORKERS




                           16        Urban TFP
                                     Rural TFP

                           14


                           12
     Urban and rural TFP




                           10


                            8


                            6


                            4


                            2


                            0
                                   1985           1990             1995        2000            2005
                                                               Year



Figure 5: CALIBRATED URBAN AND RURAL TFP DURING 1981-2007



                                                              35
                                                                                    (a) Output per capita

                                                 15
                                                             Urban − computed Data




                    Output per capita
                                                             Urban − model
                                                             Rural
                                                 10



                                                      5



                                                      0
                                                             1985            1990              1995           2000       2005


                                                                                      (b) Total output
                                                      5
                            Total output per capita




                                                             Computed data
                                                      4      Model

                                                      3

                                                      2

                                                      1

                                                      0
                                                             1985            1990              1995           2000       2005
                                                                                           Year



                                                          Figure 6: BENCHMARK MODEL - OUTPUT


                                                                                    (a) Urbanization rate
                                           0.5
                                                             Data
                Urbanization rate




                                           0.4               Model

                                           0.3

                                           0.2

                                           0.1

                                                      0
                                                      1980     1985            1990             1995              2000   2005


                                                                           (b) Urban high and low skilled labor
                                           0.8
                                                             Data − high skilled labor
                                                             Model − high skilled labor
        Urban high & low




                                           0.6
                                                             Data − low skilled labor
          skilled labor




                                                             Model − low skilled labor
                                           0.4


                                           0.2


                                                      0
                                                      1980     1985            1990             1995              2000   2005
                                                                                           Year



Figure 7: BENCHMARK MODEL - URBANIZATION RATE AND LABOR SHARE



                                                                                          36
                                                              (a) Urban output per capita

                                      15       Benchmark model
Urban output




                                               Work−based migration is shut down
 per capita




                                      10       Zhaosheng is shut down
                                               All migrations are shut down
                                           5

                                           0
                                               1985          1990            1995            2000   2005

                                                               (b) Total output per capita
                 Total output per capita




                                           6

                                           4

                                           2

                                           0
                                               1985          1990            1995            2000   2005

                                                                 (c) Urbanization rate
                                0.4
     Urbanization rate




                                0.3


                                0.2


                                0.1
                                 1980           1985           1990           1995           2000   2005
                                                                         Year



                                     Figure 8: DECOMPOSITION FOR MIGRATION CHANNELS




                                                                        37
Appendix (Not Intended for Publication)
This appendix is divided into three parts: Appendix A summarizes institutional background, Ap-
pendix B presents mathematical proofs, and Appendix C provides data sources and calibration
details.


Appendix A: Institutional background

China implemented the hukou system to solve a serious problem of the so-called “blind ‡ows” (of
rural workers into cities) in the early 1950s. The important role of zhaosheng in China’s development
is indeed due to the hukou regulation. Therefore, here we brie‡y review the institutional background
of the hukou system, its reforms and zhaosheng.


A.1 The hukou system and its reforms

China introduced the hukou regulation system in 1958. A citizen’s hukou contained two parts:
Hukou suozaidi (the place of hukou registration) and Hukou leibie (the type of hukou registration:
“agricultural”and “non-agricultural”). Hukou suozaidi was a person’s presumed regular residence,
such as cities, towns, villages or state farms. Everyone was required to register in one and only one
place of residence. This determined the place where the person received bene…ts and social welfare.
Hukou leibie was mainly used to determine a person’s entitlements to state-subsidized food grain
(commodity grain). A citizen with “non-agricultural” hukou status would lose the right to rent
land and the right to inherit the land that his parents rented. The above two classi…cations were
di¤erent. Urban areas contained both agricultural and non-agricultural hukou populations. People
with non-agricultural hukou may live in both urban and rural areas. Therefore, a “formal urban
hukou holder”refers to an urban and non-agricultural hukou holder. Before 1997, hukou registration
place and type were inherited from a person’s mother. Since 1997, they can be inherited from a
person’s mother or father.
   Under the hukou system, nongzhuanfei, changing from agriculture to non-agriculture, was the
only method to obtain an o¢ cial urban hukou. The regular channels of nongzhuanfei included (i)
recruitment by a state-owned enterprise (zhaogong), (ii) promotion to a senior administrative job
(zhaogan) and (iii) enrolment in an institution of higher education (zhaosheng). O¢ cial rural-urban
migration involved both changes in hukou registration place and in registration type. To complete
the nongzhuanfei process, a person had to satisfy both the migration requirements and obtain a
quota, which was controlled by the central government at approximately 0.15–0.2 percent of the
non-agricultural hukou population in each area.
   The hukou system not only regulated internal population movement but also governed the
social and economic aspects of a citizen’s life. In rural areas, which were organized through the


                                                  1
commune system, all rural residents had to participate in agricultural production to receive food
rations for their households. In urban areas, under the pre-reform periods, state governments
essentially controlled job assignments, grain rations, education for children, health bene…ts and
housing purchase rights. There were few jobs outside the state-owned enterprises. Without an
urban hukou, people were not able to survive. Therefore, people in China lost their freedom of
migration before the economic reform.
   A series of economic reforms began in the late 1970s. Since then, the increasingly market-
oriented economy, the rural-urban income gap and the demand for cheap labor from rural areas
have greatly increased informal rural-urban migrants, which has led to the continual relaxation of
the hukou system.
   The interesting part of the hukou reforms was the relaxation of migration regulations for the
general public. For example, state governments implemented a new type of urban hukou with “self-
supplied food grain” in 1984. In addition, due to the demands of economic development, several
state governments introduced the blue-stamp urban hukou in the early 1990s to attract professional
workers and investors. The blue-stamp hukou required an urban infrastructure construction fee for
any newcomer, ranging from a few thousand to some …fty thousand yuan. It allowed people to
obtain a temporary urban hukou. However, the blue-stamp hukou was di¤erent from the o¢ cial
urban hukou obtained through nongzhuanfei in that it provided limited rights and obligations and
was only valid in that city. The blue-stamp hukou could be upgraded to an o¢ cial urban hukou
under certain conditions and after some years.
   In 2005, the deputy minister of public security stated that eleven provinces had begun or would
soon begin to implement a uni…ed urban-rural household registration system, removing the dis-
tinctions between agricultural and non-agricultural hukou types. An updated statement in 2007
repeated the same points and included a list of twelve provincial-level units. In the statement of
2014, the government further adjusted migration policies according to the size of a city. The ul-
timate aim of the hukou reforms is to establish a uni…ed hukou registration system, abolish the
regulations of migration and provide social bene…ts to all residents.


A.2 Zhaosheng

As mentioned in the last section, zhaosheng was one of the o¢ cial and important channels for rural
people, especially for rural youths, to move to cities. Here we brie‡y review the procedure of rural
students to obtain an urban hukou through the channel of zhaosheng. Educational reforms in the
late 1990s of China are also discussed.
   To obtain formal urban hukou through zhaosheng, rural students in China must pass gaokao
to be admitted to universities. The gaokao system was established at the beginning of the 1950s,
abolished during the Cultural Revolution, and restored in 1977. Because of the scarcity of education


                                                 2
resources, acceptance rates were very low, especially in the 1980s. As most universities and colleges
in China were located in urban areas, they were considered as urban collective units. Once a rural
student was admitted to a university or a college, upon starting his freshman year, the student could
voluntarily move his hukou to the school and obtain an urban hukou. However, such urban hukou
was temporary. The youth’s hukou would be removed from the school after graduation and moved
to his work unit if he successfully found a job; otherwise, he was required to move his hukou back
to his hometown. During the years of the GJA policy (1951–1994), a college graduate was assigned
a stable government job, usually in an urban work unit. His hukou was thus transferred to the
urban work unit immediately after graduation, allowing him to keep an urban hukou henceforth.
However, after the termination of the GJA policy, governmental jobs for college graduates were
no longer guaranteed. More speci…cally, the reform of the GJA policy started in 1989, but it was
o¢ cially ended in 1996. Tibet, which abolished the system in 2007, was the last place to terminate
the distribution system of graduation. With the abolishment of the GJA policy, if a college graduate
failed to …nd an urban job upon graduation, he could temporarily assign his hukou to the collective
joint household of a personal exchange center if he was still searching for an urban job or moved
his hukou back to his hometown. Therefore, under China’s hukou system, entering college through
the gaokao provided a formal channel for rural-urban migration, and it provided rural youths with
greater upward mobility in society.


A.3 Education reforms

Since 1996, China has introduced a series of educational reforms, notably the college education
expansion and increases in college tuition. The expansion policy has provided broader access to
students from rural areas. For example, Gou (2006) shows that, from 1996 to 2005, the number
of rural students admitted to colleges have increased from 507,500 to 3,038,100 people, while the
number of urban students have increased from 520,300 to 2,692,700 people. The admission rate for
rural students also increased from 18.7% in 1989 to 62.9% in 2005. Meanwhile, the rise in college
tuition has placed a heavier burden on rural parents for children’s college education. Researchers
have noticed the phenomenon that fewer and fewer rural students were admitted to top universities,
and the rural-urban disparity in access to top universities has been discussed in studies such as Li
(2007) and Qiao (2010). College expansion, increases in college tuition and rural-urban inequality in
access to top schools all a¤ect parents’education-based migration decisions. Therefore, our model
is designed to capture the main spirits of these educational reforms in China.
   Besides, the regional inequality in the distribution of educational resource is also observed in
China. Wu and Luo (2012) point out that about two-thirds of higher education institutions either
a¢ liated directly under the Ministry of Education or supported by the 211 Project are located in
province capital cities, and few higher education institutions are located in cities that are smaller


                                                 3
than prefecture level. Hu and Vargas (2015) found that college location is signi…cantly associated
with salary levels after controlling for job locations in China. Based on these facts, we thus assume
that urban areas are the only places for higher education, i.e. college education is not available in
rural areas.


Appendix B: Mathematical appendix

Proof of Proposition 1.
    Denote cjU as the consumption of children if they are sent to an urban area and cjR as the
consumption of children if they are kept in a rural area. From (10) and (11) we have:

        cjU    =       H wH h    +    L wL   + (1      H       L ) wR     Ik (X) (1           H           L ) (X    +      e)
                                                                                                                                     j
                                                                                                                                         ;   (23)
        cjR    = (1             ) wR + (wL           w)      Ik (X) (X +     e)
                                                                                      j
                                                                                          :                                                  (24)

By subtracting (24) from (23) and rearranging terms, under Condition S, we have:

  cjU   cjR =        H wH h      +   L wL    +(        H       L ) wR   + Ik (X) (    H       +   L ) (X      +     e)          (wL          w)

               =     H wH h      +   L wL         wL + (        H       L ) wR    + Ik (X) (          H   +     L ) (X   +      e)   +       w
                                                                 k
               > (     H    +    L     ) [wL (ns )        wR ] + I (X) (   H   +    L ) (X        +   e)   +        w

               > 0:

Because u ( ) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, we have:

                                                       u cjU > u cjR :

Thus, Assumption 1 and Condition S together guarantee that EX u cjU                                                 u cjR        > 0 for all
xk 2 (0; xmax ].

Proof of Proposition 2.
    Denote ujcU = uc cjU             as the marginal utility. We compute:

                   d    iIk ; xj
                                        =         ujcU < 0
                       dxj
                   d i   Ik ; xj                 n    h                                                    io
                                        =      EX ujcU (wH           wR ) + Ik (X) (X +               e)           >0
                       d H
                   d i   Ik ; xj                 n    h                                                   io
                                        =      EX ujcU (wL           wR ) + Ik (X) (X +               e)        >0
                       d L
                   d i   Ik ; xj                      h                                                         i
                                        =      EX ujcR wR        (wL        w)     Ik (X) (X +                e)    < 0:
                        d
Since xj is decreasing in a and z j , but increasing in b, the results follow.


                                                                 4
Proof of Proposition 3.                                                         h                                i
   Under Condition S, cjU > cjR and ujcU < ujcR . De…ne                          ujcU (1   H     L)   ujcR (1   ) Ik (X),
then we have:

                                            ujcU (1        H   L)         ujcR (1     ) Ik (X)
                                <           ujcU (1        H   L)         ujcU (1     ) Ik (X)
                                = ujcU (                 H     L )I
                                                                      k
                                                                          (X)
                                                      ( )
                                < 0:
                                    i
                                d       (Ik ;xj )
Therefore, if   EX   > uicU ,           d   e
                                                    > 0.


Appendix C: Data and Calibration

1. Population

(1) Rural and urban population
   Table 1-4 of the China Population and Employment Statistical Yearbook 2010 reported the
fraction of rural (urban) population as a percentage of total population in China during the 1952–
2009 period. We directly borrow the time series data from 1980 to 2007 for our rural and urban
population (NR and NU ) data. The data in the calibration for regime 1 are the simple average of
1980–1994; for regime 2, the simple average of 1995–2007.

(2) High-skilled and low-skilled workers
   The China labor Statistical Yearbook reported the educational attainment composition of urban
employment (as a percentage of total urban employment). Thus, workers whose educational at-
tainment is categorized as college and above are de…ned as high-skilled workers. However, urban
data are only available for 2002–2007. Thus, we …rst use 2002–2007 data to compute an urban to
national ratio (a ratio of educational attainment composition of urban employment to that of the
entire country). The ratio is approximately 2.457. Second, for the years 1982, 1990, 1995–1999, and
2001, the fraction of high-skilled workers as a percentage of total urban employment is computed
using nationwide data and is adjusted by the urban to nationwide ratio. The national data for
1996–1999 and 2001–2007 are also from the China labor Statistical Yearbook. The data for 1982
are from 1 Percent Sampling Tabulation on the 1982 Population Census of the People’s Republic of
China. The data for 1990 are from the China Population Statistical Yearbook 1994. The data for
1995 are available in 1995 China 1% Population Sampling Survey Data. For the years 1980, 1985,
and 2000, the educational attainment for total population in Barro and Lee (2001) is adjusted by
the urban to nationwide ratio to obtain NH =NU . Third, we interpolate data for the years for which
no data are available. Finally, the fraction of high-skilled workers as a percentage of total urban
employment is multiplied by NU to obtain NH . Then, NL is the di¤erence between NU and NH .

                                                               5
The data in the calibration for regime 1 re‡ect the simple average of 1980–1994, and for regime 2,
the average is for 1995–2007.

(3) Rural to urban migration ‡ows
   There is no available nationwide survey on rural to urban migration for the periods of China
that we examine. Here, we use changes in urban population as a proxy for total rural to urban
migrants. We are aware that changes in urban population is equal to the amount of rural-urban
migrants only if births and deaths in urban areas are net out exactly. However, as shown in Table
C.1, we …nd that the net birth rates (net of death) in urban and rural areas are quite stable during
the periods that we examine. Since there is no nationwide available data on rural-urban migration,
we use changes in urban population as a proxy. In addition, we believe that the actual rural-urban
migration could be larger than our proxy because the birth rates and mortality rates are both higher
in rural areas than those in urban areas.
   The total number of rural to urban migrants is then divided by the stock of rural population to
obtain the ‡ow of migrants (as a percentage of the rural population). In the calibration, we take the
simple average on the ‡ow of migrants for 1981–1994 to be the ‡ow of migrants in the …rst regime.
The second regime is the average of the 1995–2007 ‡ows. Finally, the average ‡ows of migrants are
multiplied by the working-related and studying or training reasons (the average of 1985 and 2000)
to obtain the probabilities of working migration and zhaosheng ‡ow, respectively.

(4) Migration reasons
   The 10 Percent Sampling Tabulation on the 1990 Population Census of the People’s Republic
of China reported the number of immigrants by type of usual residence and cause of migration
for 1985. We choose “the number of immigrants from town and county of this province" and “the
number of immigrants from town and county of other provinces" to be rural to urban migration
in 1985. Then, the fraction of migrants due to each reason as a percentage of total rural to urban
migration is computed. The Tabulation on the 2000 Population Census of the People’s Republic
of China only reported the number of emigrants and the reasons for emigration. We thus choose
the number of emigrants from towns and counties to represent rural to urban migration in 2000.
Then, the fraction of migrants for each reason as a percentage of total rural to urban migration
is computed. Finally, we categorize migration due to job transfers, job assignments, and work or
business as working-related reasons. The migration due to studying or training is categorized as
migration via zhaosheng.

2. Human capital
   Table C.2 summarizes average years of schooling for the group of college and above and the
group of less than college. The urban employment by education in 1995 data are from the China
Statistical Yearbook 1998. The 2002 and 2009 data are from the China Labor Statistical Yearbook
2002 and 2009, respectively. We further assume that the years of schooling for graduate school is

                                                 6
equal to 18 years, 16 years for college, 14 years for junior college, 12 years for senior high, 9 years for
junior high, 6 years for primary school, and 1 year for semi-illiterate or illiterate. Then, weighted
average years of schooling for college and above and less than college are computed. Table C.3
provides the average years of schooling for 1981, 1988, 1995, and 2002. For years without data, they
are computed by backward extrapolation based on 1995, 2002, and 2009 data. In the calibration,
years of schooling in regime 1 (8.02 and 14.10) is the average of 1981 and 1988 and regime 2 (8.95
and 14.52) is the average of 1995 and 2002.
   To compute the human capital possessed by high-skilled workers relative to low-skilled workers,
the Mincerian method is employed. The education returns coe¢ cients in China reported by Zhang
et al. (2005) are 0.0497 and 0.0836 for 1980–1994 and 1995–2007, respectively. Thus, the human
                                    e0:0479   14:1                                        e0:0835 14:52
capital in regime 1 is equal to     e0:0479   8:02   . The human capital in regime 2 is   e0:0835 8:95
                                                                                                        .

3. Urban employment rate
   In the model,     H   +   L   refers to the employment rate of college graduates who migrated from
rural areas. However, no data are available. Thus, we use the urban employment rate as a proxy.
Urban employment rate is computed by using the number of urban working or employed workers
divided by the sum of the number of urban working or employed workers and the number of workers
who are waiting for a job or unemployed. The urban employment rate of 1995 is computed using
1995 CHIP urban individual data; the value of 2002 is computed using 2002 CHIP urban individual
income, consumption, and employment data; and the value of 2007 is computed using 2007 CHIP
(or RUMiC 2008). The average of them is the urban employment rate in the calibration.
   China has introduced lots of reforms in the public sector in the late 1990s. Many workers were
“o¤ post” or xiagang during the reforms. These workers still had their hukou with their employers
(and hence stay in cities) as only by doing this they could obtain compensations for the loss of their
jobs. Xiagang workers are usually low-skilled workers, senior in age and di¢ cult to …nd a job again.
See Lee (2000) for more information on the characteristics of xiagang workers. In the calibration, we
have matched the NH =NL data series and considered xiagang when computing urban employment
rate. Therefore, the employment composition change due to the reforms is being taken care of.

4. Labor income shares
   Bai and Qian (2010) reported the sectoral labor share of GDP for the 1978–2004 period and
the sectoral composition of value-added at factor cost in China. We thus compute a time series of
labor income share in urban areas by assuming that industry, construction, and service belong to
the urban sector. The labor income share is weighted by the corresponding sectoral composition of
value-added at factor cost. In the calibration, the labor income share is the average of 1980–1994
in regime 1 and of 1995–2004 in regime 2.

5. Rural per capita income
   The China Statistical Yearbook 2011 reported rural real per capita income from 1978 to 2011.

                                                             7
However, during the period before 1990, only data for 1978, 1980, and 1985 are available. We thus
use interpolation to compute rural real income per capita for 1981–1984 and 1986–1989. Then, the
rural real income per capita of 2007 is normalized to one. The rural real income per capita for other
years is adjusted accordingly. In the calibration, the rural income of regime 1 is the average of rural
real income per capita during the 1980–1994 period. The rural income of regime 2 is the average of
1995–2007.

6. Skill premium
   Zhang et al. (2005) estimate the skill premium for China during the 1988–2001 period, while
Ge and Yang (2014) estimate it for 1992–2007. Using the ratio of the skill premium in Zhang et al.
(2005) to that in Ge and Yang (2014), we construct a time series for the skill premium for 1988–2007
based on Zhang et al. (2005). Furthermore, Lee (1999) estimates the skill premium for China in
1980 and 1988. However, the estimate in Lee (1999) is higher than that reported by others because
the estimate is based on a survey of SOEs. Therefore, we …rst compute the growth rate of the skill
premium from 1980 to 1988 in Lee (1999). Then, using the estimate of the skill premium in 1988
in Zhang et al. (2005) and the growth rate computed from Lee (1999), the skill premium in 1980 is
obtained. Finally, curve …tting with polynomial 3 is used to construct a series for the skill premium
from 1980 to 2007. In the calibration, the skill premium of regime 1 is the average of 1980–1994.
The skill premium of regime 2 is the average of 1995–2007.

7. Urban premium
   The urban premium is de…ned as the ratio of the low-skilled wage to the rural wage. The China
Statistical Yearbook 2011 also reported urban real income per capita for 1978–2011. Thus, we are
able to compute a ratio of urban to rural income per capita. Because urban income per capita is
a weighted average of the high-skilled wage and the low-skilled wage, we are now able to compute
the urban premium using the skill premium data, urban-rural income per capita ratios, and the
ratios of high- to low-skilled worker stocks. However, during the period before 1990, data are only
available for 1978, 1980, and 1985. We thus use interpolation to compute the urban premiums for
1981–1984 and 1986–1989.

8. Sharp parameter of the Pareto distribution
   Chinese Household Income Project (CHIP) 1995 and 2002 reports rural household net income
data. We …rst compute the mean of the rural household net income for each year. Then the rural
household net income is divided by the average number of rural household members to obtain the
average of rural individual income. Similarly, we compute the standard deviation and the variance
of the rural individual income. Finally, using the formulas for the mean and variance of Pareto
distribution, we are able to back out the value of , which is roughly equal to 2.5138 for 1991-2002.
We thus set    to 2.5. Our estimated value is close to the value (2.11) reported by Feenberg and
Poterba (1993) for the United State during the period from 1950 to 1990. The average number

                                                  8
of rural household members is roughly equal to 4. The data on the number of rural household
members is also from CHIP 1995 and 2002.

9. Elasticity of substitution between high- and low-skilled labor
   The estimated value of the elasticity of substitution between high- and low-skilled labor in the
production function 1= (1     ) for developed countries is between 1 and 3. For example, Autor,
Katz and Krueger (1998), Acemoglu (2003), and Ciccone and Peri (2005). However, the elasticity
of substitution between high- and low-skilled labor in developing countries are usually higher. For
example, Toh and Tat (2012) estimate that the value for Singapore is 4.249. Te Velde and Morrissey
(2004) use data from Singapore, Hong Kong, Korea, the Philippines and Thailand and obtained a
value of 2.78. The results in Gindling and Sun (2002) imply that the value in Taiwan is between
2.3 and 7.4. We choose the value to be 3, the maximum value in developed countries and within
the estimated range for developing countries.

10. Child-rearing cost
   Zhu and Zhang (1996) estimated that the average child-rearing cost in rural villages in Xianyang,
which is located in the Shaanxi province of China, was approximately 17.4 percent of family income
for a child aged 0–16 in 1995. Since national-wide survey on child-rearing costs is not available for
rural China, we adopt the value in Zhu and Zhang (1996) to be our child-rearing cost.

11. Work-based migration cost
   CHIP 2002 rural-urban migrant individual data provides information on the expenditures oc-
curred in the …rst month when migrant workers arrived at the city. In the calculation of the
work-based migration cost, food and housing costs are counted as regular costs, while city expan-
sion fee, certi…cation fee and others are considered as one-time cost. Our work-based migration cost
is thus the sum of the above costs, adjusted for model periods and expressed as a percentage of rural
household income. Rural household income is computed by multiplying rural real per capita income
by the average number of rural household members. Rural real per capita income is obtained from
the China Statistical Yearbook 2011 and the average number of rural household members is from
the China Rural Statistical Yearbook.
   Tombe and Zhu (2015) found a high moving cost for Chinese migrant workers, roughly equal
to the annual income of a rural worker. For the United States, the estimated migration costs are
between one-half and two-thirds of average annual household income, such as Bayer and Juessen
(2012) and Lkhagvasuren (2014). Our work-based migration cost is consistent with the literature.

12. Education-based migration cost
   He and Dong (2007) reports the annual cost of food and dormitory for a college student in 1996-
2005. It is about 63.78% of annual rural household income. We use the estimate in He and Dong
(2007) and assume that a student stays in college for four years to compute our education-based
migration cost. It is adjusted by model periods.

                                                   9
13. Direct college cost
   The direct college cost b is computed based on Urban Household Survey (UHS) 2007 and 2008.
Because college education was almost free of charge before 1990, the value of b in regime 1 includes
stationary, materials and textbooks only, while the value of b in regime 2 includes not only stationary,
materials and textbooks but also college tuitions. College tuition as a percentage of rural household
income ranges from 22.8% in UHS to 35.2% in CHIP. We therefore assume college tuition is 30% of
rural household income in the computation of b in regime 2. Then, the value of b equals 0.48% and
5.28% of rural household income in regimes 1 and 2, respectively.

14. Data in …gures
(1) Urban output
   The computed data for urban output is calculated by the urban production function. Using the
calibrated parameters, the calibrated time series of urban TFP, the time series data of high-skilled
workers, and the time series data of low-skilled workers, we are able to obtain the computed data
for urban output. The computed data for urban per capita output is the computed data for urban
output divided by the time series data for high- and low-skilled workers.
(2) Rural output
   The computed data for rural output is obtained from the rural production function. Because
we have time series data of rural per capita income (2007 is normalized to one) and the stock of the
rural population, we are able to obtain the computed data for rural output.
(3) Total output
   The computed total output is the sum of the computed data for urban output and rural output.

Appendix References
   Acemoglu, Daron, 2003, “Cross-country inequality trends,” The Economic Journal, 113, F121-
F149.
   Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, 1998, “Computing inequality: have
computers changed the labor market?”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), pp. 1169-1213.
   Bai, Chong-En and Zhenjie Qian, 2010, “The factor income distribution in China: 1978-2007,”
China Economic Review, 21, pp. 650-670.
   Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, 2001, “International data on educational attainment up-
dates and implications,” Oxford Economic Papers 53(3), pp.541-563.
   Bayer, Christian and Falko Juessen, 2012, “On the dynamics of interstate migration: Migration
costs and self-selection,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 15, pp. 377-401.
   Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri, 2005, “Long-run substitutability between more and less
educated workers: Evidence from U.S. states, 1950-1990,”The Review of Economics and Statistics,
87(4), pp. 652-663.



                                                  10
   Feenberg, Daniel R. and James M. Poterba, 1993, “Income inequality and the incomes of very
high-income taxpayers: Evidence from tax returns,” in Tax policy and the economy, Vol. 7, edited
by James Poterba, NBER, MIT Press.
   Ge, Suqin and Dennis Tao Yang, 2014, “Changes in China’s wage structure,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 12(2), pp. 300-336.
   Gindling, T.H. and Way Sun, 2002, “Higher education planning and the wages of workers with
higher education in Taiwan,” Economics of Education Review, 21(2), pp. 153-169.
   Gou, Renmin, 2006, “Examining equality in higher education from the perspective of rural-urban
access to higher education,” Research in Educational Development, 5, pp. 29-31. (in Chinese).
   He, Zhiyun and Naihan Dong, 2007, “A study of family consumption of higher education in
Zhejiang Province based on the construction of a harmonious society –A comparative analysis with
other seven provinces and municipalities,” China Hihger Education Research, 5, pp. 23-26.
   Hu, Anning and Nicholas Vargas, 2015, Economic consequences of horizontal strati…cation in
postsecondary education: evidence from urban China,” Higher Education, 70(3), pp. 337–358.
   Lee, Hong Yung, 2000, “Xiagang, the Chinese style of laying o¤ workers,” Asian Survey, 40(6),
pp. 914-937.
   Lee, Young, 1999, “Wages and employment in China’s SOEs, 1980-1994: Corporatization, mar-
ket development, and insider forces,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 27, pp. 702-729.
   Li, Wenli, 2007, “Family background, …nancial constraint and higher education attendance in
China," Economics of Education Review, 26, pp. 725-735.
   Lkhagvasuren, Damba, 2014, “Education, mobility and the college wage premium,” European
Economic Review, 67, pp. 159-173.
   Qiao, Jinzhong, 2010, “On the rural-urban disparity in access to higher education opportunities
in China,” Chinese Education and Society, 43(4), pp. 22-31.
   Te Velde, Dirk and Oliver Morrissey, 2004, “Foreign direct investment, skills and wage inequality
in East Asia,” Journal of the Asia Paci…c Economy, 9(3), pp. 348-369.
   Toh, Ruby and Hui Weng Tat, 2012, “Trade liberalization, labor demand shifts and earnings
inequality in Singapore,” Review of Urban and Regional Development Studies, 24(3), pp. 65-82.
   Tombe, Trevor and Xiaodong Zhu, 2015, “Trade, migration and regional income di¤erences:
evidence from China,” Working paper.
   Wu, Hongjun and Yingzi Luo, 2012, “Vertical distribution structure of colleges and universities
in China: The phenomenon of assembling in political centers,” Modern Education Management
(Chinese), 5, pp. 11–16. (in Chinese).
   Zhang, Junsen, Yaohui Zhao, Albert Park, and Xiaoqing Song, 2005, “Economic returns to
schooling in urban China 1988 to 2001,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 33, pp. 730-752.
   Zhu, Chuzhu and Yougan Zhang, 1996, “Cost and bene…t of rural children in the Xianyang
province of China,” Population and Economics 5, pp. 13-22 (in Chinese).


                                                11
                Table C.1: NET BIRTH RATES IN CHINA

                                                                      Unit: ‰
                 Urban areas                            Rural areas
Year    Birth    Mortality    Net              Birth    Mortality     Net
         rate      rate    birth rate           rate      rate     birth rate
1980    14.17     5.48       8.69              18.82     6.47        12.35
1981    16.45     5.14       11.31             21.55     6.53        15.02
1982    18.24     5.28       12.96             21.97     7.00        14.97
1983    15.99     5.92       10.07             19.89     7.69        12.20
1984    15.00     5.86       9.14              17.90     6.73        11.17
1985    14.02     5.96       8.06              19.17     6.66        12.51
1986    17.39     5.75       11.64             21.94     6.74        15.20
1987       -         -          -                 -         -           -
1988       -         -          -                 -         -           -
1989    16.73     5.78       10.95             23.27     6.81        16.46
1990    16.14     5.71       10.43             22.80     7.01        15.79
1991    15.49     5.50       9.99              21.17     7.13        14.04
1992    15.47     5.77       9.70              19.09     6.91        12.18
1993    15.37     5.99       9.38              19.06     6.89        12.17
1994    15.13     5.53       9.60              18.84     6.80        12.04
1995    14.76     5.53       9.23              18.08     6.99        11.09
1996    14.47     5.65       8.82              18.02     6.94        11.08
1997    14.52     5.58       8.94              17.43     6.90        10.53
1998    13.67     5.31       8.36              17.05     7.01        10.04
1999    13.18     5.51       7.67              16.13     6.88         9.25
Source: China Statistical Yearbook 1990 and 2000. Data for 1987, 1988, and years
after 1999 are not available.




                                      12
                   Table C.2: URBAN EMPLOYMENT BY EDUCATION

Education Attainment                                 Years of schooling       1995   2002     2009
College or above                                                             10.6%  15.9%    16.2%
  Graduate                                                    18                     0.3%     0.5%
  College                                                     16                     4.4%     5.8%
  Junior college                                              14                    11.2%     9.9%
Average years of schooling college or above                                          14.63    14.84
Below college                                                                89.4% 84.1%     83.8%
  Senior high                                                 12             24.6% 26.6%     20.7%
  Junior high                                                  9             39.7% 41.0%     45.6%
  Primary                                                      6             20.4% 13.6%     15.4%
  Semi-illiterate or illiterate                                1              4.7%   2.9%     2.1%
Average years of schooling below college                                       8.72   9.19     8.99
 Source: China Statistical Yearbook and China Labour Statistical Yearbook.




                       Table C.3: AVERAGE YEARS OF SCHOOLING

                 Year                           Below college       College or above
                 1981                               7.79*                14.00*
                 1988                               8.25*                14.21*
                 1995                                8.72                14.42*
                 2002                                9.19                 14.63
                 Average: 1981-2002                  8.49                 14.31
                 Average: 1981 and 1988             8.02                  14.10
                 Average: 1995 and 2002             8.95                  14.52
                  Note: * denotes those numbers are obtained from backward extrapola-
                  tion using on 1995, 2002 and 2009 data.




                                                   13
