NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEMOCRACY BY MISTAKE
Daniel Treisman
Working Paper 23944
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23944

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

I thank Alexander Libman, Staffan Lindberg, Thomas Pepinsky, Daniel Ziblatt, and other
participants in the 2017 APSA convention (San Francisco), for helpful comments. I acknowledge
support from the UCLA College of Letters and Sciences. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Daniel Treisman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Democracy by mistake
Daniel Treisman
NBER Working Paper No. 23944
October 2017
JEL No. K00,N20,P16
ABSTRACT
How does democracy emerge from authoritarian rule? Influential theories contend that
incumbents deliberately choose to share or surrender power. They do so to prevent revolution,
motivate citizens to fight wars, incentivize governments to provide public goods, outbid elite
rivals, or limit factional violence. Examining the history of all democratizations since 1800, I
show that such deliberate choice arguments may help explain up to one third of cases. In about
two thirds, democratization occurred not because incumbent elites chose it but because, in trying
to prevent it, they made mistakes that weakened their hold on power. Common mistakes include:
calling elections or starting military conflicts, only to lose them; ignoring popular unrest and
being overthrown; initiating limited reforms that get out of hand; and selecting a covert democrat
as leader. These mistakes reflect well-known cognitive biases such as overconfidence and the
illusion of control.

Daniel Treisman
Department of Political Science
UCLA
4289 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1472
and NBER
treisman@polisci.ucla.edu

