                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   WERE NINETEENTH-CENTURY INDUSTRIAL WORKERS PERMANENT INCOME
                             SAVERS?

                                       Howard Bodenhorn

                                      Working Paper 23948
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23948


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017




I thank Ray Cohn and Richard Sutch for comments, and Babur De Los Santos for advice on the
econometrics. Veronica Aoki Santarosa, Denica Karadzhova, Dimitar Marmarov, and Justus
Staisiunas for exceptional research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Were Nineteenth-Century Industrial Workers Permanent Income Savers?
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 23948
October 2017
JEL No. D15,N21

                                       ABSTRACT

Theories of household saving posit that households add to or draw down wealth to equalize the
discounted presented value of consumption over time. This paper examines the extent to which
nineteenth-century urban American industrial workers used saving and dissaving to smooth
consumption in response to unanticipated, plausibly exogenous, shocks to income. Information
on the expected and unexpected number of days unemployed is used to construct estimates of
transitory income. The data are then used to estimate the marginal propensity to save from
transitory income, and the results are broadly consistent with Friedman’s (1957) permanent
income hypothesis.


Howard Bodenhorn
John E. Walker Department of Economics
College of Business
201-B Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com
1. Introduction
       Keynes (1936) offers eight reasons for saving. They save as a precaution
against uncertain future income and expenditures, for retirement, to leave a bequest,
to increase their economic independence, to invest in a business venture, or because
they have a preference for future over present consumption. People also save when
the interest rate exceeds their personal rate of time preference, and, perhaps, out of
sheer miserliness. Despite Keynes’ signal contributions to thinking about saving,
modern economic studies of savings are more likely to be motivated by the life cycle
and permanent income hypotheses developed in the 1950s (Modigliani and
Brumberg 1954; Friedman 1957), or the buffer stock theory of the 1990s (Deaton
1991; Carroll 1992). The central insight emerging from these later hypotheses are
that rational, forward-looking people equalize the marginal utility of expenditure over
time because lifetime welfare is maximized if the discounted utility of consumption is
equal in all periods. One implication is that households tend to smooth consumption
over time. A second is that consumption smoothing involves household saving (and
dissaving) and that the fraction of permanent income saved differs from the fraction
of transitory income saved.
       One difficulty in investigating whether historical actors were permanent-
income savers is separating the permanent and transitory components of income. A
second is the relatively generosity of the modern welfare state in its maintenance of
household consumption in the face of unanticipated income shocks. The late
nineteenth-century offers a unique opportunity to investigate whether household
saving behaviors are consistent with the permanent income hypothesis. The welfare
state was a later development and working-class manufacturing incomes were
uncertain so that households saved to avoid severe consumption shortfalls in low-
income periods. It was not uncommon for many manufacturing enterprises to
operate only for part of the year. In some industries plant closings were predictable,
such as in glass blowing in New Jersey in which factories closed in July and August,
and workers earned higher wages that partly compensated them for the
inconvenience (New Jersey Bureau of Statistics of Labor and Industry 1883-1888,
hereafter NJBSLI, Atack, Bateman, and Margo 2002; Averett, Bodenhorn, and

                                          2
Staisiunas 2005). But unexpected plant closings, as well as illnesses or industrial
accidents created substantial divergences between the anticipated and actual number
of days worked per year and, thus, substantial divergences between expected and
realized annual incomes (Fishback 1998; Murray 2007). One jeweler, for example,
reported that “You will notice in my report of earnings that the number of days lost
is large; also that my expenditure has been greater than my income, which had been
entirely due to the loss of time” (NJBSLI 1883, 122). This study takes advantage of
unanticipated unemployment to estimate the permanent and transitory components
of observed annual incomes to test the predictions of the permanent income
hypotheses in an historical context.
         Although Progressive Era reformers worked to create a safety net for
industrial workers, the presumption remained that workers needed to provide for
themselves. In a now infamous sermon delivered during an 1877 railroad strike
during which it was reported that strikers and their families were forced to live on a
dollar a day, or effectively a bread and water diet, Henry Ward Beecher thundered
that “the man who cannot live on bread and water is not fit to live” (quoted in
Rossiter 1955, p. 157). 1 In such a political, economic and social climate, it was
incumbent on workingmen who wished to maintain their families’ living standards to
transfer income from flush to hard times. Intertemporal transfers presuppose a
combination of forward-looking behavior (a demand for saving) and some type of
formal or informal financial institution to facilitate the transfer (a supply of saving
capacity).
         Modern empirical investigations of life-cycle consumption and saving find
that the predictions hold even with imperfect capital markets. The principal
imperfection in modern times is that young households generally prefer to consume
more early in life but do not because capital markets make present borrowing against
future income and wealth uneconomic (Browning and Lusardi 1996). Capital market
imperfections emerge in modern markets despite the gamut of consumption-


1
   Following withering criticism for his insensitivity, Beecher later clarified his earlier comments in
that: “I do not say that a dollar a day is enough to support a workingman: but I do say that it is
enough to support a man – that is to say, if it gives him bread. Not that a man should eat bread
forever … it is a mere question of how he will carry himself during the emergency” (Beecher 1877, p. 92
emphasis in original).

                                                  3
smoothing and saving vehicles open to modern households: demand and savings
accounts at commercial banks, thrifts, credit unions and trust companies; online
brokerage accounts; employer-sponsored pensions and retirement accounts; life
insurance; payday and title loans; pawn shops and many, many others. Before the
mid-nineteenth century the principal “imperfection” was that there were few formal
financial institutions available to assist working-class households in the accumulation
of financial assets. By century’s end, mutual savings banks, industrial life insurance
companies, beneficial societies, and building and loan associations mobilized and
invested household savings, allowing households to smooth consumption over time.
       This paper exploits data on the income, expenditures, and days worked of
New Jersey’s late nineteenth-century industrial workers to better understand whether
and how these workers responded to income shocks. Factories closed for longer
than usual periods, unexpected labor actions, and extended illnesses meant fewer
days worked per year than anticipated for many workers. The paper examines
whether and how much workers saved from current deviations in transitory income
in anticipation of future income shocks.
       Using five cross sections of income, expenditure, and days worked data
collected by the New Jersey Bureau of Statistics of Labor and Industry conducted
between 1883 and 1888, this paper estimates the marginal propensities to save out of
transitory and permanent income. This study, motivated by Friedman’s (1957)
permanent income hypothesis, the data reveal that the marginal propensities to save
out of transitory income were between about one-half and two-thirds, or about the
same values found by Paxson (1992) in her study of Thai farmers. This finding
suggests that late nineteenth-century industrial workers used savings to smooth
consumption. Workers saved a large fraction of current transitory income to see
them through periods of low earnings.
       The principal challenge of the paper is decomposing income into its
transitory and nontransitory components. One contribution paper is that it uses
pooled cross section-time series data on individual work days lost and establishment
averages of work days lost to directly estimate transitory income due to employment
shocks. A principal prediction of the permanent income-life cycle models of
household consumption is that income shocks that affect current income will not

                                           4
affect current consumption, which is a function of households’ permanent incomes.
Thus, that fraction of household income determined by an employment shock
provides a measure of transitory income. Once estimates of transitory income are
estimated, those estimates are used to generate estimates of the marginal propensity
to save out of transitory and nontransitory income. The resulting estimates are
consistent with a weak version of the permanent income hypothesis.
        A second contribution of this paper is the measurement of savings. The
existing economic history of savings relies on data that may not capture
representative savings rates. North (1979) observed that growing industrial
economies create a need for financial saving, but relatively little is known about how,
or even whether, urban-industrial households saved. Evidence from the New Jersey
surveys imply an average savings rate between 8.5% and 14.8% of current income,
which are slightly lower than the 12% to 17% percent estimated by Alter et al (1994),
who include only those saver, and considerably lower than the saving rate generated
by Sutch (2011) for industrial workers in Kansas in 1885, which excludes dissavers
and workers reporting zero saving.
        A third contribution of the paper is that the data are drawn from an era that
witnessed the rise and rapid expansion of formal savings institutions – savings banks,
industrial life companies, and fraternal benefit societies – and shows that working-
class households took advantage of these expanded opportunities. Data reported in
the NJBSLI (1886) labor survey reveal that the average annual working-class
household expenditure on life insurance and fraternal benefit society (sickness
insurance) dues was $14.62 or about 1.9% of average annual household income, and
sufficient to purchase a basic sickness insurance policy and a $200 burial insurance
policy. And approximately one-half of working-class households had such policies
because, as a Hudson County freight handler explained in an earlier survey: most
workers lived “in mortal dread of sickness and death, and there is scarcely a man
among them that does not owe a heavy physician’s bill” (NJBSLI 1883, 130). Regular
dues paid into a beneficial society relieved a working man of the bill, if not the dread.
One-seventh reported a savings bank account with an average account balance of
$240. One-quarter of households belonged to a building and loan society, which was
a popular path to home ownership (Schoenfeld 1925). Ultimately, this paper offers

                                           5
fresh insights into the Progressive Era. Industrial workers were not at the mercy of
forces beyond their understanding or control. Workers could envision, even
anticipate, periods of low employment and income and save and dissave in a fashion
consistent with modern theories of consumption and saving behaviors.


2. A permanent-income approach to saving
        The nature of the data is such that most early budget studies consider the
extent to which a household’s current consumption depends on current income
(Brady and Friedman 1947). But Friedman (1957) argues that current consumption
depends on current wealth, which depends on past, current, and future income and
the time path of interest rates. Current consumption, then, depends on permanent
income, not current income. The corollary is that current saving depends on current
income, current wealth and the interest rate. When the future is certain, households
hold, add to, or draw down wealth to smooth consumption over time, depending on
the household’s time preferences, its expected future incomes, and expected interest
rates. Households hold most of their wealth as relatively illiquid human capital, but
also hold a liquid reserve fund against unexpectedly low earnings in some periods
(Ehrenberg and Smith 2008). Households hold cash and other liquid assets to
maintain consumption during emergencies and when current income falls below
expected income.
        A parsimonious derivation of the household’s saving decision from the
permanent income hypothesis follows from Friedman’s (1957, p.26) three-equation
system (suppressing the time subscripts on current and transitory variables for
convenience):
(1)     cp = k(r, u, w) • yp
(2)     y = yp + yt
(3)     c = cp + ct ,
where c is current consumption, and cp and ct are its permanent and transitory
components; y is current income, and yp and yt are its permanent and transitory
components. Permanent consumption cp is the product of permanent income and
the proportional multiplier k, which is a function of the interest rate (r), preferences
(u), and wealth (w).

                                           6
         If we define current saving as s = y – c, substitute equations (1) through (3)
and rearrange terms, saving can be written as:
(4)      s = (1-k) • yp + yt - ct.
An important implication of the hypothesis is that the marginal saving rate from
permanent income (1–k) is less than the marginal saving rate from transitory income
(1). In the limit, ct ≈ 0 and k=1, which further imply that all transitory income is
saved and that permanent consumption does not respond to changes in
nontransitory income. Further, under certainty dyp = 0, and under uncertainty E[dyp]
= 0, which imply that saving and dissaving follows from shocks to transitory income.
         Friedman posits the following additional conditions:
(5) ρyt yp = ρct cp = ρyt ct = ρcp y = 0,
where ρ is the correlation coefficient between the relevant variables. Friedman (1957,
p. 27) notes that the assumptions that permanent and transitory incomes are
uncorrelated and that permanent and transitory consumption are uncorrelated follow
from their definitions. The third assumption – that transitory income and transitory
consumption are uncorrelated – is a strong one, but one that introduces substantive
content into the hypothesis and makes it potentially refutable. The common notion
of saving as a residual makes the third assumption plausible. The saving-as-residual
notion implies that consumption is determined by long-term factors, so that
transitory income shocks lead primarily to additions to or subtraction from wealth.
         The fourth assumption – that permanent consumption and current income
are uncorrelated – is central to the permanent income hypothesis and is vital to
understanding the household’s decision to save. “The resources that a representative
consumer allocates to consumption at any age,” writes Modigliani (1986, p. 299)
“will depend only on his life resources … and not at all to income accruing
currently.” Modigliani held that households smooth consumption and that short-
term saving responds only to stochastic deviations between current and expected –
or transitory – income. Short-term fluctuations in income do not induce deviations
from the anticipated consumption path, and strong versions of the permanent




                                            7
income hypothesis predict that fluctuations in current saving are driven entirely by
changes in transitory income (Paxson 1992, p. 26). 2
         The empirical challenges lies in decomposing observed annual income into
its transitory and nontransitory components, and then determining the amount saved
from each component. 3 Following Paxson (1992), I assume that the saving of
household j residing in county c and employed in industry i in year t is a linear
function of permanent income (Ypjirt) and transitory income (Ytjirt). It is important to
note that the empirical analog of permanent income estimated here is not the
permanent income ( = annuity value of lifetime wealth) discussed in the theoretical
literature; rather it is the short-term expected income conditional on a household’s
characteristics in year t. Transitory income is the amount of household income
realized due to positive and negative employment shocks experienced by the
household head due to differences between reported and expected illness, reported
and expected slack time, and work days missed for other reasons. The precise
definition of employment shocks is provided below.
         Long-term factors, such as family size and other household characteristics,
Fjirt, influence household saving behavior. Studies of saving find that households with
more children will save less because the current income of young household
members is less than the annuity value of lifetime wealth (Deaton 2005). In addition,
to the extent that parents view children as sources of support in retirement, current
expenditures on children may substitute for current saving. The family variables
include a series of dummy variables related to family size – single individual, two
people, three people, and so forth. An additional dummy variable is included that
equals one if a family member other than the household head reports earning income
during the year; and zero otherwise. Neighborhood factors, Njirt, may be
determinants of saving. The principal neighborhood feature included here is ready

2
  The buffer stock theory also predicts a relatively high propensity to consume out of transitory
income (Carroll 1997. p. 3), and, unlike other models assumes consumers are impatient. Savings are a
“necessary evil” – foregone current consumption opportunities – that are held as insurance against an
uncertain future (Deaton 1992, p. 264). Because the data provide no information on wealth the
analysis follows the permanent income approach, which does not require information about lifetime
wealth.
3 I follow Paxson (1992) in referring to nontransitory income as permanent income, but it is

important to note that they are not the same. Permanent income is difficult to determine absent
detailed information on households’ wealth and other characteristics.

                                                 8
access to a formal financial institution, namely a mutual savings bank or a building
and loan association (New Jersey Department of State 1882-1889).
        Finally, the variability of a household’s income, σyjit, will influence saving.
Absent panel data, it is difficult to measure income variability. The approach taken
here is to proxy for σyjit with a variable that measures the variance of slack days, or
the days in which workers are unable to work because their place of employment
closes or slows production, leading to layoffs. These statistics are drawn from
separate surveys of establishments conducted by NJBSLI (1883-1885). The
establishment surveys inquired into total employment, average wages, hours per day,
and the number of days lost to lack of work. Because they are drawn from separate
surveys, the establishment-level measure of slack days differs from the worker-
supplied estimates and is not subject to the same measurement error as the
employee-reported time lost. (Appendix 1 reports summary statistics of
establishment- and employee-reported slack days.) The measure is such that it does
not vary across households employed in the same industry or across time.
        These considerations yield the following saving equation:


(6)     Sjirt = α0 + α1 Ypjirt + α2 Ytjirt + α3 Njirt + α4 Fjirt + α5 σYjir + ηjirt


Paxson (1992) shows that a saving equation linear in permanent and transitory
income and the variance of income is consistent with a lifetime utility function that is
additively separable and is either quadratic in the arguments or exhibits constant-
absolute-risk-aversion. A permanent income approach suggests that the marginal
saving rate from permanent income, α1, will be approximately zero, and that the
marginal saving rate from transitory income, α2, will be approximately one. The
coefficient on the variability of income, α5, is ambiguous, though it is not
unreasonable to posit that households with highly variable incomes save more. If α5
> 0, the results are consistent with constant absolute risk aversion.
        The difficulty in estimating a saving equation like Eq. (6) is that it requires
information on transitory and permanent income, which is unobserved. Because the
budget surveys provide no information about current or lifetime wealth, direct


                                               9
estimation of permanent income is problematic. It is possible, however, to estimate a
transitory component of current income and to construct a short-term analog to
permanent income. To construct an estimate of transitory income, assume that it can
be expressed as:


(7)     Ytjirt = φtt + βt Xtjirt + εtjirt


where φtt is a transitory year fixed effect common to all households. Xtjirt consists of
a set of household specific variables affecting transitory income.
        The budget surveys report the number of days lost in the past year to illness,
to slack days (establishment closings or slowdowns), and to “other causes” and the
variables included in X that determine transitory income are deviations from average
values for sick days, slack days, and other days lost, as well as the squared values of
each, to capture any nonlinearity in sick days on income. Slack day deviations are
estimated in two ways: (1) slack days reported by individual respondents less the
mean value of slack days reported by all respondents employed in the same industry;
and, (2) slack days reported by the worker less the mean value of slack days as
reported by employers at the establishment level. (See Appendix 1 for a comparison.)
Sick day deviations are also calculated in two ways: (1) individual-reported sick days
less the average number of sick days for workers in the same industry; and, (2) as
individual reported sick days less 5% of the 275 days of full-time, year-round
employment (=50 weeks at 5.5 days per week). In the 1884 establishment reports, a
shoe manufacturer and a rubber manufacturer state that workers typically missed
about 5% of time to illness and the second estimate follows their observation
(NJBSLI 1884).
        Other days missed are estimated as the individual-reported other days lost
less the average other days lost for workers in the same industry. Industry-specific
averages are used to create the fraction of days lost by cause rather than all-worker
averages because some industries – such as hat making – involve the use of
dangerous materials that may lead to higher sickness rates; and the other days lost
variable will be specific to industries if strikes or other job actions occur in an
industry, as occurred in the shoe-making industry in 1885 (NJBSLI 1885). Equation

                                            10
(8) provides a general definition of the principal variables that make up Xt, namely
Lost days deviation and its square.


(8) Lost days deviation = (individual sick days – industry sick days) +
        (individual slack days – industry slack days) +
        (individual “other” days – industry “other” days).


        Estimates of a short-term analog of permanent income follow a parallel
strategy. Assume that a household’s permanent income can be expressed as:


(9)     Ypjirt = φpt + φc + φi + βp Zpjirt + εpjirt


where φpt is a year fixed effect, φc is a county-of-residence fixed effect, and φi is an
industry-of-employment fixed effect. The vector Zpjirt includes two types of
individual factors that are likely to influence permanent income: the skill level of the
survey respondent, as well as a proxy for the likely length of the respondent’s career.
        People who make greater investments in human capital can reasonably
expect higher lifetime or permanent income (Ehrenberg and Smith 2008). Two
strategies are followed to assign workers to skill levels. Reiss’ (1961) industry-job title
classification categorizes jobs into three broad skill levels: craft or skilled workers;
operatives; and laborers. Skill category dummy variables for all but common laborers
are included in the income regressions. Duncan’s classification also includes a
socioeconomic prestige score for each industry/job description that varies from zero
to 100. These prestige scores are used to construct a second measure of human
capital: quintiles of the prestige scores are first estimated, then dummy variables for
the four highest quintiles are included in the income regressions.
        Besides human capital investments a second feature of most jobs that bear
on the permanent income anticipated from choosing that occupation is the expected
length of career. Jobs in which workers remain productive for longer periods expect
higher lifetime incomes, ceteris paribus, and Progressive Era reformers expressed
concerns over the connection between the length of many workers’ careers and the
length of the working day, workplace safety, and the long-term health consequences

                                             11
of certain occupations. To better understand workplace safety and the health
consequences of manufacturing occupations respondents were asked to provide
information on the age at which workers in their job start to “decline,” interpreted
here as the onset of age-related productivity decline. These responses, which ranged
from age 25 to 65, were categorized into a series of 5-year dummy variables centered
on the fives (i.e., 32.5 < z35 ≤ 37.5, 37.5 < z40 ≤ 42.5, etc.). The excluded category
is z40, which was the most commonly reported age-at-decline and is consistent with
known high-health-risk occupations, such as potters and hatters who were exposed
to lead, mercury, and other dangerous chemicals. Carpenters, on the other hand,
reported an average age at decline of 57 years; bricklayers, 56 years (Ransom and
Sutch 1995).
        The expected sign on the age-at-decline effects are ambiguous. If workers
have perfect foresight and markets are competitive and frictionless, workers in
dangerous or unhealthy occupations should receive a compensating differential such
that, holding all else constant, permanent incomes are similar for similar skills,
education, and so on. Workers in hazardous occupations and expecting shorter
careers should earn more at each age than workers in less hazardous jobs. If markets
do not compensate for hazardous or unhealthful workplaces, which concerned
Progressive Era reformers, there may not be a consistent relationship between
income and age at decline. Fishback (1998) and Averett et al (2005) find that
Progressive-Era workers were partly compensated for job hazards and
unemployment risk.

        Equations (7) and (9) provide an estimating equation for total income (Eq.
10):

(10) Yirt = φt + φc + φi + βp Zpjirt + βt Xtjirt + β1 Njirt + β2 Fjirt + εjirt


and equations (7) and (9) can also be substituted into the structural saving equation
(Eq 6), which yields an augmented structural equation:


(11) Sjirt = α0t + α1 [φc + φi + βp Zpjirt ] + α2 [ βt Xtjirt ] + α3 Njirt + α4 Fjirt + α5 σYjir
        + ηjirt

                                               12
where φt = φtt + φpt, α0t = α0 + α1 φpt + α2 φtt, the error term in the income equation
is εirt = εtjirt + εpjirt , and ηjirt is the error term in the saving equation. A reduced-form
saving equation can be written as:


(12) Sjirt = γt + γc + γi + γ1 Zpjirt + γ2 Xtjirt + γ3 Njirt + γ4 Fjirt + υjirt .


The reduced-form saving equation does not contain the income variance term, σYjir,
because it is collinear with the determinants of permanent income in that it does not
vary across individuals within an industry and is defined such that it forms a linear
combination of the industry dummy variables. The income-variance effect, therefore,
is captured in the industry fixed effects, γi.
        The first test of whether late-nineteenth-century working-class households
were permanent-income-type savers is to generate estimates of the reduced-form
income (Eq. 10) and saving (Eq. 12) equations. One implication of the permanent
income hypothesis is that γ2, the marginal rate of saving from transitory income,
should equal 1, and that the marginal effects of the transitory elements in Xtjirt on
saving should be the same as they are on income. That is, if the permanent-income
hypothesis holds, γ2 = βt. Transitory employment shocks, whether due to sickness,
slack days, or other causes should influence saving and income in identical fashion
because the marginal propensity to consume from transitory income is zero.
        An additional implication of the permanent income hypothesis for the
reduced-form estimates is that γ1, the marginal rate of saving from permanent
income is zero. This implication predicts that the marginal effects of all the variables
included in Zjirt should have no effect on saving, or that the elements of γ1 that
correspond to permanent income equal zero. While it is plausible that location,
industry, family structure, and age at decline all influence permanent income in some




                                               13
way, the strongest test will be whether the estimated coefficients on the human
capital variables are zero. 4
        Estimates of the structural saving model (Equation [6]) provide a second test
of the hypothesis. Following Paxson (1992) I implement a two-step model in which
Equation [10], the reduced-form income equation, is first estimated by ordinary least
squares to form estimates of transitory and permanent income. Household saving is
then regressed on the resulting estimates of permanent (Ypjirt) and transitory (Ytjirt)
incomes. A two-step estimation procedure is computationally simple, though it is not
statistically efficient and will yield consistent estimates only under restrictive
conditions. Barro (1977) argues that efficiency can be improved by joint estimation
of the original income and second-step equations to correct for the correlation
between the error terms, but Pagan (1984) doubts whether doing so notably
improves efficiency or consistency. Despite the econometric concerns surrounding
such estimates, the results are reported because they offer some insight into the
extent to which households were permanent income savers.
        Finally, the third test of the permanent income saving hypothesis estimates
the income and savings equations (10) and (11) simultaneously by maximum
likelihood. This maximum likelihood estimator is effectively the same as the reduced-
form estimators, subject to the nonlinear restrictions on the coefficients that appear
in Equation (11). These estimates are used to test the overidentifying restrictions on
the model, namely that the effects of each of the transitory income variables (e.g.,
deviation in days lost and its square) and permanent income variables is proportional
to two-step coefficients consistent with estimation of Equation (6). The factor of
proportionality for the transitory variables is α2; and the factor of proportionality for
the permanent income variables is α1.


3. Data
        The principal source of evidence on household saving behaviors is five
reports issued by the NJBSLI between 1883 and 1888, except 1887 when no survey
was conducted. Modeled after the Massachusetts labor bureau headed by Carroll D.

4
   Friedman (1957, pp. 16-17) discusses the importance of human capital in determining permanent
income at some length, but mentions family structure as a determinant only in passing (p.55).

                                              14
Wright, the NJBSLI conducted the same types of annual surveys of working-class
men and women employed in manufacturing enterprises across the state. Some
details of the surveys changed from year to year, but certain core questions appeared
in each survey: the city or town in which the respondent worked; the broad industry
in which he worked (i.e., glass, iron, construction, etc.); a reasonably precise job title
(i.e., green bottle glass blower, puddler, plasterer, etc.); the number of hours worked
in a typical day; typical wages by day, week, or month, depending on the individual’s
pay cycle; the number of working days the individual was not employed due to
sickness, an inability to find work, which usually implied scheduled seasonal factory
shutdowns, and days missed for other reasons, most often a strike or other labor
action; the number of individuals in the household; the worker’s annual income from
his or her job; any additional income aggregated up to annual figure earned by other
household members employed outside the home; the household’s total annual
expenses, sometimes broken down into categories such as rent, food, clothing, and
other expenses; and whether the household had accumulated any savings in the past
year. Other questions included in some, but not all years, involved the ages of
children in the household, whether the household took on debt during the year, or
had saved in previous years.
        Although the surveys provide details about work, income, and spending,
New Jersey’s labor bureau did not ask what now seem to be obvious questions. They
did not ask about age, race, marital status, education, or job experience. In 1888
alone they inquired into the respondents’ nativities, but the response rate was
relatively low even when other parts of the survey were complete. It is likely that the
bureau revisited some of the same enterprises in more than one year, but it is not
possible to construct an individual-level panel because individuals are not identified
by unique number across years. In 1884, a few different individuals were assigned the
same number. These instances were identified in the second round of data cleaning
and the income-spending-household size variables were accurately matched based on
place and job identifiers. The five annual surveys yielded 3,650 individual records,
but only 2,940 reported information on annual income and/or expenses that afford a
calculation of household saving. Of these, age-at-decline was reported by the
individual or could be imputed from Ransom and Sutch (1995) based on a

                                           15
respondent’s industry/job title for just 1,143 individuals. Regressions reported below
report results for the full sample and the age-at-decline subsample.
        Despite the absence of information on age, job tenure, and other individual
characteristics, the surveys provide valuable documentation of working-class saving
behaviors that have been long neglected (Carter and Ransom 1991). Similar surveys
conducted in other states between the 1870s and the 1910s have been used to
investigate retirement, asset accumulation, and job tenure (see Carter et al (1991) for
a brief survey). And using the New Jersey surveys Averett et al (2005) find that
workers received a partially compensating wage differential for anticipated seasonal
unemployment.


3.1. A note on theory and measurement
        One concern with using income and expenditure to estimate saving rates is
that modern approaches do not define current saving as current income less
expenditure. Although there are differences, most approaches define annual saving
as changes in net wealth, which includes changes in cash holdings and durable goods,
including housing, which provide a flow of future services. Changes in net wealth,
which equals current saving, are approximately the difference between disposable
income less expenditure on perishable goods and current services.
        Because the New Jersey surveys contain no information on wealth or
expenditures on durables, the saving rate is measured as the difference between
household income less expenditure all divided by household income (e.g., saving rate
= (total income – total expenditure)/ total income). The income-less-expenditure
measure provides a lower bound estimate of the saving rate because some reported
expenditures qualify as saving.
        It is possible, however, to generate alternative estimates of saving rates that
account for some saving, namely insurance premiums and house payments, from
responses to the 1882, 1883, and 1886 surveys. The 1886 survey, for instance,
inquired into life insurance payments and sickness society dues (see Bodenhorn 2018
for details), which average about $11.10 per household per year. If these values are
counted as expenditures rather than saving, calculated saving rates will be below
actual rates. To correct for the underestimate caused by including premiums and

                                          16
dues as current expenditure, data on premiums and dues in the 1886 report was used
to predict premiums paid in other years using household size, occupational skill
category, and county and industry fixed effects as predictors. The (untabulated)
predicted values were used to generate revised saving rates by subtracting insurance
expenditures from current expenditures and income.
       A second adjustment involves estimating saving in the form of investment in
owner-occupied housing. Home ownership is both a current consumption good and
an investment good, but it is difficult to empirically extract the consumption and
saving components from the data. One way to deal with the problem of accounting
for housing services is to eliminate housing expenditures (whether rent or house
payments) from both expenditures and income (Attanasio et al 2005), which
mitigates the problem if the current consumption component is large. Some
respondents to the 1883, 1884, and 1886 surveys provide the annual dollar value of
rent paid (average of $114/year); other households did not report a value for house
rent. In 1886, the survey notes that most nonrenters owned their homes. If all
respondents who returned no value for rent in the 1883 through 1886 surveys lived
in owner-occupied housing it implies an ownership rate of 58.1%, which is well
above the 34.3% reported in the 1900 federal census (Census Bureau 2017). It is
likely that some renters failed to report, but there is no way to distinguish between
non-reporters and home owners. Additionally, if we assume that rent payments
depends on family size, occupational skill category, and county and industry fixed
effects, the current consumption component of housing can be predicted for the
years 1883 to 1886 for respondents not reporting a value for rent. Untabulated
regressions predict an average rental value of owner-occupied house is $96.53,
compared to average annual rent for rental units of $114.63.
       The insurance and current rental value of housing adjustments imply a
calculated saving rate equal to [(total income – (total expenditure – estimated
insurance premiums – estimated rental expenditures) / (total income – estimated
rental expenditures)]. To better understand the mechanics and implications of the
insurance and rental adjustments consider the case of survey respondent number 124
in the 1886 report (selected at random from those reporting neither premiums nor
rent). He worked as a skilled machinist in an iron foundry in Florence, Burlington

                                         17
County, New Jersey. He reported $600 in earnings, $501 in current expenditures, but
$0 in premiums and rent. The saving rate calculated as income – expenditure yields a
saving rate of 16.5%. Using the predicted value of $131.63 for annual rent and $5 for
insurance premiums, however, the estimated saving rate is 22.2%. Similar
comparisons of current and predicted saving rates can be estimated for 1,529 of the
2,940 respondents; the average current income-current expenditure saving rate for
these households is 8.5% and the average predicted premium-rent adjusted saving
rate is 12.8%. Appendix Figure A1 provides a plot of the current versus the
estimated saving rate. Although the simpler calculation underestimates the saving
rate, the correlation coefficient between the two series is 0.98 (p-value <0.001).
Given the high correlation between the two series and that the current income-
current expenditure sample is nearly twice the size, the subsequent analyses use the
larger current income-current expenditure sample


        < Table 1 about here>


3.2. Data description and summary statistics
        Table 1 provides summary statistics for the main sample of 2,940
observations and two subsamples used in later analyses. The surveys provide a
valuable perspective on workingmen’s condition in the late nineteenth century. Most
of the state’s counties appear in the sample, though the industrial regions of
Camden-Gloucester counties (proximate to Philadelphia) and Passaic-Essex-Hudson
counties (proximate to New York City) are overrepresented. The samples also
provide information on workers in a broad array of industries, though the glass
making industry, which specialized in green glass bottles and window/plate glass
make up nearly one-fourth of the sample. Nearly half of the surveyed workers are
classified as semi-skilled operatives. One-third is relatively unskilled laborers. Less
than 2% are clerical workers employed by industrial enterprises. And approximately
one-seventh is skilled or craft workers. The 1884 survey provided more than one-
third of the observations; the 1888 survey provided one-fifth. Worker families were
relatively large. Nearly two-thirds of the respondents resided in households with five



                                               18
or more residents. Women represent just 2% of the sample respondents and were
employed mostly in textiles mills and shoemaking establishments.
         The first question then is whether nineteenth-century working-class
households had the wherewithal to save. And if so, did they? Average reported
income in the full sample is $590.82. 5 Reported earnings are consistent with
estimates of GDP per worker derived from available national income accounts:
$686.30 in 1880 and $617.57 in 1890 (Carter et al 2006, Series Ca9-19, Ba1-10, Ba40-
49). Average reported total household expenses are $588.80. Average estimated
household saving, calculated as the difference between reported income and
expenses is $78.57.


                                                  Figure 1
                                 Household saving rate by income percentile
                    .5
                    .25
             Saving rate %
                   0-.25
                    -.5




                             0         20        40           60          80           100
                                                 Income percentile


Source: author’s calculations from data in NJBSLI (1883-1888).
Notes: Circle size reflects relative number of observations for each saving rate-income percentile pair.
Dark line is fitted third degree polynomial with no additional correlates.




5
  In 2015 dollars, the $590 value lies between $15,000 and $89,000. The lower value is based on the
CPI; the higher value is based on comparisons of labor costs across time
(https://www.measuringworth.com/uscompare/, accessed December 2016). The late nineteenth-
century value is in line with an average US manufacturing sector wage of $35,000 in 2015
(http://www.worldsalaries.org/usa.shtml).

                                                    19
       Deaton (1991, 1992) argues that reliable individual-level saving data from
developing countries exhibit three characteristics: (1) zero saving is common,
consistent with consumer impatience; (2) dissaving is common; and (3) saving rates
increase with income. Figure 1 presents a Brady-Friedman (1947) graph of
household saving rates (saving/income) plotted against the households’ place in the
income distribution reported as percentiles. Each saving rate-income percentile pair
is weighted by the fraction of observations for that pair. A third-degree polynomial
estimated without additional correlates is overlaid to illustrate the central tendency.
Several notable features of the figure stand out. First, approximately one-third of
households report annual incomes equal to annual expenditures, implying impatience
and zero saving. Second, households at all points in the income distribution reported
income in excess of expenditures, which implies that even households at the bottom
of the income distribution saved, probably in anticipation of future emergencies or
retirement. Nevertheless, the proportion of households in the lower quintile of
incomes that saved was lower than in the middle quintiles. When working poor
households realized a surplus, they banked it.
       A third feature of the scatterplot is that households at all points in the
income distribution dissaved, though the proportion of dissavers in the highest
quintile is small. Relatively large dissaving rates for some households point to a
reliance on past saving or, perhaps, charity. Among households in the first income
quintile, the mean saving rate was -2.72% and only 18.5% of households reported
saving in the past year, but 31.4% reported having saved in previous years. That
nearly one-third of low-income households had previously saved suggests some kind
of forward-looking, precautionary saving behavior. Fourth, the estimated
relationship between income percentile and saving rate, not controlling for other
factors, suggests that the typical household at each percentile of the income
distribution above the twentieth percentile engaged in net saving and the typical
saving rate for households in the tenth decile approached 25%.
       More 53% of respondents reported household income in excess of
expenditure at rates consistent with other sources (Alter et al 1994; Sutch 2011), but
the issue remains whether households actually saved. The 1883 through 1885 surveys
offer one validity check. These three surveys asked a simple question: “Have you

                                          20
accumulated any savings during the past year?” The responses were coded 0 (no) or
1 (yes). Approximately 40% reported saving in the past year. Pearson correlation
coefficients between saving in the past year and the constructed retrospective saving
rate used in Figure 2 is 0.62 (p-value<0.001). It is reasonable to conclude that
households that reported income in excess of expenditures saved some part of the
estimated surplus.


                                        Figure 2
         Household saving rate by household head reported days lost less industry-
                             worker average days lost
                 .5
                 .25
          Saving rate %
                0-.25
                 -.5




                          -100     -50           0            50          100        150       200
                                 Individual days lost less industry-worker average days lost


       Sources: author’s calculations from data in NJBSLI (1883-1888).




       A second concern is whether the data reveal enough about transitory income
factors to make a test of the permanent income hypothesis possible. Table 2 presents
two matrices that report negative, zero, and positive savings in columns and whether
the respondent experienced a positive (more days than anticipated) or negative (less
days than anticipated) deviation from average days lost. Panel A uses the
establishment-level estimates of days lost; Panel B uses the average of the worker-




                                                        21
reported days lost as the baseline from which deviations are calculated. 6 The
permanent income hypothesis predicts that most of the observations will be in the
upper left and lower right cells. In Panel A, 50.4% of observations appear in these
cells; and, if the negative and zero saving cells are collapsed into nonpositive saving,
the diagonal contains 59.6% of observations. In Panel B, 43.9% of households
appear in the upper left-lower right cells; and 55.5% appear in the diagonal of
nonpositive-positive matrix.
        Friedman (1957, p. 57) offers another approach to determine if there is
sufficient variance in transitory income to uncover whether households were
permanent income savers. He shows that one minus the elasticity of measured
consumption to measured income (i.e., 1 – (∂Ct/∂Yt)*(Yt/Ct)) equals the percent of
the variance of measured income attributable to the transitory factors. In the mid-
twentieth-century United States and United Kingdom, the elasticities derived from
large nationally representative budget surveys were 13% for the UK and 18% for the
US. It is well documented that industrial employment was less stable and less
predictable in the late-nineteenth century than in the twentieth and that it varied
considerably across industries (Atack et al 2002; Averett et al 2005).
        Untabulated OLS regressions of the natural log of household expenditure on
the natural log of income generate generally larger estimates of the percent of
measured income attributable to transitory components than the values observed in
the twentieth century. The income elasticity of expenditure for New Jersey
households in which the head was employed in textiles was 0.98, which implies that
2% of the variance of measured income is attributable to transitory factors. In shoes
the elasticity is 0.97, but in construction and primary metals it is just 0.74. In glass
industry it is 0.52. If these values are taken at face value, the percentage of the
variance in measured income attributable to transitory factors is potentially twice as
high for households whose principal breadwinner is employed in some late-
nineteenth New Jersey industries as for the average mid-twentieth century US
household. Due to small sample sizes for some industries, the estimates should be
treated with care, but even if the true income elasticities are greater than the

6
  Zero deviations in days lost is not included because there were only five households that
experienced the establishment average and 68 that experienced the worker-by-industry average.

                                             22
         estimates, they still point to the importance of saving for most nineteenth-century
         working-class households. Given the extent to which transitory unemployment
         weighed heavily on historical incomes, it is informative to understand how
         household saving behaviors responded to unanticipated unemployment.


         4. Results
         4.1 Reduced-form estimates


                                                     Table 2
                                     Reduced-form income and saving equations
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)                   (5)             (6)
VARIABLES                      Income       Saving        Income          Saving             Est Income       Est Saving

Days lost                     -1.482**        -0.789**           -1.543**      -0.758**        -2.134**        -1.385**
                               [0.280]         [0.189]            [0.259]       [0.165]         [0.490]         [0.384]
Days lost sq                   0.002**         0.001**            0.002**       0.001**        -0.001+         -0.002**
                               [0.000]         [0.000]            [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.001]         [0.000]

Operative                    170.103*         60.454+         167.968*        58.757+         256.003*         119.015
                              [59.381]        [30.799]         [60.528]       [31.127]        [102.542]        [71.524]
Craft                        185.931**        58.390**        176.648**       53.173**        240.218**        82.872*
                              [23.932]        [12.224]         [23.874]       [11.617]         [41.752]        [27.510]
Other skill                  109.468*         52.524*          98.720*        53.034*         109.102*          36.731
                              [36.583]        [21.523]         [35.033]       [23.573]         [42.075]        [58.834]

Observations                    2,940           2,940             2,878         2,878           1,523            1,523

Test 1                                              0.287                           0.174                           0.338
Test 2                                              0.000                           0.000                           0.000
Test 3                                              0.002                           0.003                           0.001

Notes: standard errors clustered on industry of employment in brackets. * implies p-value <0.05; ** implies p-
value<0.01. Days lost in Column (1-2 and 5-6) is difference between individual report and mean of individual reports;
Columns (3-4), it is the difference between individual report and mean enterprise report for slack days and 5% of days
due to sickness. Test 1: p-value of Days lost variable = -1; Test 2: p-value of effect of days lost on income equal effect
of days lost on saving; Test 3: skill variables jointly insignificant. The regressions include the full set of controls,
including county of resident, industry of employment, family size, proximity to a formal financial institution, and year
fixed effects.
Sources: Author’s calculation from NJBSLI (1883-1888).


                 Coefficient estimates for the principal transitory and permanent income
         variables from reduced-form income and saving equations are reported in Table 2
         (the full set of estimates is reported in Appendix Table 2A). Columns (1) and (2) use

                                                            23
the base sample, which uses worker-reported annual income/expenses; the days lost
variables are defined as the difference between self-reported days lost and an
industry-year specific average number of days lost by all workers and its square. A
one standard-deviation increase in the difference in days lost reduces income by
$54.06, or by about 9.2% of mean reported income. The transitory component of
worker income represents a potentially large share of late nineteenth-century
workers’ incomes. Semi-skilled operatives, skilled craft workers, and clerical workers
earn more than laborers, which captures, in part, the permanent income effect of
earlier human capital investments.
        The days lost variables are individually and jointly different from zero in the
saving equation (Column 2). But a test of the permanent income hypothesis is
whether all positive transitory income realizations are saved (or negative transitory
shocks dissaved), which – given the definition of the transitory variable – implies
that the coefficient on Days lost is significantly different from -1. The p-value,
reported as Test 1, reveals that the null cannot be rejected. The implication is that
most of the reduced income arising from transitory factors is dissaved rather than
not consumed, a result that provides support for a strong version of the permanent
income hypothesis.
        A second implication of the strong version of the permanent income
hypothesis is that effect of transitory factors should be the same in the income and
saving equation, which is not the case. An additional lost day of work reduces
income by an estimated $1.48 (compared to mean reported daily wage for those
reporting of $2.55 [sd=1.26]), but reduces saving by $0.79. Test 2 reports the p-value
of the joint test of coefficient equality on days lost and its square in the two
equations. The null hypothesis of coefficient equality is rejected. This result provides
limited support for a direct implication of the hypothesis, but it is consistent with the
overriding argument of both the permanent income/life cycle and buffer stock
approaches that households tend to smooth consumption over their lifetimes, and
that a household will save out of positive transitory realizations to tide it over a
negative realization. These results reveal that dissaving was a fraction of diminished
income.



                                           24
         Although the results are generally consistent with a strong version of the
permanent income hypothesis, they are not necessarily consistent with a third of the
theory’s implications, namely that all permanent income is consumed (βp = 0 in Eq.
(10)). Of the variables available from the surveys, the skill variables are those most
likely to capture the most relevant factor (human capital) affecting the workers’
permanent income, given that less than one-third (probably much less) of workers
owned real estate or other immobile capital. 7 The analog to the implication that all
permanent income is consumed is that the coefficients on the skill categories should
be equal to zero in the reduced-form saving equation. Craft and clerical workers
saved substantially more than laborers. The coefficient on Operatives is larger than
that for laborers, but it is barely significant at conventional levels. It should be noted,
however, that the coefficients on the skill category variables in the saving equation
are one-third to one-half the magnitude of the coefficients in the income equation. If
we interpret these ratios as a marginal propensity to save from permanent income
among nineteenth-century workers, the estimated propensity to save from
permanent income is notably smaller than the propensity to save from transitory
income. It is important to reiterate, however, that because there is no information
about workers’ assets, it is difficult to interpret any of the coefficients from the
regressions as capturing a genuine permanent income component. But if any of
available set of the variables is likely to do so, it is the set of skill categories.
         Columns (3) and (4) report reduced-form estimates using an alternative
measure of the days lost variable. Average lost days is calculated from enterprise
reports of slack days and assumes that the average worker loses 5% of time to illness.
Instead of reported annual income, Columns (5) and (6) use incomes estimated from
the product of daily wages and days worked. The results are robust to alternative
definitions. The data fail to reject the null hypothesis that the propensity to save
from transitory income is one (Test 1). Additionally, the propensity to save from



7
  In the 1883, 1884, and 1886 surveys, workers provided information on annual expenditures for rent,
clothing, food, and so forth. In these years, 69.8% of respondents reported paying rent, the remaining
respondents did not provide a value. In some instances, but neither all nor even most, a notation was
made that the worker owned his or her residence. The notation appeared in so few responses that this
information was not entered into the data set.

                                                 25
nontransitory income is about one-third to one-half the propensity to consume from
transitory income.


4.2 Two-step estimates
        Two-step estimates provide a test of the implications of the structural saving
model (Equation [6]). The two-step method is implemented by first estimating by
OLS the reduced-form income equation (Equation [10]). Estimates of transitory and
permanent income are then estimated from the OLS coefficients. Household saving
is then regressed on the resulting estimates of permanent (Ypjirt) and transitory
(Ytjirt) incomes. The regressions also include the residual income (Yejirt). The
second-stage equation is then estimated jointly with the original reduced-form
income equation to correct for correlated errors in the two equations (Barro 1977).
Because residual income is the mean of the errors from the first step it contains both
permanent and transitory components and cannot be interpreted as transitory; it is
unexplained income. The permanent income hypothesis implies that the coefficient on
the residual should fall between the permanent and transitory coefficients, though
measurement error will bias the coefficient on unexplained income upward toward
one (Paxson 1996).
        Before discussing the coefficients, Panel A of Table 3 reports estimates of
the levels of permanent and transitory incomes as a check on the credibility of the
procedure. Three estimates are provided using the same samples as in Section 4.1. In
each instance, estimated permanent income exceeds actual reported income. In
Column (1), for instance, which uses the reported income / reported days lost
sample, estimated permanent income is $606.34 compared to average reported
income of $590.82. The difference equals the estimate of transitory income, a result
that necessarily follows from the statistical procedure, but one also consistent with
the permanent income hypothesis. Transitory income is, by definition, the difference
between a household’s (expected) permanent and current realized income. The
expected value of residual income is zero, which follows from the estimation
procedure, but residual income shows substantial variance.




                                         26
                                               Table 3
                                         Two-step estimates
                                                  (1)           (2)         (3)
             VARIABLES                          Saving        Saving    Est saving
                                               Panel A
                                  First-stage estimates, mean (sd)
             Y(permanent)                      606.339       581.861     668.974
                                              [164.421]     [251.699]   [332.469]
             Y(transitory)                     -15.522        11.827     -32.425
                                               [56.324]      [64.810]   [131.934]
             Y(residual)                        0.000          0.000      0.000
                                              [183.110]     [182.439]   [317.695]

                                             Panel B

             Y(permanent)                    0.254**        0.237**      -0.127**
                                             [0.015]         [0.016]      [0.020]
             Y(transitory)                   0.454**        0.437**      0.687**
                                             [0.036]         [0.032]      [0.034]
             Y(residual)                     0.412**        0.415**      0.719**
                                             [0.011]         [0.011]      [0.019]
             Slack day sigma-sq               0.332           0.224      6.296**
                                             [0.247]         [0.244]      [0.444]
             Constant                       -60.551**      -53.841**      26.584
                                             [9.985]        [10.270]     [18.546]

             Observations                     2,878          2,878        1,497
             R-squared                        0.433          0.434        0.767

             Test Y(t) = 1                    0.000           0.000        0.000
             Test Y(t) = Y(p)                 0.000           0.000        0.000
             Notes: standard errors clustered on industry of employment in
             brackets. * implies p-value <0.05; ** implies p-value<0.01.
             Sources: author’s calculation from NJBSLI (1883-1888).




        Panel B reports coefficient estimates from the three models. The coefficients
are not consistent with a strong version of the permanent income hypothesis: we can
reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients on permanent income are zero, and
the null that the coefficient on estimated transitory income is one. But like the results
in Section 4.1, the coefficients on transitory income are between 1.8 and 5.4 the
magnitude of the (absolute value) of permanent income coefficients and the null

                                                27
hypothesis of coefficient equality is rejected in each case. Thus, the propensity to
save from transitory income is notably larger than the propensity to save from
estimated permanent income.
        An additional feature of the results is that the proxy measure used to capture
the effect of income variance on saving is about the same size as the coefficient on
permanent income, but is statistically insignificant in two cases. A positive coefficient
implies that a household with higher variance of income saves more, a plausible
result, and one consistent with constant absolute risk aversion. But a zero coefficient
is consistent with a utility function quadratic in risk (Paxson 1996), and we cannot
reject the null hypothesis of no effect in two cases using reported income and
expenditures. It should be kept in mind, however, that variance of slack days is
derived from three years of establishment-level data and does not vary across
households or over time. There may be other sources of unobserved variation that
influence saving differently, but the results are consistent with the buffer-stock
hypothesis. Households that experience more variable incomes will save more when
realized income exceeds expected income as insurance against periods of negative
realizations.


4.3 Maximum likelihood simultaneous estimation
        Maximum likelihood estimates are used to test the overidentifying
restrictions suggested by Equations (9) and (10). The full model estimates imply 46
restrictions, but the restrictions can be separated into four groups: the transitory
variables (days lost deviations) alone; the permanent variables (skill levels) alone; the
combination of transitory and permanent variables; and all variables. The
overidentifying restrictions on the transitory variables are that the coefficients in the
saving equations are proportional to the coefficient on transitory income reported in
Table 3 (α2). Similarly, the restrictions on the permanent variables are proportionality
equal to α1. There is no implied proportionality restriction on the neighborhood and
family structure variables, so the test proceeds under the assumption that coefficient
of proportionality is one.




                                            28
                                             Table 4
              Overidentification tests -- maximum likelihood joint estimate models

                                (1)                   (2)                       (3)
Overid test                   Income          Estimated days lost        Estimated income

Transitory variables            5.28                   3.07                    25.76
χ-sq (2)                       [0.071]                [0.22]                  [0.000]

Permanent variables            19.48                  20.66                    38.86
χ-sq (3)                       [0.00]                 [0.00]                   [0.00]

Trans & Perm                   23.12                  22.57                   258.53
χ-sq (5)                       [0.00]                 [0.00]                  [0.00]

All variables                  957.62                 929.4                   648.02
χ-sq (46)                      [0.00]                 [0.00]                  [0.00]

Notes: the values in brackets are p-values. The underlying coefficients are reported in Table
2 and Appendix Table A2.


        Table 4 reports the overidentification test statistics and their p-values. The
test statistics on the permanent income variables, the joint transitory and permanent
variables, and the full set of variables imply that the restrictions can be rejected, but
in two of the three tests on the transitory income variables the restrictions cannot be
rejected. Thus, tests based on reported income point toward behaviors consistent
with one of the important implications of the permanent income hypothesis. Shocks
to transitory income translate into proportionate changes in household saving.


4.4 Occupational prestige index and age-at-decline samples
        Table 5 reports the second-stage results from the two-step procedure using
Reiss’s (1961) occupational prestige score to measure human capital as the principal
determinant of permanent income. Reiss’s index ranges between zero and 100. The
values in the New Jersey sample range between zero (rag picker, street sweeper, or
sand digger) to 79 (manager of a glass establishment) with an average of 16.53 (sd =
10.82), or the equivalent of a blacksmith, a house painter, or a ship carpenter.


                                                29
                                        Table 5
             Two-step estimates and MLE overidentification tests
                                                (1)                   (2)
             VARIABLES                        Saving                Saving
                                       Occupation prestige          Age-at-
                                              Index                 decline

             Y(p)                              0.259**               0.336**
                                                [0.015]               [0.024]
             Y(t)                              0.447**               0.390**
                                                [0.037]               [0.041]
             Y(e)                              0.407**               0.459**
                                                [0.011]               [0.021]
             Slack day sigma-sq                  0.292                 0.392
                                                [0.248]               [0.591]
             Constant                         -64.988**            -108.132**
                                                [9.988]              [18.615]

             Observations                         2,878              1,121
             R-squared                            0.430              0.493

             Test Y(t) = 1                        0.000              0.000
             Test Y(t) = Y(p)                     0.000              0.241

             Overid tests - p-values

             Transitory only - χ-sq(2)            0.042              0.002
             Permanent only - χ-sq(10)            0.000              0.000
             All variables - χ-sq(49)             0.000              0.000

             Notes: see Table 3
             Sources: see Table 3




       Coefficient estimates in Column (1), which uses the full sample of 2,878
observations and the alternative human capital measure, generates estimates similar
to those reported in Table 2. The coefficient on transitory income is less than unity,
but it is 72% larger than the coefficient on nontransitory income. And the null
hypothesis of coefficient equality is easily rejected. Workers save more when they
employed in industries in which the variance of slack days increases, though the

                                             30
effect is not precisely estimated. The χ-squared statistics reported at the bottom of
the table test whether the coefficient of proportionality implied by relationship
between the income and saving equation holds. We can reject the null that the
proportionality condition on the transitory variables holds at the 5% level, but not at
the 1% level. The other proportionality conditions, however, are rejected. Using an
alternative human capital measure does not change the conclusions generated above.
        Column (2) of Table 5 reports the results from a subsample of 1,121 workers
who reported an age-at-decline or worked in an occupation in which age-at-decline
could be imputed using the ages reported in Ransom and Sutch (1995). The smaller
sample yields results less consistent with the permanent income hypothesis. The null
hypothesis that the fraction of transitory income saved equals one is rejected. The
null hypothesis that the fraction of transitory and permanent income saved is equal
cannot be rejected. The proportionality conditions are also rejected.
        The results from the age-at-decline sample are a seemingly consequence of
using the smaller sample rather than adding age-at-decline as a determinant of
nontransitory income. When the model is estimated using the age-at-decline sample
without the age-at-decline variables, the coefficient estimates are approximately the
same as those reported in Column (2), as are the results of the statistical tests.


5. Conclusions
        Saving is essential to the health of economies and households, yet relatively
little scholarship investigates savings among the urban working class in the late
nineteenth century. This paper uses five surveys of industrial workers in 1880s New
Jersey. An analysis of data generated by New Jersey’s surveys of late nineteenth-
century workers provides unprecedented insights into the saving behaviors of the
era’s working-class households. Although the results are not fully consistent with
strong versions of Friedman’s (1957) permanent income hypothesis, they show that
propensities to save out of transitory income are rather high. The reduced-form and
maximum likelihood estimates imply that about three-fourths of transitory income is
saved; two-step estimates imply fractions of about one-half. The result is important
because it indicates that households saved and dissaved out of transitory income
such that the consumption effects of transitory income shocks were spread over

                                           31
time. Past savings are used to buffer negative shocks due to layoffs or illness. And
positive shocks to current income are saved in anticipation of future negative
realizations. These results may provide some insights into how households
responded to transitory shocks from factors other than lost work days, but the
marginal propensity to save from nontransitory income was generally positive, which
may point toward a limited capacity to tap credit markets to see households through
tough times.
       Other states conducted comparable surveys in the same period, some of
which inquired into household incomes and savings. The techniques used here might
be usefully employed in the analysis of those surveys to determine whether the New
Jersey results can be generalized. In the meantime, the results generated here point
toward households that made use of an expanding array of formal savings options to
smooth consumption over time. One component of the NJBSLI’s annual worker
surveys was an open-ended question about the principal concerns of working-class
households. The majority of the responses focused on the evils of alcohol abuse and
child labor, too-low wages for too-hard work, and the need for universal education.
Some workers, however, focused on the importance of savings, or economy in
contemporary parlance. A rolling mill employee argued that for his fellows to avoid
poverty “they should practice more economy” (NJBSLI 1883, 114). A machinist
responded that “economy and laying up for a rainy day are necessary for a man to
make his way in the world,” while another wrote “economy is the only hope of the
poor man.” And in a statement reminiscent of those encouraging young
professionals in the twenty-first century to contribute to their 401(k) accounts early
and often, one nineteenth-century worker observed that “the most rigid economy
should be observed, until he can get a start in life; then it will be easier” (NJBSLI
1883, 122). Nineteenth-century working men and women understood that saving
was essential to their well-being. The evidence presented here points toward
behaviors consistent with their understanding.




                                         32
6. References
Alter, George, Claudia Goldin, and Elyce Rotella. 1994. “The savings of ordinary
        Americans: the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society in the mid-nineteenth
        century.” Journal of Economic History 54(4): 735-767.
Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman and Robert A. Margo. 2002. “Part-year operation in
        nineteenth-century American manufacturing: evidence from the 1870 and
        1880 censuses.” Journal of Economic History 62(3): 792-809.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Laura Blow, Robert Hamilton, and Andrew Leicester. 2005.
        Booms and busts: consumption, house prices, and expectations. Institute for
        Fiscal Studies working paper WP05/24.
Averett, Susan, Howard Bodenhorn, and Justus Staisiunas. 2005. “Unemployment
        risk and compensating differentials in late-nineteenth-century New Jersey
        manufacturing.” Economic Inquiry 43(4): 734-749.
Barro, Robert. 1977. “Unanticipated money, growth and unemployment in the
        United States.” American Economic Review 67(1): 101-115.
Beecher, Henry Ward. 1877. “Plymouth pulpit: sermon by Henry Ward Beecher.”
        Christian Union 16(5) (August 1), 92.
Brady, Dorothy S. and Rose D. Friedman. 1947. “Savings and the income
        distribution.” In Studies in Income and Wealth Volume Ten, pp. 247-265.
        Conference on Research in Income and Wealth. New York: National Bureau
        of Economic Research.
Browning, Martin and Annamaria Lusardi. 1996. “Household saving: micro theories
        and micro facts.” Journal of Economic Literature 34(4): 1797-1855.
Carroll, Christopher D. 1992. “The buffer-stock theory of saving: some
        macroeconomic evidence.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2( ): 61-135.
Carter, Susan et al. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition. New
        York: Cambridge University Press.
Carter, Susan B., Roger L. Ransom, and Richard Sutch. 1991. “The historical labor
        statistics project at the University of California.” Historical Statistics 24(2): 52-
        65.
Deaton, Angus S. 1991. “Saving and liquidity constraints.” Econometrica 59(5): 1221-
        48.

                                             33
Deaton, Angus S. 1992. “Household saving in LDCs” credit markets, insurance and
       welfare.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94(2): 253-73.
Deaton, Angus S. 2005. “Franco Modigliani and the life-cycle theory of
       consumption.” BNL Quarterly Review 58(233), 91-107.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Robert S. Smith. 2008. Modern Labor Economics: Theory and
       Public Policy 10th ed. Pearson/Addison Wesley.
Fishback, Price V. 1998. “Operations of ‘unfettered’ labor markets: exit and voice in
       American labor markets at the turn of the century.” Journal of Economic
       Literature 36(2): 722-765.
Friedman, Milton. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton, N. J.:
       Princeton University Press.
Gallman, Robert E. 1986. “The United States capital stock in the nineteenth
       century.” In Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, pp. 165-214.
       Edited by Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman. Chicago: University
       of Chicago Press.
Keynes, John M. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. New York:
       Harcourt, Brace and Company.
Modigliani, Franco. 1986. “Life cycle, individual thrift, and the wealth of nations.”
       American Economic Review 76(3): 297-313.
Murray, John E. 2007. Origins of American Health Insurance: A History of Industrial
       Sickness Funds. New Haven: Yale University Press.
New Jersey. 1883. Bureau of Statistics of Labor and Industries. Sixth Annual Report.
       Trenton, N.J.:
New Jersey. 1884. Bureau of Statistics of Labor and Industries. Seventh Annual Report.
       Trenton, N.J.:
New Jersey. 1885. Bureau of Statistics of Labor and Industries. Eighth Annual Report.
       Trenton, N.J.: John L. Murphy, State Printer.
New Jersey. 1886. Bureau of Statistics of Labor and Industries. Ninth Annual Report.
       Trenton, N.J.: John L. Murphy Publishing Co.
New Jersey. 1888. Bureau of Statistics of Labor and Industries. Eleventh Annual
       Report. Trenton, N.J.:



                                          34
New Jersey. 1882-1889. Department of State. Annual Statements of the Banks and Savings
       Institutions of the State of New Jersey. Trenton: John L. Murphy Publishing
       Company, State Printers.
North, Douglass. 1979. “Capital accumulation in life insurance between the Civil
       War and the investigation of 1905.” In Men in Business: Essays on the Historical
       Role of the Entrepreneur, pp. 238-253. Edited by William Miller. Westport,
       Conn.: Greenwood Press.
Pagan, Adrian. 1984. “Econometric issues in the analysis of regressions with
       generated regressors.” International Economic Review 25(1): 221-247.
Paxson, Christina H. 1992. “Using weather variability to estimate the response of
       savings to transitory income in Thailand.” American Economic Review 82(1): 15-
       33.
Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch. 1995. “The impact of aging on the
       employment of men in American working-class communities at the end of
       the nineteenth century.” In Aging in the Past: Demography, Society, and Old Age,
       pp, 303-327. Edited by David I. Kertzer and Peter Laslett. Berkeley:
       University of California Press.
Reiss, Albert J., with the collaboration of Otis Dudley Duncan, Paul K. Hatt, Cecil C.
       North. 1961. Occupations and Social Status. Glencoe, J.J.: Free Press.
Rossiter, Clinton. 1955. Conservatism in America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Schoenfeld, Margaret H. 1925. “Trend of wage earners’ savings in Philadelphia.”
       Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 121: 1-65.
Sutch, Richard. 2011. “Hard work, nonemployment, and the wealth-age profile:
       evidence of a life-cycle strategy in the United States during the nineteenth
       century.” Paper presented at NBER-DAE Spring Program Meeting (March
       2011).                                    Available                           at
       https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/www/external/labor/seminars/a
       dp/pdfs/2010/sutch.pdf
United States. Census Bureau. 2017. Historical Census of Housing Tables.
       Https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/census/historic/owner.html.




                                            35
Table 1
Summary statistics
                         (1)             (2)            (3)
                        Base         Estimated      Estimated
VARIABLES              Sample        Days lost       Income

Income                  590.816        593.689        639.211
                       (251.673)      (251.699)      (420.624)
Expenses                588.800        590.721        611.204
                       (207.100)      (206.930)      (209.982)
Saving                   78.570         79.420        107.482
                       (143.860)      (144.188)      (337.273)
Days lost                 0.000        -13.626          0.698
                        (40.580)       (44.922)       (41.069)
Days lost sq           1,646.189      2,203.001      1,686.009
                     (11,697.676)   (11,649.347)   (15,986.125)
Bergen                    0.012          0.012          0.005
                         (0.108)        (0.110)        (0.068)
Burlington                0.034          0.034          0.011
                         (0.180)        (0.181)        (0.105)
Camden                    0.104          0.105          0.069
                         (0.306)        (0.307)        (0.253)
Cumberland                0.165          0.166          0.173
                         (0.371)        (0.372)        (0.379)
Essex                     0.116          0.116          0.107
                         (0.320)        (0.321)        (0.309)
Gloucester                0.095          0.095          0.143
                         (0.293)        (0.294)        (0.350)
Hudson                    0.072          0.072          0.085
                         (0.259)        (0.258)        (0.279)
Hunterdon                 0.032          0.032          0.035
                         (0.176)        (0.175)        (0.185)
Mercer                    0.024          0.024          0.014
                         (0.152)        (0.154)        (0.117)
Middlesex                 0.043          0.042          0.031
                         (0.203)        (0.200)        (0.173)
Monmouth                  0.008          0.007          0.006
                         (0.090)        (0.085)        (0.077)
Morris                    0.018          0.018          0.014
                         (0.134)        (0.134)        (0.117)
Passaic                   0.161          0.159          0.156
                         [0.367]        [0.366]        [0.364]
Salem                     0.014          0.015          0.025
                         (0.119)        (0.120)        (0.156)
Sussex                    0.004          0.005          0.004

                                         36
                 (0.066)   (0.067)   (0.063)
Union             0.051     0.051     0.064
                 (0.219)   (0.219)   (0.244)
Warren            0.038     0.038     0.045
                 (0.192)   (0.191)   (0.208)
Unknown county    0.009     0.009     0.012
                 (0.095)   (0.095)   (0.111)
Glass             0.227     0.232     0.332
                 (0.419)   (0.422)   (0.471)
Mfg               0.192     0.196     0.180
                 (0.394)   (0.397)   (0.384)
Primary metals    0.101     0.103     0.068
                 (0.301)   (0.304)   (0.251)
Construction      0.070     0.071     0.091
                 (0.255)   (0.257)   (0.287)
Shoes             0.067     0.068     0.032
                 (0.250)   (0.253)   (0.175)
Textiles          0.151     0.154     0.097
                 [0.358]   [0.361]   [0.295]
Transport         0.044     0.045     0.070
                 (0.205)   (0.207)   (0.255)
Clothing          0.058     0.059     0.040
                 (0.233)   (0.236)   (0.196)
Service           0.039     0.040     0.037
                 (0.195)   (0.197)   (0.188)
Mining            0.015     0.016     0.016
                 (0.123)   (0.124)   (0.125)
Tobacco           0.014     0.015     0.023
                 (0.119)   (0.120)   (0.150)
Other industry    0.021     0.000     0.017
                 (0.144)   (0.000)   (0.130)
Labor             0.338      0.33     0.302
                 [0.473]   [0.470]   [0.459]
Operative         0.491     0.502     0.542
                 (0.500)   (0.500)   (0.498)
Craft             0.153     0.150     0.144
                 (0.360)   (0.358)   (0.351)
Other skill       0.017     0.017     0.012
                 (0.128)   (0.128)   (0.108)
y83               0.143     0.145     0.165
                 (0.350)   (0.352)   (0.371)
y84               0.349     0.349     0.250
                 (0.477)   (0.477)   (0.433)
y85               0.182     0.180     0.141
                 (0.386)   (0.384)   (0.348)
y86               0.107     0.107     0.027


                             37
                      (0.310)     (0.309)     (0.162)
y88                     0.219       0.219       0.418
                      [0.414]     [0.414]     [0.493]
One                     0.029       0.028       0.020
                      (0.169)     (0.165)     (0.139)
Two                     0.076       0.077       0.087
                      [0.265]     [0.267]     [0.282]
Three                   0.118       0.118       0.142
                      (0.323)     (0.323)     (0.350)
Four                    0.151       0.152       0.177
                      (0.358)     (0.359)     (0.381)
Five/six                0.305       0.304       0.323
                      (0.460)     (0.460)     (0.468)
Seven +                 0.320       0.320       0.251
                      (0.467)     (0.467)     (0.434)
Female                  0.028       0.028       0.007
                      (0.164)     (0.165)     (0.085)
earningsoth            76.557      76.452      79.475
                     (147.084)   (147.058)   (147.248)
Mutual saving bank      0.510       0.510       0.452
                      (0.500)     (0.500)     (0.498)
Building & loan         0.844       0.846       0.853
                      (0.363)     (0.361)     (0.354)

Observations          2,940       2,878       1,523




                                    38
                                    Appendix Table 1A
                Slack days from establishment reports and individual surveys
                       Establishment reports                     Individual surveys
Industry           Mean         Std dev       Obs         Mean          Std dev       Obs

Clothing           50.26         28.25          49        20.07         35.89         170
Construction       57.75         21.45          27        29.36         40.27         205
Glass              57.31         37.28          66        25.29         35.08         667
Metals             29.04         21.45          43        21.69         40.76         297
Manufacturing       36.6         32.22          170       17.27         34.79         565
Mining              9.64         18.29          15         1.22          4.66          45
Services           19.55         10.2            2         8.53         21.45         116
Shoes              31.32         20.48          62        28.71         36.63         197
Textiles           32.01         24.61          55        31.62         40.58         445
Tobacco            21.86          6.5           10        10.78         20.16          42

Sources: Establishment reports, NJBSLI (1883-1885); individual surveys NJBSLI (1883-1888).




                                           39
                                Appendix Table 2A
                      Reduced-form income and saving equations
                    (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)         (6)
VARIABLES         Income       Saving       Income         Saving      Est Income   Est Saving

Days lost         -1.482**     -0.789**         -1.543**    -0.758**    -2.134**     -1.385**
                   [0.280]      [0.189]          [0.259]     [0.165]     [0.490]      [0.384]
Days lost sq       0.002**      0.001**         0.002**      0.001**    -0.001+      -0.002**
                   [0.000]      [0.000]          [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.001]      [0.000]
Bergen           117.394**     63.425**        133.122**    73.521**     -27.673      -27.546
                  [12.419]     [11.208]         [14.395]    [14.440]    [54.328]     [26.263]
Burlington          24.422      -13.656           41.055      -4.501     119.907      -66.048
                  [33.809]     [15.608]         [32.311]    [13.937]    [69.265]     [48.617]
Camden              21.638      -13.752           24.215     -10.023      76.072       -9.157
                  [43.839]     [18.066]         [44.731]    [17.812]    [53.585]     [36.224]
Cumberland          17.406        6.301           18.793      8.960    125.705**       43.741
                  [46.751]     [24.968]         [46.142]    [24.053]    [36.635]     [24.815]
Essex               18.332      -23.836           21.813     -20.125    83.234+       -16.173
                  [37.476]     [19.909]         [33.462]    [17.713]    [38.499]     [21.850]
Gloucester          38.220       22.649           41.024     25.436       44.493       -6.866
                  [44.460]     [22.472]         [44.967]    [22.372]    [37.586]     [24.677]
Hudson            68.277*        18.878         68.525*      19.748     85.936**       10.636
                  [24.226]     [14.082]         [25.153]    [14.053]    [14.032]      [9.988]
Hunterdon           16.184       15.657           19.306     22.358       -5.310      -16.432
                  [35.856]     [20.563]         [35.099]    [20.316]    [55.885]     [34.302]
Mercer            58.746+      49.862*          57.258+     50.056*      68.272*     77.929*
                  [30.459]     [17.067]         [31.176]    [18.454]    [30.294]     [29.468]
Middlesex          -44.473        1.935          -52.492      0.506        4.970     34.903+
                  [33.693]     [18.484]         [33.376]    [18.824]    [35.869]     [19.217]
Monmouth            38.888       26.017           63.282     43.332    133.759**       53.469
                  [39.697]     [23.474]         [46.221]    [27.228]    [38.213]     [32.715]
Morris              78.661        2.605           62.870      -3.613      -3.781      -28.879
                  [52.456]     [22.003]         [58.407]    [20.842]   [110.956]     [56.324]
Salem            100.895+      72.567*         102.252+     75.369*    192.308**    110.832**
                  [49.985]     [25.886]         [50.228]    [25.650]    [46.370]     [31.832]
Sussex              20.660        3.643           23.960      9.905     -130.570      -73.775
                 [118.710]     [41.873]        [112.276]    [38.973]    [90.195]     [56.017]
Union              -43.329      -18.326          -36.862     -12.254       1.857       -7.047
                  [25.402]     [10.595]         [26.223]    [10.476]    [13.702]     [12.921]
Warren              55.823       15.993           58.318     17.775     91.367+        -0.950
                  [41.001]     [15.141]         [42.078]    [16.744]    [42.131]     [20.222]
Unknown county      -9.872       20.872           -6.378     33.304       -5.313       17.528
                  [56.257]     [40.235]         [53.386]    [39.355]    [48.158]     [51.610]
Glass            334.860**    132.408**        276.315**   103.258**   397.763**    241.232**
                  [23.054]     [11.580]         [29.615]    [14.917]    [25.108]     [15.584]


                                          40
Mfg               104.271**    42.099**         64.434**    21.469*       57.823**    20.054+
                   [16.727]     [9.521]         [15.893]     [7.784]      [11.823]    [10.642]
Primary metals    120.250**    63.560**        103.308**    54.988**        18.846      41.613
                   [23.369]    [12.394]         [20.036]    [10.153]      [34.979]    [23.262]
Construction       84.287**    42.421**         49.706*     25.050*         31.450      17.993
                   [25.190]    [13.428]         [19.535]     [9.853]      [30.804]    [21.104]
Shoes             198.313**    99.072**        176.154**    86.625**     235.723*    210.627**
                   [49.353]    [26.569]         [46.153]    [23.882]      [92.920]    [64.775]
Transport         101.487**    45.845**         88.866**    37.743**      89.680*       45.857
                   [23.550]    [13.244]         [20.490]    [11.374]      [39.636]    [31.483]
Clothing             21.607       4.379           2.500      -5.608       91.456**    95.185**
                   [22.435]    [13.881]         [19.923]    [11.903]      [17.587]    [10.463]
Service           111.735**    43.189**         76.724**    23.393*       82.569+       27.820
                   [20.408]    [10.696]         [15.145]     [7.849]      [39.143]    [26.397]
Mining              -51.176      10.700          -78.486     -2.187        -46.632       9.262
                   [41.622]    [20.257]         [45.918]    [21.379]      [67.540]    [34.262]
Tobacco            65.790**      15.038         38.334*       1.344         12.408      -2.549
                   [16.060]    [10.762]         [16.546]    [10.581]      [13.358]     [9.412]
Other industry     80.581*     42.134+                                      58.468      69.934
                   [35.349]    [19.373]                                   [55.571]    [41.691]
Operative         170.103*     60.454+          167.968*     58.757+     256.003*     119.015
                   [59.381]    [30.799]          [60.528]    [31.127]    [102.542]    [71.524]
Craft             185.931**    58.390**         176.648**    53.173**    240.218**    82.872*
                   [23.932]    [12.224]          [23.874]    [11.617]     [41.752]    [27.510]
Other skill       109.468*      52.524*          98.720*      53.034*    109.102*       36.731
                   [36.583]    [21.523]          [35.033]    [23.573]     [42.075]    [58.834]
y83                 -10.920     -21.973            -1.655     -17.492    -80.737**   -64.157**
                   [28.422]    [12.303]          [26.531]    [10.748]     [21.408]    [13.698]
y84               -19.044+      -14.639          -25.191*     -18.389    -38.135+      -27.126
                   [10.488]     [8.820]           [9.826]    [12.776]     [18.437]    [26.673]
y85                -49.605*     -28.423           -22.366     -15.293   -122.931**   -108.062*
                   [17.727]    [16.089]          [20.920]    [18.340]     [35.409]    [41.913]
y86                  -8.086    -44.278*            -3.701    -41.132*    399.638**   335.675**
                   [16.332]    [15.354]          [15.919]    [14.787]     [36.631]    [33.188]
One                 -13.095    36.594+            -12.644    38.060+        -4.185    65.055**
                   [20.328]    [17.360]          [21.497]    [18.252]     [34.288]    [15.487]
Three              45.971**      -1.330          46.617**      -3.081       21.198     -28.606
                   [10.773]     [7.459]          [11.443]     [7.503]     [11.973]    [16.798]
Four               63.972*    -17.113+           65.078*    -16.860+        20.396   -59.006**
                   [22.062]     [8.410]          [21.733]     [8.764]     [20.231]    [14.490]
Five/six           71.831**   -49.383**          69.120**   -51.364**     34.074+    -76.329**
                   [10.215]    [13.663]           [8.733]    [14.116]     [15.794]    [18.280]
Seven +            50.403**    -42.706*          50.693**    -43.084*       63.003   -44.705**
                   [15.376]    [15.740]          [13.919]    [16.347]     [38.739]     [9.863]
Female           -205.210**      -1.190        -207.446**      -1.216   -158.598**      13.042
                   [31.971]    [24.772]          [24.236]    [23.058]     [41.756]    [40.660]


                                          41
earningsoth            -0.198*   0.253**           -0.194*   0.254**     -0.330*    0.187*
                       [0.065]    [0.024]          [0.065]    [0.026]    [0.113]    [0.061]
Mutual saving bank     37.953      4.614          41.799+      7.182     52.760      9.188
                      [22.536]   [11.861]         [22.120]   [11.546]   [30.786]   [15.546]
Building & loan       48.444**    -5.378          46.852**    -4.973    47.535**   -13.289
                      [13.428]    [8.387]         [13.293]    [8.491]    [7.675]   [11.320]
Constant             239.917**     6.187         243.922**     7.096    198.290*   -12.464
                      [43.753]   [10.964]         [40.501]   [10.151]   [65.586]   [21.853]

Observations           2,940      2,940            2,878      2,878      1,523      1,523
R-squared              0.471      0.279            0.475      0.278      0.430      0.271




                                            42
                          Appendix Table 3A
      Maximum likelihood estimates using occupational prestige scores
                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
VARIABLES               income         saving         income          saving

Days lost                  -1.438**      -0.770**       -2.294**     -1.203**
                            [0.100]       [0.066]        [0.145]      [0.111]
Days lost sq                0.002**       0.001**        0.003**      0.001**
                            [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]      [0.000]
Bergen                      55.939       40.071+        -209.328     -199.590
                           [36.260]      [23.827]      [178.447]    [136.219]
Burlington                  35.949         -6.659       -78.502*     -63.231*
                           [24.595]      [16.162]       [39.919]     [30.473]
Camden                     42.640**        -3.442      -50.108+      -42.843*
                           [16.025]      [10.530]       [28.121]     [21.467]
Cumberland                  34.316         15.415      -66.270+      -54.515*
                           [21.756]      [14.296]       [36.190]     [27.626]
Essex                       12.977       -23.369*      -99.018**    -83.306**
                           [16.559]      [10.882]       [28.488]     [21.746]
Gloucester                  55.969*       31.961*        -41.235      -26.747
                           [24.450]      [16.067]       [37.445]     [28.584]
Hudson                     72.988**      22.392+        61.774+         1.445
                           [17.519]      [11.512]       [35.008]     [26.724]
Hunterdon                    7.329         11.882     -101.988+       -60.404
                           [28.334]      [18.619]       [60.469]     [46.160]
Mercer                      19.417        35.882*       -90.960*       11.011
                           [25.837]      [16.978]       [42.491]     [32.436]
Middlesex                 -70.712**        -4.806     -231.443**    -86.183**
                           [21.106]      [13.869]       [40.785]     [31.133]
Monmouth                    17.300         21.074       -110.469      -77.423
                           [44.254]      [29.080]       [68.825]     [52.538]
Morris                      49.643         -3.166      119.776+       -42.984
                           [38.064]      [25.013]       [64.147]     [48.967]
Salem                     110.886**      77.363**        -15.746        7.856
                           [36.362]      [23.894]       [45.739]     [34.915]
Sussex                      26.777         11.364       -154.026     -102.337
                           [56.911]      [37.398]      [131.325]    [100.248]
Union                      -49.737*       -21.441     -178.245**    -98.764**
                           [19.838]      [13.036]       [40.281]     [30.749]
Warren                     71.088**        23.092       -96.542*      -37.859
                           [26.003]      [17.087]       [47.002]     [35.879]
Unknown county               5.348         28.722     -170.473**      -68.855
                           [40.930]      [26.896]       [55.632]     [42.467]
Glass                     134.461**      64.176**      386.374**    169.262**
                           [20.924]      [13.750]       [44.093]     [33.659]
Mfg                        27.595+       17.132+       188.453**     79.459**


                                              43
                   [15.644]    [10.280]     [39.342]    [30.032]
Primary metals     64.224**    45.546**    173.499**   89.486**
                   [16.662]    [10.949]     [41.146]    [31.409]
Construction       55.609**    33.878**    168.422**     69.770*
                   [18.507]    [12.162]     [40.369]    [30.816]
Shoes                22.680    29.827+      84.925+       63.186
                   [23.288]    [15.303]     [50.844]    [38.812]
Transport            32.990    23.523+       88.449     85.812+
                   [21.270]    [13.977]     [63.916]    [48.791]
Clothing         -160.100**   -60.722**     -48.884        0.388
                   [22.445]    [14.749]     [41.481]    [31.665]
Service               9.709     14.356     217.148**   109.420+
                   [22.277]    [14.639]     [77.070]    [58.832]
Mining              -43.886      5.385    -130.082+       57.216
                   [40.671]    [26.726]     [78.429]    [59.869]
Tobacco            89.622**     22.394     147.140**      54.515
                   [32.345]    [21.255]     [44.853]    [34.239]
Other industry       -2.747     12.125     162.422**     95.989*
                   [26.209]    [17.222]     [54.345]    [41.485]
sei2               75.065**    31.531**      48.104       22.065
                   [15.368]    [10.099]     [39.186]    [29.913]
sei3               80.272**    14.068+      79.425*       24.851
                   [11.979]     [7.872]     [32.363]    [24.704]
sei4              268.599**    92.630**    130.655**    47.384+
                   [15.825]    [10.399]     [37.616]    [28.715]
sei5              155.586**    56.277**    126.937**     73.893*
                   [13.455]     [8.841]     [39.265]    [29.973]
y83                   6.270   -14.904+       -2.436      -17.046
                   [12.556]     [8.251]     [20.188]    [15.411]
y84                  -3.381     -8.621      45.660*        2.891
                   [10.709]     [7.037]     [18.209]    [13.900]
y85               -41.243**   -24.579**      -1.839        2.017
                   [11.973]     [7.868]     [19.935]    [15.217]
y86                  -2.608   -42.469**      21.762       -7.038
                   [13.673]     [8.985]     [25.926]    [19.791]
One                 -18.308    33.789*     -73.417+       -8.348
                   [24.460]    [16.073]     [43.586]    [33.271]
Three              36.886*      -5.169       37.310       -2.049
                   [16.084]    [10.569]     [26.793]    [20.453]
Four               57.870**   -19.814+      55.161*     -39.411*
                   [15.456]    [10.157]     [25.980]    [19.832]
Five/six           66.018**   -52.000**      24.971    -88.353**
                   [14.394]     [9.459]     [24.242]    [18.506]
Seven +            41.921**   -46.724**       1.334    -91.973**
                   [14.875]     [9.775]     [24.392]    [18.620]
Female           -200.153**     -1.006    -222.156**       2.040


                                   44
                     [23.729]    [15.593]    [35.900]    [27.405]
earningsoth          -0.208**    0.251**     -0.129**    0.329**
                      [0.025]     [0.017]     [0.040]     [0.030]
Decline age 30                                -41.718     -6.101
                                             [31.849]    [24.312]
decline35                                    -42.721*   -41.906**
                                             [18.998]    [14.503]
decline45                                   -89.289**   -77.412**
                                             [15.513]    [11.842]
decline50                                   -86.605**   -87.456**
                                             [23.536]    [17.966]
decline55                                   -80.353**   -52.718**
                                             [20.843]    [15.911]
decline60                                      -8.247    -40.973
                                             [58.418]    [44.594]
Mutual saving bank    36.839*      4.570     46.067+      -8.174
                      [14.504]    [9.531]    [24.461]    [18.672]
Building & loan       41.405**    -8.571     34.170+     -12.857
                      [13.283]    [8.728]    [19.164]    [14.629]
Constant             337.023**   40.264**   438.373**   121.884**
                      [22.369]   [14.699]    [39.253]    [29.964]

Observations           2,940      2,940       1,143       1,143
R-squared              0.453      0.278       0.643       0.418




                                     45
                                                     Appendix Figure A1
                                          Current saving rate vs estimated saving rate




                      .5
          Estimated annual saving
                  0   -.5




                                    -.5                            0                     .5
                                                         Current annual saving




Source: author’s calculations from data reported in NJBSLI (1883-1888).
Notes: the horizontal axis measures saving as current household income less current
total expenditure. The vertical axis measures estimated saving rate, after making
imputations for insurance premiums and rental value of housing. The solid line is the
45-degree line. The diagram reveals the concordance between current and estimated
saving, though the latter is generally higher, except at high dissaving rates.




                                                              46
