                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE LABOR MARKET EFFECTS OF OFFSHORING BY
                           U.S. MULTINATIONAL FIRMS

                                        Brian K. Kovak
                                       Lindsay Oldenski
                                         Nicholas Sly

                                      Working Paper 23947
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23947


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2017, Revised October 2019




The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that maintain
legal confidentiality requirements. The authors would like to thank William Zeile, Raymond
Mataloni, and James Fetzer for assistance with the BEA data and James Albertus, Nathan
Anderson, David Atkin, Brian Cadena, Dave Donaldson, Andrew Goodman-Bacon, Jim Hines,
David Hummels, Ben Keys, Peter Morrow, Greg Wright, and participants at various conferences
and seminars for helpful discussions. Benjamin Mayer provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect official positions of the
U.S. Department of Commerce nor the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Nicholas Sly gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the WE Upjohn Institute received while at the University of
Oregon.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Brian K. Kovak, Lindsay Oldenski, and Nicholas Sly. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market Effects of Offshoring by U.S. Multinational Firms
Brian K. Kovak, Lindsay Oldenski, and Nicholas Sly
NBER Working Paper No. 23947
October 2017, Revised October 2019
JEL No. F16,F23,F66,J20,J30

                                         ABSTRACT

We use firm-level data on U.S. multinationals to show how offshoring affects domestic
employment within and across firms. We introduce a new instrument for offshoring: Bilateral
Tax Treaties, which reduce the cost of offshore activities. We find substantial heterogeneity in
effects. A 10 percent increase in affiliate employment drives a 1.3 percent increase in
employment at the U.S. parent firm, with smaller effects at the industry and regional levels. In
contrast, offshoring by vertical multinationals drives declining employment among non-
multinationals in the same industry, and firms opening new affiliates exhibit smaller domestic
employment growth than those expanding existing affiliates.

Brian K. Kovak                                 Nicholas Sly
H. John Heinz III College                      Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Carnegie Mellon University                     1 Memorial Dr
4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012                   Kansas City, MO 64198
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                           Nick.Sly@kc.frb.org
and NBER
bkovak@cmu.edu

Lindsay Oldenski
Georgetown University
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington DC, 20057
Lindsay.Oldenski@georgetown.edu
1       Introduction
In recent years, the question of how offshoring affects domestic employment has been at the
forefront of political and popular discussions of international economic policy. In spite of the
salience of this question, there is little agreement among academic economists regarding the
sign of offshoring’s effects on domestic labor market outcomes, let alone the magnitude.1 This
is in large part because the term “offshoring” comprises many different activities. Offshoring
may take place within a multinational firm or at arm’s length. Firms may relocate U.S.
production to new plants in other countries, or they may increase their output at existing
offshore locations. The work performed in the U.S. may differ from the work performed
offshore. These different dimensions of offshoring decisions could have different effects not
only on the workers at the firm doing the offshoring, but also on workers at competing firms
within the same industry or in supporting industries within the same geographic location.
     We present a consistent framework to study the effects of offshoring on employment
within U.S. multinational firms, at all firms in a given U.S. industry, and for all workers in a
given region, with changes in effective tax rates of foreign affiliates serving as an instrument
for offshore employment. We combine data on U.S. multinational enterprises (MNEs) from
the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and broader industry employment within
County Business Patterns data to highlight differences in the effects of offshoring across
industries (with high vs. low reliance on royalties, interest, and dividends), due to various
offshoring margins (extensive vs. intensive), and between organizational forms (domestic vs.
multinational). Our results show that these distinctions matter. A 10 percent increase in
affiliate employment drives a 1.3 percent increase in employment at the U.S. parent firm,
with smaller effects at the industry and regional levels. In contrast, increased foreign affiliate
activity in vertically oriented multinational firms drives declining employment among non-
multinationals in the same industry, and multinational firms opening new affiliates exhibit
smaller domestic employment growth than those expanding existing affiliates. Overall, our
results indicate that greater offshore activity modestly raises net employment by U.S. firms,
albeit with substantial job loss and employment reallocation.
     Any empirical analysis of the labor market effects of offshoring is complicated by the
    1
     For example, Desai et al. (2009) find a positive relationship between domestic labor market outcomes
and offshoring activities of U.S. multinationals, while Muendler and Becker (2010) find negative effects for
German multinational firms, and Monarch et al. (2014) find negative employment effects of offshoring for
U.S. firms participating in the Trade Adjustment Assistance program. Harrison and McMillan (2011) provide
evidence from the U.S. that the association between offshore and domestic employment may depend on the
type of offshoring activity. The destination of offshore activities may also alter the relationship between
domestic and foreign employment; see Brainard and Riker (1997). Rather than positive or negative effects,
several studies find null impacts of offshoring on domestic labor market outcomes, e.g. Slaughter (2000,
2001), Ottaviano et al. (2013), and Antràs et al. (2017).


                                                     1
fact that offshore activity and domestic employment both reflect choices made by firms,
making it difficult to disentangle the causal relationships between the two phenomena. To
overcome this inherent simultaneity between domestic and offshore employment, we exploit
a policy instrument that alters the relative costs of offshore activity and is exogenous to
firm choices — bilateral tax treaties (BTTs). These treaties allow U.S. firms to avoid double
taxation, in which foreign affiliate income is taxed in two jurisdictions due to constraints on
the size of the foreign tax credit available to U.S.-owned firms. BTTs make this constraint
less likely to bind, lowering the average effective tax rate on income from foreign affiliates,
hence lowering the overall cost of offshore activity. During our sample period of 1987-2007,
countries accounting for 23 percent of total foreign affiliate employment of U.S. multinational
firms received new BTTs with the U.S. We leverage variation in the timing of these treaties,
the pre-existing country mix of multinational firms’ affiliates, and the incidence of double
taxation across industries to infer the causal effect of BTT-induced changes in foreign affiliate
employment on changes in U.S. domestic employment.
    To motivate our empirical analysis we use the model of multinational firm organization
developed by Antràs and Helpman (2004).2 This framework i) demonstrates the simultaneity
of employment decisions at a domestic parent and its foreign affiliates, ii) characterizes the
division of revenue between multinational parents and affiliates, which is necessary to address
double-taxation, iii) characterizes sourcing decisions within and across both country and firm
boundaries, dimensions of offshoring that have different implications for U.S. employment,
and iv) yields a panel difference-in-differences estimation strategy, with changes in effective
tax rates of foreign affiliates serving as an instrument for offshore employment.
    We rule out the presence of confounding pre-trends using an event-study framework
demonstrating similar employment trends for affected and unaffected firms prior to BTT
implementation. This analysis also documents positive (reduced-form) effects of BTTs on
domestic employment in multinational firms, with results concentrated in industries with
relatively high royalty, interest, and dividend payments (RID) to the parent. This is to be
expected since the pre-treaty incidence of double-taxation – and thus the benefit of a BTT –
is larger for firms in high RID industries.3 RID payments are subject to foreign withholding
taxes, which often place total foreign tax payments above the maximum level of the U.S.
foreign tax credit, resulting in double taxation. We also find a strong positive (first-stage)
    2
      See Feenstra and Hanson (2005) and Defever and Toubal (2013) for empirical support of the property
rights/incomplete contracts theory of multinational firms.
    3
      Blonigen et al. (2014) provides evidence that the effects of BTTs vary across U.S. industries according
to the use of differentiated inputs. Highly differentiated products tend to have higher markups and so more
revenue that is exposed to double taxation. Rather than use a proxy for the degree to which income is
subject to double taxation, here we use initial royalty, interest, and dividend payments at the industry level
to assess directly the exposure to treatment from BTTs.


                                                      2
effect of BTTs on foreign-affiliate employment, but only in high RID industries. The absence
of effects in low RID industries helps rule out identification concerns regarding other policy
reforms that might have occurred simultaneously with BTTs.
     For our exclusion restriction to hold, it must be the case that BTTs only impact the
domestic hiring decisions of U.S. firms through their effect on foreign affiliates. We offer
several pieces of evidence supporting this assumption. First, BTTs reduce the tax burden on
foreign affiliate activities, leaving the taxation of domestic activity unchanged. Second, the
vast majority of double-taxation cases involving U.S.-owned firms are raised in the foreign
affiliate’s country, suggesting that this is where the costs of double taxation are incurred
(Ernst and Young, 2015). Third, we show that firms in industries that are less likely to
be subject to double taxation exhibit no reduced-form relationship between BTTs and U.S.
employment, nor do they have significant first stage results linking BTTs with foreign affil-
iate employment. These relationships only exist for the sample of firms in industries with
relatively large royalty, interest, and dividend payments to the parent, payments that are
the source of double taxation, again supporting the exclusion assumption (Angrist and Pis-
chke 2009 p.131). Finally, our IV estimates are significantly smaller than the corresponding
OLS results and are less than one third the magnitude of estimates in the most closely re-
lated prior literature (Desai et al., 2009), which suggests that our instrument substantially
ameliorates upward simultaneity bias.
     In addition to our firm-level analysis we use County Business Patterns data to study em-
ployment outcomes for overall national industries and regional labor markets. The industry
perspective allows us to capture two margins that are absent in the analysis of multinational
firms alone. First, changes in employment at multinational parents may be partly offset by
equilibrium employment adjustment at other domestic firms in the same industry. Second,
declining costs of offshore activity will likely motivate some firms to become multinational
firms by opening new affiliates. Both margins predict smaller effects at the industry level
than at the multinational parent level, and this is what we find. The effect within multina-
tional parents is much smaller than the overall industry employment effect, and employment
at non-multinational firms significantly declines in response to increased offshore activity
at vertically oriented multinational firms in the same industry, suggesting substitution of
intermediate input purchases from domestic suppliers to foreign affiliates adversely affects
domestic employment. Finally, we examine effects at the regional level, capturing potential
spillovers across industries in the same metropolitan area. We generate a regional measure of
offshoring exposure as a weighted average of industry-level foreign affiliate employment, with
weights reflecting the market’s initial industry mix, using a procedure similar to Topalova
(2010), Autor et al. (2013), and Kovak (2013). As before, we instrument for observed affiliate


                                              3
employment using BTTs. The metro-area estimates are somewhat larger in magnitude than
the industry results, consistent with the presence of cross-industry spillovers at the regional
level.
    Our paper contributes in a variety of ways to the literature on the labor market effects
of offshoring. We introduce Bilateral Tax Treaties as a new source of identifying policy
variation in the effective cost of offshore activity.4 Although BTTs have been extensively
studied in prior work, to our knowledge they have not been used to examine the domestic
labor market effects of offshoring.5
    Other work has documented that the relationship between offshore and domestic em-
ployment varies according to the affiliate country (Brainard and Riker, 1997) and the type
of offshoring activity (Harrison and McMillan, 2011). By examining outcomes at different
levels of aggregation and for different subsamples, we are also able to capture heterogene-
ity in the effects of offshoring across firms with different organizational forms and different
offshoring margins. For example, our parent-level analysis suggests that extensive-margin
offshoring (opening new affiliates in response to cost reductions) does not significantly affect
domestic employment within multinationals, while intensive-margin adjustments (increasing
employment at existing affiliates) increase domestic employment. These findings suggest
that there is not a single effect of increased offshore activity on domestic employment, but
that the effects vary depending on the circumstances, potentially explaining differences in
empirical findings across research papers.6
    This observation also has important implications for relating our findings to others in the
broader literature on the effects of increased imports, which tends to find negative effects
of total imports on labor market outcomes (e.g. Autor et al. (2013), and Hummels et al.
(2014)). Total imports include final goods, inputs purchased abroad at arms-length, and
inputs purchased from foreign affiliates of domestic multinationals. Each of these trade flows
may have a different effect on domestic labor market outcomes and is subject to different
    4
      Closely related prior work uses variation based at least partly on year-to-year changes in affiliate-country
GDP (Desai et al., 2009) or wages (Brainard and Riker, 1997; Slaughter, 2000; Muendler and Becker, 2010;
Harrison and McMillan, 2011). Permanent reductions in the cost of offshore activity following a a BTT more
closely parallel the secular declines in offshoring costs during recent decades
    5
      See, for example, Blonigen and Davies (2004), Davies (2004), di Giovanni (2005), Egger et al. (2006),
Louie and Rousslang (2008), Davies et al. (2009), and Blonigen et al. (2014).
    6
      For example, we find positive net effects on domestic employment while a recent paper by Boehm et al.
(2017) find declining domestic employment in response to offshoring. Their analysis restricts attention to
U.S. manufacturing establishments, omitting the headquarters establishments where positive scale effects
are most likely to emerge. They also observe offshoring at arms-length and extensive margin offshoring at
newly formed multinationals. Both of these margins likely contribute to domestic employment declines but
are unobservable in the BEA data. In contrast, Suárez Serrato (2018) examines the effects of an effective tax
increase on firms with existing affiliates, in which scale effects are most likely to dominate, finding domestic
employment effects consistent with ours.



                                                        4
policy interventions. We focus on the effects of increased employment at foreign affiliates of
U.S. multinational firms, both to take advantage of a compelling policy-based identification
strategy and because the potential effects of offshoring by multinational firms have been the
topic of much attention in political debates and the popular press, distinct from discussions
of trade more broadly. Moreover, the U.S. Census Bureau reports that about 50 percent
of U.S. imports are between related parties, and Slaughter (2009) discusses evidence that
MNEs account for approximately 20 percent of total employment in the U.S. Hence, the type
of offshoring we consider here is of first-order importance to U.S. labor market outcomes.
    Our research design explicitly measures the overall effects of declining costs of offshore
activity, including potential substitution and scale effects. This approach is distinct from
that in papers estimating substitution parameters in multinational firm-level cost functions,
which explicitly hold firm output fixed to isolate substitution effects.7 In our framework,
the key mechanism driving the positive relationship between domestic and offshore affiliate
employment is that firms may expand output, and thus employment, as offshoring costs
fall. Hence, our positive estimates are entirely consistent with prior work finding that for-
eign and domestic employment are substitutes, since our estimates reflect a combination of
substitution and scale effects. Moreover, we find independent evidence for the quantitative
importance of substitution effects by showing smaller employment growth in firms opening
new affiliates in BTT countries, a margin in which substitution effects are most important.
    The following section describes Bilateral Tax Treaties and the data we utilize to study
their effects. Section 3 estimates the reduced-form effect of BTTs on domestic employment
in multinational firms, emphasizing that the appearance of BTTs was uncorrelated with
pre-existing firm employment growth. Section 4 presents our main analysis, studying how
increased offshore employment affects domestic employment. This includes the theoretical
framework, analysis of how BTTs affect foreign affiliate employment, and results for the
effects of offshoring at the multinational parent, industry, and regional levels. Section 5
concludes.


2       Background and Data
This paper identifies the effects of offshore employment on domestic employment using vari-
ation in offshore activity driven by Bilateral Tax Treaties (BTTs). BTTs resolve a problem
called “double taxation” in which limits on the amount of foreign tax credits available to
    7
     e.g. Slaughter (2000) and Muendler and Becker (2010). Harrison and McMillan (2011) control for output
by assuming that firm output depends only upon domestic and foreign prices and then empirically proxying
for those prices using industry sales.



                                                    5
U.S. MNEs result in the same income being taxed in two jurisdictions, potentially raising
the effective tax rate for foreign affiliates well above the statutory level in either jurisdiction.
     In particular, during our sample period the U.S. corporate tax applied to worldwide
profits, meaning that profits resulting from a U.S. multinational firm’s activities both at
home and abroad were subject to the U.S. corporate tax. This is in contrast to territorial
systems, in which foreign affiliate activity is only taxed by the country in which the affiliate
is located.8 Under the U.S.’s worldwide system, any foreign tax on foreign affiliate activity
would subject the firm to double taxation in the absence of some compensation. In an effort
to limit this possibility, the U.S. government offers a foreign tax credit to U.S. firms to offset
their foreign tax liabilities.9 However, a U.S. multinational firm may not claim a foreign tax
credit that exceeds the U.S. tax on foreign taxable income, otherwise the U.S. IRS would
implicitly subsidize the foreign tax authority. When the foreign tax liability exceeds this
limit, a portion of the firm’s income is taxed by both the U.S. and foreign taxing authorities
without an offsetting credit.
     Double taxation of this kind is most likely to arise when the foreign jurisdiction imposes
a substantial tax on royalties, interest, or dividends, known as a “withholding tax.” These
rates can be quite high, so that the combined corporate income tax and withholding tax in
many foreign jurisdictions can exceed the relatively high U.S. corporate tax rate. In this
circumstance, the firm owes withholding taxes to the foreign tax authority without receiving
a fully offsetting credit, resulting in double taxation and imposing additional costs on the
foreign activities of the firm.
     To see how lowering withholding tax rates helps avoid double taxation, consider a hy-
pothetical situation in which a U.S. multinational firm has an affiliate in Mexico that earns
$100 of taxable income, $60 of which is paid to the U.S. parent in the form of royalties.
Before a BTT is in place, the Mexican tax authority levies a 25 percent withholding tax on
the $60 of royalty payments plus a 35 percent tax on the $40 earned in its jurisdiction. In
this scenario the foreign tax authority collects $29 (= 0.25 ∗ 60 + 0.35 ∗ 40) from the foreign
affiliate. Yet, the U.S. foreign tax credit limit is $14 (= 0.35 ∗ 40), reflecting the 35 percent
U.S. corporate tax rate applied to the value of Mexican activity. As a result, the foreign
affiliate is left with $15 in un-credited foreign tax liabilities, subjecting the multinational
enterprise to double taxation. If signing a BTT were to eliminate the withholding tax, then
the U.S. foreign tax credit would be sufficient to fully offset the taxes paid to the foreign
tax authority. Albeit an overly simplified example, this scenario demonstrates how limits on
   8
      With the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, the U.S. adopted a more territorial corporate tax system so
our identification strategy does will not apply after 2017.
    9
      See Desai et al. (2001) for an introduction to the U.S. foreign tax credit and Doernberg (2016) Ch. 8
and Misey and Schadewald (2015) Ch. 4 for detailed treatments.


                                                    6
foreign tax credits can lead to double taxation, and how BTTs can mitigate the problem by
reducing withholding tax rates on royalty, interest, and dividend income.10
    Table 1 provides information on each of the U.S. BTTs that entered into force during
our sample period 1987-2007.11 These treaty partner countries account for approximately 23
percent of total foreign affiliate employment of U.S. MNEs during our sample period.12 Table
1 also reports withholding tax rates on royalty, interest, and dividend income facing U.S.
multinational firms just before and just after the relevant BTT entered into force. Note the
withholding rates under the treaty are often substantially lower than they were prior to the
treaty. By reducing these withholding rates, BTTs reduce the probability of double taxation,
lowering the effective tax rate faced by multinational firms and incentivizing offshore activity
in treaty countries.
    Even though BTTs apply to all industries, the effects of BTTs on effective tax rates
may vary by industry because of differences in the initial incidence of double taxation. For
multinational firms in industries where royalties, interest, and dividends (RID) are higher,
the amount of withholding tax levied on foreign affiliate activity is also higher, and double
taxation is more likely. In contrast, industries that rely minimally on royalty, interest,
and dividend payments are much less likely to face double taxation. Hence, we expect the
effects of BTTs to be larger in industries with relatively high RID payments. Appendix A.2
describes in detail our categorization of industries with high or low RID payments.
    Our empirical analyses examine the effects of BTTs on employment in U.S. multinational
firms, their foreign affiliates, and the broader labor market. Information on multinational
firms comes from the 1987-2007 Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, collected by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). These data provide a quasi-exhaustive sample
of U.S. multinational firms and their affiliates in foreign countries. Our analysis utilizes
information on domestic employment at the U.S. parent firm and employment in each of
its majority-owned foreign affiliates, along with information on each parent firm’s 3-digit
primary industry.13 Firm-level data are ideal in this context, as they allow us to control for
  10
      Note that the prospect of double taxation arising from withholding taxes may deter firms from making
royalty, interest, or dividend payments (Desai et al., 2001). Even in this case, lowering withholding taxes
through a BTT lowers effective costs, since it allows the firm to allocate resources with less distortion.
   11
      Treaties are often signed in years prior to when they become effective, and several BTTs have been
renegotiated over time. We use the date in which the original signing entered into force to indicate when
countries have a treaty in place. See IRS.gov, United States Income Tax Treaties A-Z for treaty text,
including relevant dates. Our event-study analysis in Figure 1 below shows no sign of anticipatory effects,
supporting this timing definition. See Appendix A.1 for a visualization of our sample’s time coverage relative
to BTT dates.
   12
      Authors’ calculations using the BEA Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.
   13
      We classify affiliates based on their parent’s primary industry. The BEA uses 3-digit SIC-based ISI codes
prior to 1999 and uses 4-digit NAICS-based ISI codes afterwards. For consistency, we convert NAICS-based
codes to 3-digit SIC-based codes for the relevant years.


                                                      7
time-invariant unobservable firm or affiliate characteristics and to investigate heterogeneity
in effects based on offshoring margin and firm organizational structure. Our sample includes
5,715 firms with 46,498 foreign affiliates spanning 121 3-digit industries and operating in 130
countries from 1987 to 2007. Note that our sample includes all multinational firms, including
those outside manufacturing.
     After examining outcomes within multinational firms, we consider employment effects at
the industry and regional levels using data on employment by industry and metropolitan
statistical area (MSA) from the U.S. Census Bureaus’s County Business Patterns (CBP).
These data report total employment at private business establishments in covered industries
by industry and county.14 We aggregate industries to match the 3-digit classification used
in the BEA data and aggregate counties to construct 304 time-consistent metropolitan areas
spanning our sample period.
     Throughout our analyses, we present specifications controlling for a standard set of time-
varying country-level determinants of offshoring, using data compiled from several sources.15
Control variable names appear in square brackets. To capture the regularities that greater
national incomes promote foreign affiliate activity, while large differences in national in-
come reduce it, we control for the log of the sum of U.S. and affiliate country’s real GDP
[ln(GDPus + GDPd )] and the log of the squared difference in the two countries’ GDPs
[ln((GDPus − GDPd )2 )]. Information regarding real GDP and trade costs come from the
Penn World Tables, with national incomes expressed in trillions of U.S. dollars. Trade
costs are measured using a standard definition of openness: the log of 100 minus the trade
share of total GDP [ln(Trade Costs)]. The skill difference between the U.S. and a foreign
affiliate country is measured as the log of the difference in average educational attainment
[ln(Skill Difference)] from Barro and Lee (2010). Educational attainment measures are avail-
able every five years, so we linearly interpolate data for years between observations. Data
indicating whether the U.S. has a bilateral investment treaty [BIT] with the destination coun-
try are from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. The presence of
free trade agreements [FTA] across countries is available from the U.S. Trade Representative.
Annual exchange rate data [Exchange Rate] are from the World Bank.
     Table 2 reports summary statistics for the all foreign affiliates in our sample and the U.S.
parent firms that own them. The average firm in our sample has roughly 9 foreign affiliates
with total foreign employment of 3513 workers and total U.S. employment of 7906 workers.
  14
      The CBP data provide full coverage in all industries except crop and animal production; rail trans-
portation; National Postal Service; pension, health, welfare, and vacation funds; trusts, estates, and agency
accounts; private households; and public administration.
   15
      See Carr et al. (2001), di Giovanni (2005), and Blonigen et al. (2014) for papers motivating these
controls.



                                                     8
3        Effects of BTTs at U.S. Multinationals
Before moving on to our theoretically motivated IV estimates of the effects of offshoring on
U.S. employment, we begin our empirical analyses by estimating the effect of BTTs on U.S.
parent firm employment. This analysis is the reduced form of the simultaneous equations
framework introduced in Section 4.1, and serves two purposes. First, the effect of BTTs on
multinational firm hiring in the U.S. is of independent interest, as tax treaties are among the
most commonly implemented policy tools affecting the incentives to engage in cross-border
production, and they help inform us about the broader consequences of changes in effective
tax rates for multinational firms. Second, this analysis allows us to rule out the presence of
confounding trends, in which faster growing multinational firms are systematically more or
less likely to have affiliates in countries signing new BTTs with the U.S.
     We estimate the effect of BTTs on parent employment using a panel difference-in-differences
research design (Bertrand et al., 2004). In order to have a single well-defined treatment pe-
riod for each parent firm, here we focus on the first BTT received by one of the parent’s
affiliates during our sample period. A parent firm is treated when at least one of the countries
hosting its affiliates has enacted a new BTT with the U.S. during our sample period. Define
t̃f as the first year in which an affiliate of firm f receives a BTT, so the firm is treated when
t ≥ t̃f . To account for differences in the relative importance of the first affiliate receiving a
BTT, we scale the treatment indicator by that affiliate’s pre-BTT share of the parent firm’s
total affiliate employment, ϕ̃f estimate the following:16
                                          h               i
                          ln sf t = β RF ϕ̃f 1(t ≥ t̃f ) + ΓXf t + λf + νit + f t ,                            (1)

where sf t is U.S. employment at parent firm f in year t; 1(t ≥ t̃f ) is a treatment indicator for
years in which at least one of firm f ’s affiliates has received a BTT; this treatment indicator is
scaled by that affiliate’s initial employment share, ϕ̃f ; Xf t is the vector of standard offshoring
controls described in Section 2; λf are parent firm fixed effects; νit are industry-year fixed
effects; and f t is an error term. Because (1) includes fixed effects for each parent firm and for
each industry-year combination, β RF measures the (reduced form) difference in employment
growth for parent firms in the same industry whose affiliates do and do not receive BTTs.
    16
       To be precise, let tc be the year in which country c enacts a BTT with the U.S., and tc = ∞ if the country
does not enact a BTT. Cf is the set of countries in which firm f initially has affiliates. Then t̃f ≡ minc∈Cf {tc }.
Note that t̃f = ∞ if none of f ’s affiliates have a BTT during our sample period, so 1(t ≥ t̃f ) = 0, and f is
not treated. Let c̃f ≡ arg minc∈Cf {tc } be the first of firm f ’s affiliate countries
                                                                               P        to receive a BTT. Affiliate
c̃f ’s pre-BTT share of affiliate employment is then ϕ̃f ≡ (mf,c̃f ,t̃f −1 )/( c∈Cf mf,c,t̃f −1 ), where mf,c,t is
employment at parent firm f ’s affiliate in country c in year t. We scale by the pre-BTT affiliate employment
to avoid including any endogenous employment adjustments.



                                                         9
We calculate two-way cluster-robust standard errors, clustering by parent firm and by year.
     The results appear in Table 3. The first column includes firms from all industries, while
columns (2) and (3) separately estimate the effects of BTTs in industries with high and low
levels of royalty, interest, and dividend (RID) payments. A positive point estimates for the
BTT indicator’s coefficient implies that parent firms whose affiliates receive BTTs expand
employment on average in comparison to parents whose affiliates do not. The effect on all
parents in column (1) is statistically insignificant.17 However, when restricting the sample
to parents in high RID industries, BTTs have large and statistically significant effects. This
is expected since double taxation is more likely in these industries prior to BTT implemen-
tation. In contrast, the estimates for low RID industries are much smaller and statistically
indistinguishable from zero. Introducing additional controls in columns (4)-(6) yields similar
results. The coefficient in column (5) implies that a BTT for a multinational firm with single
affiliate in high RID industries increases domestic employment by 6.6 percent.18
     In order to interpret the estimates from (1) as the causal effect of BTTs on MNE parent
firm employment, it must be true that parents whose affiliates did and did not receive BTTs
would have experienced equal average employment growth in the absence of new BTTs. We
test for pre-existing differences in employment trends using the event-study framework of
Jacobson et al. (1993), in which we examine the employment effect of a parent’s first new
BTT in each year before and after it enters into force. The estimation equation, which
strictly generalizes the difference-in-differences specification in (1), is

                               +6         h                   i
                   ln sf t =          βjRF ϕ̃f 1 t − t̃f = j        + ΓXf t + λf + νit + f t .            (2)
                               X

                               j=−6


The estimates of βjRF measure the difference in employment growth for parent firms in
the same industry whose affiliates do and do not receive new BTTs, in year j before or
after the BTT was implemented. To rule out potentially confounding pre-BTT trends in
parent firm employment growth, we expect βjRF ≈ 0 ∀j < 0. We focus on high RID
industries, since they exhibited substantial responses to BTTs in Table 3. Figure 1 plots the
estimated coefficients along with their 95 percent confidence intervals, with the year before
BTT implementation (j = −1) as the omitted category, equal to zero. The coefficients on
the pre-BTT β̂jRF are flat and nearly identical to zero, and there is no sign of pre-BTT
differences in employment growth for firms that would and would not later be treated.
Only in the period of BTT implementation and later do treated and non-treated firms’
  17
      di Giovanni (2005), Blonigen and Davies (2005), and Davies et al. (2009) also find no robust relationship
between BTTs and FDI activity at an aggregate level.
   18
      100 ∗ (exp(0.064) − 1) = 6.6.



                                                       10
employment growth rates diverge, as indicated by the jump in period 0, in which the BTT
was implemented, and growth in the effects over the subsequent years. These results are
consistent with prior evidence that increased multinational activity occurs only after BTTs
enter into force (Blonigen et al., 2014), and show that BTT assignment is uncorrelated with
preexisting firm performance.19
     Together, the results in this section show that decreasing effective tax rates on foreign
affiliate activity by enacting a BTT increases employment at the U.S. parent firm. As we
will discuss in detail below, these positive estimates suggest that scale effects, in which lower
costs drive increases in overall firm activity, outweigh substitution effects, in which firms shift
activity toward the newly cheaper affiliate activities. Statistically and economically signif-
icant results appear for parents in high RID industries, which benefit most from removing
double taxation, while the effects in low RID industries are indistinguishable from zero.
     These findings support the notion that BTTs are exogenous to counterfactual firm em-
ployment growth in a variety of ways. The lack of confounding pre-BTT trends in parent
employment rules out concerns in which firms that were experiencing stronger employment
growth were systematically more likely to have affiliates receiving BTTs. Another potential
concern is the presence other time-varying confounders that are correlated with BTTs. A
potential example is that some countries listed in Table 1 (e.g. India) implemented other
market-based policy reforms around the time their BTT entered into force, potentially con-
founding the effects of BTTs on employment growth. Unlike BTTs, broader market reforms
should affect both high- and low-RID industries, so the lack of any observed effect of BTTs in
low RID industries rules out substantial confounding from simultaneous policy reforms. In
the following section, we similarly find that BTTs have no effect on affiliate employment in
low RID industries. As Angrist and Pischke (2009) argue (p.131), the lack of reduced-form
(parent) effect in a subsample with no first-stage (affiliate) effect helps reinforce the idea that
BTTs satisfy the exclusion restriction required for the IV analysis in the following section.


4        Effects of Offshoring on Domestic Employment
We now turn to studying the more general question of how changes in foreign affiliate hiring
affect domestic employment at multinational parent firms and in the broader U.S. labor
market. Although this question has been the subject of prior research and is of interest to
    19
     In Appendix A.3 we implement two alternative versions of this parent-level reduced form analysis. First,
we remove the affiliate employment scaling factor, ϕ̃f , and examine the effect of an average BTT irrespective
of the relative size of the affected affiliate. Second, we utilize information on all new BTTs experienced by
a parent firm’s affiliates, not just the first one. In each case we find results consistent with our preferred
specification.


                                                     11
policy makers, it is difficult to answer credibly due to the inherent simultaneity between
offshore and domestic activity.


4.1     Theoretical Framework
We utilize the Antràs and Helpman (2004) global sourcing model to motivate an estimation
strategy using BTTs to resolve this simultaneity problem. This particular model suits our
context for three reasons. First, it defines the boundary of the firm in an environment with
incomplete contracts, allowing us to characterize how the effects of offshoring vary across
firms with different organizational forms. Since BTTs only influence effective tax rates
for integrated multinationals (not those transacting at arm’s length), the firm boundary
distinction is essential. Second, by specifying each agent’s bargaining position, the framework
describes the economic division of revenue across tax jurisdictions, thereby characterizing the
respective tax liabilities, and subsequently the potential for double taxation. Finally, the
model explicitly characterizes the simultaneity of parent and offshore affiliate employment,
yielding a system of linear simultaneous equations justifying a panel difference-in-differences
research design using variation in BTTs as an instrument for affiliate employment.

4.1.1   Fundamentals

The world economy consists of one home country and C foreign countries. Consumers in
all countries are laborers with identical quasi-linear preferences over a homogeneous good,
xt0 , and a series of composite goods, Xti , across industries i = 1...I, given by Ut = xt0 +
     i=1 Xti , with 0 < µ < 1. Consumers have constant elasticity of substitution preferences
1 PI      µ
µ
over unique varieties, f , among the set Fti of varieties available in industry i and period
                        hR                 i1/αi
t specified as Xti = f ∈Fti xti (f )αi df         , with 0 < αi < 1. It follows that, within each
period, monopolistically competitive firms each producing a unique variety, f , face an inverse
demand function pti (f ) = Xtiµ−αi xti (f )αi −1 .
     Labor is the only factor of production, with a perfectly elastic supply in all countries.
Let ω be the wage in the home country and wc be the wage in each Foreign country with
ω > wc . Workers may either perform headquarters services, s, or assembly, m, in producing
the variety of the final good sold by the firm. Each worker can provide a single unit of
headquarters services or assembly services, and the final product for each firm is delivered
to consumers by combining headquarters services and assembly according to
                                                      #ηi "              #1−ηi
                                            st (f )           mct (f )
                                           "
                           xti (f ) = θ(f )                                      ,           (3)
                                              ηi              1 − ηi


                                                 12
where θ(f ) is a firm-level productivity parameter. Headquarters services, st (f ), can only be
performed domestically, while assembly can take place domestically or at factories in any
country c ∈ C.20 Regardless of where assembly occurs, the process is firm-specific.

4.1.2    Offshoring and Double Taxation in Integrated Multinationals

Firms face an inability to write ex-ante enforceable contracts over the delivery of specialized
inputs like R&D, design, marketing, or the specific processes used during assembly at the
factory. Instead, the parent firm and affiliate engage in Nash bargaining over the surplus
from their relationship after goods are sold. A multinational enterprise is comprised of
a parent firm that supplies headquarters services and integrates with its offshore assembly
factory, giving the parent the right to seize outputs from the affiliate after they are produced.
However, in the case of seizure the parent loses a share (1 − δc ) ∈ (0, 1) of final output, which
can vary by the location of offshore assembly c. The parent’s outside option is therefore
to seize the goods produced and sell them directly, receiving only a proportion δcαi of the
revenue that would result had the parent not exercised its rights to claim the assembled
output. Thus, the surplus generated by cooperation between the parent and affiliate is a
fraction (1 − δcαi ) of total revenue. The parent company receives a fraction β of this surplus,
with the remainder going to the foreign affiliate supplier.
    The parent’s problem is therefore to choose its employment, equivalent to choosing its
production of headquarters services st (f ), in order to maximize its profits:

                                max [δcαi + β(1 − δcαi )] rti (f ) − ωst (f ),                          (4)
                                 st (f )

                                             h      iαi ηi h     iαi (1−ηi )
where revenue is rti (f ) = θ(f )αi Xtiµ−αi stη(fi ) mct (f )
                                                     1−ηi
                                                                               . The corresponding problem
for the affiliate performing assembly in foreign location c is

                            max [(1 − β)(1 − δcαi )] rti (f ) − τcti wc mct (f ) .                      (5)
                           mct (f )


The term τcti ≥ 1 is our addition to the Antràs and Helpman (2004) model, reflecting the
possibility that the multinational firm faces double taxation. We model double taxation such
that the affiliate must hire τcti > 1 workers to provide one unit of assembly services. The next
subsection discusses the motivation for and implications of assuming that the incidence of
double taxation falls on the affiliate while leaving the parent’s problem unchanged. Note that
  20
     For simplicity, we assume that domestic and offshore labor inputs are perfect substitutes in performing
assembly. Muendler and Becker (2010) find that in the German context they are substitutes, but imperfect
ones.



                                                     13
τcti may vary by affiliate country, year, and industry, capturing variation in the timing and
presence of BTTs with particular countries, and the fact that the incidence of double taxation
is greater in industries with more reliance on royalties, interest, and dividend payments.

4.1.3    Labor Demand Within Multinational Firms

A parent firm solves (4) by choosing its employment, st (f ), given its affiliate’s employment,
mct (f ). This yields the following best-response function for the parent.

                         ln [δcαi + β(1 − δcαi )] + ln αi − ln ω + αi [ln θ(f ) − (1 − ηi ) ln(1 − ηi )]
  ln st (f ) = ln ηi +
                                                            1 − αi ηi
                                                             αi − µ             αi (1 − ηi )
                                                         −            ln Xti +               ln mct (f ) . (6)
                                                           1 − αi ηi             1 − αi ηi

Similarly, an affiliate in country c solves (5) by choosing its employment, mct (f ), given its
parent’s employment, st (f ), yielding its best-response function.

                              αi [ln θ(f ) − ηi ln ηi ] + ln(1 − δcαi ) + ln(1 − β) + ln αi − ln wc
  ln mct (f ) = ln(1 − ηi ) +
                                                           1 − αi (1 − ηi )
                         αi − µ                         αi ηi                          1
                    −                  ln Xti +                    ln st (f ) −                  ln τcti (7)
                      1 − αi (1 − ηi )           1 − αi (1 − ηi )               1 − αi (1 − ηi )

We can more concisely express these two best-response functions by grouping terms together
into firm-industry-country fixed effects, ψf ci and ϕf ci , and industry-year fixed effects, ϑti and
φti , yielding the following expressions.

                                    ln st (f ) = ψf ci + ϑti + γ ln mct (f )                               (8)

                              ln mct (f ) = ϕf ci + φti + ζ ln st (f ) − ν ln τcti                         (9)

Equations (8) and (9) form a set of linear simultaneous equations for parent and affiliate
employment, making clear the inherent challenge in estimating γ, the effect of affiliate em-
ployment on parent employment.21 Estimating (8) by OLS overstates the effect of affiliate
employment on parent employment because of the simultaneity induced by (9), in which
ζ > 0.22 However, (8) and (9) also provide a solution to the simultaneity problem. Re-
ductions in effective tax rates on offshore activity, τcti , shift out the affiliate employment
  21
      Given a Cobb-Douglas production function, γ = αi (1−ηi )/(1−αi ηi ) > 0. In Appendix B.2, we examine
a more general model in which production is CES, and show that γ can generally be positive or negative.
   22
      The sign of additive simultaneity bias is given by the sign of ζ as long as the condition γζ < 1 is
satisfied. This condition is necessary for the existence of equilibrium, and is satisfied in our context, since
0 < αi , ηi < 1.


                                                      14
profile in (9), while leaving the parent profile in (8) unchanged. Therefore, when analyzing
the effect of affiliate employment on multinational parent employment, we utilize a panel
difference-in-differences research design based upon (8) in which we instrument for affiliate
employment using BTTs.23
    For this approach to succeed, τcti must be excluded from the parent’s best-response
function. In Appendix B.1 we explicitly model BTT-induced reductions in withholding tax
rates in the context of the U.S. corporate tax system. There, we show that if multinational
parents insulate themselves from changes in double taxation by adjusting transfers between
themselves and their affiliates, then the implementation of a new BTT satisfies the exclusion
restriction. If instead new BTTs reduce the costs faced by both parents and affiliates, the
IV estimates will not entirely resolve the simultaneity issue. In that case, some portion of
the upward bias will remain, and our estimates will reflect an upper bound on the true effect
of affiliate employment on domestic employment. As discussed below, our results are less
than one third the magnitude of the most closely related estimates in the literature (Desai
et al., 2009). Therefore, in spite of the potential theoretical concern regarding exclusion, our
approach appears to substantially ameliorate the simultaneity issue in practice.

4.1.4     Industry Labor Demand

Total industry employment in the home country includes hiring for headquarters services st
across all firms, along with domestic labor used in assembly, mt , either in-house or at arm’s
length. Let Oti be the set of firms in industry i that choose to offshore assembly within an
affiliate in a foreign country during period t, while Ati is the set of firms that source assembly
services from an arms-length provider in a foreign country. Likewise let Iti denote the set
of non-multinational firms that hire local workers in the home country to assemble output
in-house, while Uti is the set of firms that source assembly from local arms-length providers
in the home country. In total, domestic employment for industry i is given by
              Z                            Z
  Lti ≡                 st (f )df +                 st (f )df
          f ∈Oti ⊂Fti                 f ∈Ati ⊂Fti
                                               Z                                       Z
                                      +                 [mct (f ) + st (f )]df +                 [mct (f ) + st (f )]df . (10)
                                          f ∈Iti ⊂Fti                              f ∈Uti ⊂Fti


    Equation (10) shows that a decline in the effective cost of offshore activity resulting
  23
     An alternative approach to our empirical strategy is to exploit the variation in the changes in individual
tax rates across countries shown in Table 1. We prefer the binary treatment indicator as it is the most
conservative and transparent approach, but the results (available in Appendix A.4) are unaffected when we
scale the BTT indicator according to country-specific changes in withholding tax rates.


                                                                15
from a BTT (dτcti < 0) may affect total industry employment, Lti , in a variety of ways.
First, existing integrated multinational firms (Oti ) will increase offshore employment with
the decline in its effective cost, and this change will affect headquarters employment based
on γ in (9). Based on the positive reduced-form results for continuing multinational firms
discussed in Section 3, this intensive margin effect is likely to increase domestic employment.
Other firms will change organizational form to become new integrated multinationals. If
these firms had previously assembled goods domestically (Iti or Uti ), this extensive margin
shift will lower domestic employment (Boehm et al., 2017). We therefore expect to find more
negative (less positive) domestic employment effects of increased offshore activity among
firms opening new affiliates in BTT countries than among firms maintaining continuing
affiliates. Finally, because the costs of production for integrated multinationals fall, other
firms face stiffer competition in product markets and may contract as a result (Groizard et al.,
2015). Given the various positive and negative components, the overall effect on industry
employment may be positive or negative. We therefore empirically examine both the overall
effect on industry employment along with separate effects for existing multinationals, for
firms opening new affiliates in BTT countries, and for non-multinationals, confirming the
heterogeneity in effects just described.


4.2     Empirical Analysis
4.2.1    The Effect of BTTs on Foreign Affiliate Employment

Solving the system in (9) and (8) yields a first-stage estimating equation the effect of BTTs
on foreign affiliate employment:

                             ln mat = β A BT Tct + ΓXat + aa + bti + at .                              (11)

Affiliates are defined by thier parent f , in country c, and industry i, which we consolidate
one subscript a indicating an individual affiliate.24 The term mat is employment for affiliate
a, BT Tct is an indicator for the presence of a BTT between the U.S. and affiliate country c
in year t, and Xat is a vector of controls. Affiliate and industry-year fixed effects are given
by aa and bti , respectively, and at is an error term. We two-way cluster standard errors
by affiliate country and by year. The coefficient of interest is β A , reflecting the difference
in employment growth for affiliates in the same industry, located in countries that do and
do not receive BTTs during our sample period. BTTs lower the effective cost of offshore
  24
    The BEA survey allows firms the option of aggregating sibling affiliates in the same industry and country
when reporting, so we apply this aggregation to all firms for consistency.



                                                     16
activity for MNEs, so we expect β̂ A > 0 with effects appearing primarily in industries with
high royalty, interest, and dividend (RID) payments from foreign affiliates to parent firms.
     Table 4 reports the results of estimating (11). In column (1), we include all affiliates
and find a positive and statistically significant point estimate, indicating that affiliates in
countries receiving a BTT expanded their employment more than other affiliates in the same
industry. Columns (2) and (3) show that this positive effect is entirely driven by affiliates in
high RID industries, where BTTs are most likely to resolve double taxation. The effect in low
RID industries in column (3) is statistically indistinguishable from zero and is economically
small. Columns (4) - (6) introduce the standard controls discussed in Section 2, along
with controls for BTTs in sibling affiliate countries to control for potential spillovers across
siblings. We define “Parent-Sibling BTTs” as the share of initial sibling affiliate employment
covered by a BTT with the U.S. in year t and “Affiliate-Sibling BTT” as the share of initial
sibling affiliate employment covered by a BTT between country c and the countries in which
affiliate a has siblings. In both cases, using the initial shares of employment observed for
each firm avoids allowing endogenous shifts in the affiliate weights to affect these controls.
These controls have minimal effects on the coefficients of interest. The coefficient estimate of
0.338 in column (5) indicates that in high RID industries, receiving a BTT increased affiliate
employment by 40.2 percent, on average.25
     The results in Table 4 imply that BTTs substantially increase affiliate employment by
resolving double taxation, thereby lowering the effective tax rate on affiliate activity. This
effect is only present in high RID industries in which double taxation is most prevalent.
Specification (11) represents the first stage of the instrumental-variables analysis in the
following sections, and the first-stage partial F-statistics are large enough to rule out weak
instruments concerns only in high RID industries.26 This means that BTTs provide a policy
experiment for evaluating the effects of foreign affiliate employment on domestic employment,
but only in industries with high royalties, interest, and dividends. For this reason, we focus
on high RID industries in the instrumental-variables analyses in the following sections. We
also note that for the subsample of low RID industries in which we have no first-stage
relationship in Table 4, we also have no reduced-form relationship in Table 3. The fact that
the reduced-form relationship is absent precisely when the first-stage relationship is absent
helps rule out potential concerns regarding violations of the exclusion restriction when using
BTTs as an instrument for foreign affiliate employment (Angrist and Pischke (2009) p.131).
  25
     100 ∗ (exp(0.338) − 1) = 40.2
  26
     Stock and Yogo (2005) report that in order to reject the null hypothesis that the actual size of a 5
percent test is greater than 10 percent, the first stage F statistic must be greater than 16.38 in columns
(1)-(3) 22.30 in columns (4)-(6).




                                                   17
4.2.2    The Effect of Offshoring on Multinational Firm Employment

We now utilize BTT-induced variation in foreign affiliate employment to measure its effect
on domestic employment within U.S. multinational firms. Our objective is to estimate the
following parent-level specification corresponding to equation (8).

                              ln sf t = β P ln Mf t + ΓXf t + cf + dti + f t ,                            (12)

where sf t is parent employment and Mf t ≡ a∈f mat is total affiliate employment for firm
                                                      P

f .27 Xf t is a vector of parent-level controls (described below), and cf and dti are firm and
industry-year fixed effects. We two-way cluster standard errors by parent and by year. The
coefficient of interest, β P , may be positive or negative, depending upon whether scale effects
or substitution effects dominate.
     Because many parent firms have multiple affiliates, and the first-stage regression in (11)
is at the affiliate level, we must aggregate the first-stage predicted values for affiliate employ-
ment up to the parent level. Aggregating the predicted values for ln mat to predict ln Mf t
involves a nonlinear transformation of random variables, and we perform the aggregation
accounting for the sampling distribution of the affiliate-level predicted values.28 This nonlin-
earity also implies that simply plugging the estimate ln   \ Mf t into the second-stage regression
in (12) is inappropriate. This would be an example of the so-called “forbidden regression”
in which a nonlinear first-stage estimate is plugged into a linear second stage (Wooldridge,
2002; Angrist and Pischke, 2009). We follow Wooldridge (2002) Procedure 18.1, estimat-
ing an IV regression for (12), with the predicted ln    \ Mf t as an instrument for the observed
ln Mf t . We must similarly aggregate the controls, Xat in (11), from the affiliate to the
         29

parent level. We generate employment-weighted averages of the affiliate-level controls, using
affiliate employment weights from the year before the parent’s first affiliate receives a BTT
(t̃f − 1).
     Table 5 presents OLS and IV estimates of (12), measuring how changes in foreign affiliate
employment affect employment at U.S. parent firms. Table 5 reports the first-stage partial F-
statistics associated with Wooldridge (2002) Procedure 18.1, but the appropriate F-statistics
to consider when evaluating weak instruments concerns are those for the affiliate-level first
   27
      Recent work by Antràs et al. (2017) argues that the number of affiliates comprising a parent firm’s total
offshore employment likely influences the effects of offshore activity on parent firm productivity, which can
subsequently impact the employment effects we estimate here. We are abstracting from this mechanism.
   28
      This procedure is known as “smearing” and addresses issues similar to Jensen’s inequality. Our main
results use a parametric smearing approach assuming normally distributed errors (see Appendix B.3), but a
nonparametric version based on Duan (1983) and a naive plug-in estimate both yield similar results.
   29
      Note that the parent-level IV standard errors are accurate in spite of the affiliate-level instrument
generation procedure that precedes it (Wooldridge, 2002).


                                                      18
stage in Table 4.30 Because we only have a strong first-stage relationship between BTTs and
foreign affiliate employment within certain industries, we restrict our sample of parents in
Table 5 to those in high RID industries.
    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 implement naive OLS regressions of domestic parent em-
ployment on total foreign affiliate employment. The very large positive correlation between
parent and affiliate employment likely reflects upward simultaneity bias, as discussed in Sec-
tion 4.1.3. The IV results in columns (3) and (4) confirm this point, finding much smaller
point estimates and rejecting the equality of OLS and IV results at conventional levels. The
IV coefficient on ln Mf t in column (4) is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that
a 10 percent increase in foreign affiliate employment drives a 1.3 percent increase in domes-
tic employment at the U.S. parent firm. As shown in column (5) of Table 4, a new BTT
increases employment at affected affiliates in highly RID industries by approximately 40.2
percent. Using the estimate from column (4) of Table 5, this corresponds to about a 5.2
percent increase in domestic employment, or about 413 new U.S. workers for the average
parent firm. The coefficients of interest in columns (3) and (4) are quite similar, indicating
that our results are robust to including or excluding the controls, Xf t .
    As mentioned in Section 4.1.3, our instrumental variables strategy requires that BTTs
shift affiliates’ best response functions while leaving those of parents unchanged. If this
assumption is violated, then the IV results in Table 5 may retain some upward bias. Yet,
even in that case, the estimates remain informative. First, the IV estimates in columns (3)
and (4) are significantly smaller than the OLS estimates in columns (1) and (2), implying
that our IV strategy is substantively addressing the simultaneity between parent and affiliate
employment. Second, the most closely related result in the prior literature is found in Desai
et al. (2009), which reports an effect that is 5 times larger than our estimates in column (4)
of Table 5.31 Our estimates reflect an upper bound on the true effect of affiliate employment
on parent employment, yet they are significantly below the OLS estimates and imply a much
less positive effect than one would expect based upon prior work.
    As discussed in Section 4.1.4, we expect the expansion of existing affiliates to increase
domestic employment because parent firms benefit from scale effects when the effective cost of
their offshore activity falls with a BTT. However, extensive margin effects, in which firms shift
activity from domestic to offshore locations, may decrease domestic employment within the
U.S. parent firm. Although we cannot observe employment for newly formed multinational
firms before they begin offshoring, we can examine effects for continuing multinationals that
open or acquire new affiliates in BTT countries during our sample period. We expect the
  30
       Large F-statistics are common when implementing Wooldridge (2002) Procedure 18.1.
  31
       See Table 5, column (4) in Desai et al. (2009).



                                                   19
domestic employment growth to be less positive for these firms exhibiting extensive margin
offshoring. This is precisely what we find in columns (5) and (6) of Table 5. When restricting
attention to multinationals opening new affiliates in BTT countries (column (5)), the effect
on domestic employment is not statistically significant, while larger statistically significant
effects appear for multinationals that exhibit only intensive margin behavior (column (6)).

4.2.3   Industry Level Effects of Offshoring

We now address the employment effects of offshoring on overall industry employment in
the U.S. This broader analysis allows us to capture two margins that are absent when
examining multinational firms alone. First, the changes in employment at multinational
parents may be partly offset by equilibrium employment adjustment at other domestic firms
in the industry. Second, declining costs of offshore activity will likely motivate some firms to
become multinational firms by opening new affiliates. Both of these margins contribute to
industry-level employment responses. We measure U.S. industry employment using County
Business Patterns data at the 3-digit SIC level and link to the BEA International Surveys
Industry (ISI) classification, resulting in 61 consistently identifiable high-RID industries.
Even though we only consider industries with high royalty, interest, and dividend payments,
these industries employ an average of about 111 million U.S. workers annually in our sample.
    We study the relationship between log domestic employment and log total affiliate em-
ployment at the industry level using the following specification.

                           ln Lit = β I ln Mit + ΓXit + fi + gt + it ,                    (13)

where Lit is total domestic employment in industry i in year t, Mit is total foreign affil-
iate employment in the industry, and fi and gt are industry and year fixed effects. We
calculate two-way clustered standard errors by industry and year. As with the parent-level
regressions, we aggregate from the affiliate level to the industry level, taking care to address
the nonlinearity of the aggregation. We then instrument for observed log industry affiliate
employment ln Mit , using predicted log industry affiliate employment ln    \ Mit . Because the
increases in employment within continuing multinational firms may be partly or entirely
offset by reductions in employment at newly offshoring firms or competing domestic firms,
the estimate of β I may be positive or negative.
    Table 6 shows the relationship between U.S. employment and offshore affiliate employ-
ment at the industry level. Columns (1) and (2) present the OLS results, and columns (3)
and (4) show the instrumental variables results. As in the multinational parent-level analysis,
the estimates are positive, implying that the various margins just discussed combine to yield


                                               20
modest increases in domestic industry employment when affiliates of multinational firms in
that industry experience BTT-induced reductions in the cost of foreign affiliate activity. The
IV estimates are approximately half the size of the corresponding the OLS estimates, con-
firming the importance of appropriately addressing the simultaneity issue. The IV estimates
are small in magnitude and significant at the 5 percent level, suggesting that the negative
effects from equilibrium adjustments to employment and any offshoring by new multination-
als at the industry level offset much, but not all, of the gains in domestic employment within
existing multinationals.
     We observe total multinational employment in the BEA data, and then calculate non-
multinational employment as a residual, subtracting multinational employment from total
industry employment measured using County Business Patterns data. Table 7 columns
(1) and (2) show that domestic employment in multinational firms increases in response to
growth in affiliate employment. This is simply the industry-level analogue of the parent-level
effect in Table 5. In contrast, the effects on industry-level non-multinational employment in
columns (3) and (4) are extremely small and statistically indistinguishable from zero, imply-
ing that non-multinational firms do not share in the employment growth of multinational
firms when the costs of offshore employment fall.
     Table 8 adds additional nuance to these findings by considering the effects of increased
foreign affiliate employment only for vertically oriented foreign affiliates–those with sales to
their U.S. parent firm.32 We expect increased activity at vertically oriented affiliates to have
more negative effects on domestic employment, since their activities are more likely to replace
those of domestic suppliers of intermediate inputs. The effects on domestic employment
in multinational firms, shown in columns (1) and (2), remains positive and statistically
significant. However, increases in foreign affiliate employment among vertically oriented
affiliates drive decreases in domestic employment among non-multinational firms in the same
industry. Although small, these employment decreases likely reflect a combination of shifts
in sourcing away from domestic suppliers and competition from multinational firms enjoying
decreased costs of affiliate activity following the implementation of a BTT.

4.2.4     Regional Effects of Offshoring

Finally, we measure the domestic employment effects of offshoring at the regional level.
This perspective adds yet another margin of labor market adjustment to the analysis by
including potential employment spillovers across industries in the same region. Our unit of
   32
     Tables 7 and 8 show the only case in which the results for vertical affiliates qualitatively differ from
those for all affiliates. Appendix A.5 reports all other results in the paper, restricting attention to vertically
oriented foreign affiliates.



                                                       21
analysis is the metropolitan area, and we use 304 time-consistent metro areas, constructed
from underlying county-level employment in the County Business Patterns data.33 Our
metro-area estimation equation is

                               ln Lmt = β M ln Mmt + hm + kt + mt ,                                (14)

where Lmt is metro area m employment in year t, and hm and kt are metro area and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered by metro area and year. Our regional
measure of offshoring exposure, Mmt is a weighted average of industry-level foreign affiliate
employment. We construct industry-level foreign affiliate employment as described above,
and the industry weights reflect the distribution of employment across covered industries in
1986, just before the start of our main analysis sample: Mmt ≡ i σmi       Mit where σmi
                                                                   P 1986              1986
                                                                                            ≡
L1986     i0 Lmi0 . This measure captures each metro area m’s exposure to foreign affiliate
       P      1986
  mi /
employment, following a procedure similar to Topalova (2010), Autor et al. (2013), Kovak
(2013), and others. We generate an instrument for ln Mmt by constructing an otherwise
identical measure that replaces observed industry affiliate employment, Mit , with predicted
industry affiliate employment, Md , as in the industry-level analysis.
                                   it

    Table 9 shows the region-level results, with OLS estimates in columns (1) and (2) and
IV estimates in columns (3) and (4). As with the aggregate industry-level results, the
relationship between offshoring and employment is positive, and the IV estimates are smaller
than the OLS results. The estimate in column (4) implies that a metro area whose industries
experience on average a 10 percent increase in affiliate employment exhibit a 0.17 percent
increase in metro area employment. While this is a modest positive effect, it is larger in
magnitude than the industry-level results in Table 6, suggesting the possibility of cross-
industry spillovers between industries directly affected by offshoring and other industries in
the region that are indirectly affected by changes in local economic conditions.


5        Conclusion
The consequences of ever rising levels of offshoring activity by U.S. multinational firms are
consistently a source of debate for both the public and policy makers. However, among
other challenges, the fact that offshore hiring and domestic employment are determined
simultaneously has made it difficult for economists to provide clear answers about the re-
lationship between the two. We contribute to this discussion by providing estimates that
    33
     In order to maintain confidentiality, in small counties the CBP data report employment ranges rather
than precise employment counts. Appendix A.6 describes our approach to imputing these values and presents
similar results treating suppressed values as zeros.


                                                   22
rely on relevant and exogenous variation in offshoring costs, allowing us to infer the causal
implications of greater offshore employment for U.S. labor market outcomes. We provide
clear evidence that changes in the global tax structure influence the hiring activity of U.S.
multinational firms both domestically and abroad, with spillover effects to regional U.S. em-
ployment outcomes. These changes in hiring activity demonstrate how shifts in global tax
structure can alter the geographic distribution of economic activity both across and within
national borders.
    Our results also highlight important nuances in the effects of various international eco-
nomic activities, demonstrating that the effects of offshoring differ across firms’ organiza-
tional structures and across different margins of offshoring activities. Within existing multi-
nationals, a fall in the cost of offshoring has a net positive effect on U.S. hiring. However,
when the costs of offshore activity fall, some firms may alter their global sourcing strategies
and begin to substitute offshore facilities for activities that had previously been completed lo-
cally. This substitution can adversely affect employment outcomes for U.S. workers. Among
multinational firms that open new affiliates in countries that realize lower offshoring costs,
we find that domestic employment responds only modestly to BTTs, suggesting that positive
scale effects are largely offset by negative substitution effects in these firms.




                                               23
References
Joshua D. Angrist and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
  Companion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2009.

Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman. Global sourcing. Journal of Political Economy, 112(3):
  552–580, 2004.

Pol Antràs, Teresa Fort, and Felix Tintelnot. The margins of global sourcing: Theory and
  evidence from u.s. firms. American Economic Review, 107(9):2514–2564, 2017.

David Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. The china syndrome: Local labor market
  effects of import competition in the united states. American Economic Review, 103(6):
  2121–2168, 2013.

Robert J. Barro and Jong-Wha Lee. A new data set of educational attainment in the world,
  1950-2010. NBER working paper 15902, 2010.

Marianne Bertrand, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. How much should we trust
 differences-in-differences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 249–275,
 2004.

Bruce A. Blonigen and Ronald B. Davies. The effects of bilateral tax treaties on u.s. fdi
  activity. International Tax and Public Finance, 11:601–622, 2004.

Bruce A. Blonigen and Ronald B. Davies. Do bilateral tax treaties promote foreign di-
  rect investment. In James Hartigan, editor, Handbook of International Trade Volume II:
  Economic and Legal Analysis of Laws and Institutions. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2005.

Bruce A. Blonigen, Lindsay Oldenski, and Nicholas Sly. The differential effects of bilateral
  tax treaties. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2):1–18, 2014. NBER
  working paper 17480.

Christoph E. Boehm, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. Multinationals, offshoring
 and the decline of u.s. manufacturing. mimeo, 2017.

S Lael Brainard and David A Riker. Are us multinationals exporting us jobs? Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997.

David L. Carr, James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus. Testing the knowledge-capital
  model of the multinational enterprise. The American Economic Review, 91(3):995–1001,
  2001.

Ronald B. Davies. Tax treaties and foreign direct investment: potential versus performance.
  International Tax and Public Finance, 11:775–802, 2004.

Ronald B. Davies, Pehr-Johan Norback, and Ayca Tekin-Koru. The effect of tax treaties on
  multinational firms: new evidence from micro-data. The World Economy, 32(1):77–110,
  2009.

                                            24
Fabrice Defever and Farid Toubal. Productivity, relationship-specific inputs and the sourcing
  modes on multinationals. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 94:345–57,
  2013.

Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines. Repatriation taxes and dividend distor-
 tions. National Tax Journal, 54(4):829–851, 2001.

Mihir A Desai, C Fritz Foley, and James R Hines. Domestic effects of the foreign activities
 of us multinationals. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1):181–203, 2009.

Julian di Giovanni. What drives capital flows? the case of cross-border m&a activity and
  financial deepening. Journal of International Economics, 65(1):127–149, 2005.

Richard L. Doernberg. International Taxation in a Nutshell. West Academic Publishing,
  10th edition edition, 2016.

Naihua Duan. Smearing estimate: A nonparametric retransformation method. Journal of
  the American Statistical Association, 78(383):605–610, 1983.

Peter Egger, Mario Larch, Michael Pfaffermayr, and Hannes Winner. The impact of endoge-
  nous tax treaties on foreign direct investment: Theory and empirical evidence. Canadian
  Journal of Economics, 39(3):901–931, 2006.

Ernst and Young. International tax alert: News from transfer pricing. 2015.

Robert C Feenstra and Gordon H Hanson. Ownership and control in outsourcing to china:
  Estimating the property-rights theory of the firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics, (2):
  729–761, 2005.

Jose L. Groizard, Priya Ranjan, and Antonio Rodriguez-Lopez. Trade costs and job flows:
  evidence from establishment-level data. Economic Inquiry, 53(1):173–204, 2015.

Ann Harrison and Margaret McMillan. Offshoring jobs? multinationals and us manufactur-
 ing employment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3):857–875, 2011.

David Hummels, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang. The wage effects of
  offshoring: Evidence from danish matched worker-firm data. The American Economic
  Review, 104(6):1597–1629, 2014.

Louis S Jacobson, Robert John LaLonde, and Daniel Gerard Sullivan. Earnings losses of
  displaced workers. The American Economic Review, 83:685–709, 1993.

Brian Kovak. Regional efects of trade reform: What is the correct measure of liberalization?
  American Economic Review, 103(5):1960–1976, 2013.

Henry J. Louie and Donald J. Rousslang. Host-country governance, tax treaties and us direct
  investment abroad. International Tax and Public Finance, 15(3):256–273, 2008.

Jr. Misey, Robert J. and Michael S. Schadewald. Practical Guide to U.S. Taxation of Inter-
  national Transactions. Wolters Kluwer, 10th edition edition, 2015.

                                             25
Ryan Monarch, Jooyoun Park, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. Gains from offshoring? evidence
  from u.s. microdata. University of Michigan, 2014.

Marc-Andreas Muendler and Sascha O. Becker. Margins of multinational labor substitution.
 The American Economic Review, 100(5):1999–2030, 2010.

Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, Giovanni Peri, and Greg C. Wright. Immigration, offshoring and
  american jobs. American Economic Review, 103(5), 2013.

Matthew J. Slaughter. Production transfer within multinational enterprises and american
 wages. Journal of International Economics, 50(2), 2000.

Matthew J. Slaughter. International trade and labor-demand elasticities. Journal of Inter-
 national Economics, 54(1):27–56, 2001.

Matthew J. Slaughter. How u.s. multinational companies strengthen the u.s. economy. Tech-
 nical report, Business Roundtable and Business Roundtable and The United States Coun-
 cil Foundation, 2009.

James H Stock and Motohiro Yogo. Testing for weak instruments in linear iv regression.
  In Donald W. K. Andrews and James H. Stock, editors, Identification and Inference for
  Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, pages 80–108. Cambridge
  University Press, 2005.

Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato. Unintended consequences of eliminating tax havens. mimeo,
  2018.

Petia Topalova. Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evidence on
  poverty from india. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(4), 2010.

Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA, 2002.




                                            26
                                                                                Figure 1: Effect of BTTs on U.S. Multinational Firm Employment
                                                                                        in High Royalty, Interest and Dividend Industries

                                                                        0.14


                                                                        0.12
       Coefficient Estimate: Effect of First BTT on Parent Employment




                                                                        0.10


                                                                        0.08
                                                                                                                        event-study estimates
                                                                        0.06


                                                                        0.04


                                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                                                diff-in-diff estimate
                                                                        0.00
                                                                                  -6   -5   -4    -3   -2     -1        0     1          2      3       4        5      6

                                                                        -0.02


                                                                        -0.04


                                                                        -0.06
                                                                                                        Years Since BTT Effective Date


Source: Authors’ calculations based on BEA Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad 1987-2007. Sample restricted to
firms in industries with high RID payments to U.S. parent firms. Each point on the black line represents a coefficient estimate
from the event study specification in (2). Dashed lines reflect 95 percent confidence intervals for these event-study estimates
when clustering standard errors by both parent firm and year. Gray lines reflects the diff-in-diff estimate described in (1),
located so the lower line corresponds to the average of pre-BTT event study coefficients. Both specifications include firm and
industry × time fixed effects and a full set of controls, as in column (5) of Table 3.




                                                                                                                   27
                                    Table 1: Countries with New Treaties in Effect During Sample Period (1987-2007)


                       Treaty                  Year BTT                       Pre-Treaty Rates                                Post-Treaty Rates
                       Partner             Entered into Force          Dividends Interest Royalties                    Dividends   Interest   Royalties

                       India                        1990                    25             25           30                  15               15              20
                       Indonesia                    1990                    20             20           20                  15              0, 15          10, 15
                       Spain                        1990                    25             25           25               10, 15              10             5-10
                       Tunisiaa                     1990                     -              -            -                   -                -               -
                       Mexico                       1993                    0            15-35         15-35               5-15            10, 15            10
                       Russia                       1993                    15             15           20                5, 10               0               0
                       Israel                       1994                    25             25           25               12.5-25         10, 17.5          10, 15
                       Portugal                     1995                  25, 30           20           15                  15               10              10
                       Thailand                     1997                    10             15           15                  10             10, 15         5, 8, 15
                       Turkey                       1997                  20,22           13.2          22                15,20              15             5, 10




28
                       Estonia                      1999                    26             26           15                0,5,15             10             5, 10
                       Latvia                       1999                    10          0, 5, 10       5, 15                10            0, 5, 10        2, 5, 10
                       Lithuania                    1999                    29           24-29         24-29                15               10              10
                       Venezuelab                   1999                     -              -            -                 5,15         0, 4.95, 10       0, 5, 10
                       Ukraine                      2000                    15           0, 15           0                 5,15               0              10
                       Sloveniaa                    2001                    25              -            -                 5,15               5               5
                       Sri Lanka                    2004                    10             15           15                  15               10             5, 10
                       Bangladesha                  2007                     -              -            -                   -                -               -


     Sources: Year BTT entered into force determined from tax treaty text, available from IRS United States Income Tax Treaties - A to Z. Note that Russia had been covered by a
     pre-existing tax treaty between the U.S. and U.S.S.R., but this treaty did not include standard measures to reduce double taxation, so we count the 1993 treaty with Russia as a
     new treaty. Tax rates from Price Waterhouse Coopers (PwC) publications, Corporate Taxes: A Worldwide Summary, across various years. When multiple rates apply in different
     circumstances, each rate or a range is reported. Pre- and post-treaty data are from publications in the following years for each country: India (1990,1991), Indonesia (1990,1991),
     Spain (1990,1991), Mexico (1993,1994), Russia (1993,1994), Israel (1995,1995), Portugal (1995,1996), Thailand (1997,1999-2000), Turkey (1999-2000,1999-2000), Estonia (1997,
     2001-2002), Latvia (1999-2000,2003-2004), Lithuania (1999-2000,2001-2002), Venezuela (1999-2000,2004), Ukraine (1999-2000,2001-2002), Slovenia (2000-2001,2004), Sri Lanka
     (2004,2005). Note that Israel reports 1995 non-treaty rate for the pre-treaty period (doesn’t appear in prior issues), and Turkey reports 1991-2000 non-treaty rate for the
     pre-treaty period. a Tunisia and Bangladesh are omitted from the PwC publications, as are Slovenia’s pre-treaty withholding tax rates for interest and royalties. b Venezuela’s
     pre-treaty withholding tax structure is too complex to report with a simple set of rates.
                                           Table 2: Summary Statistics.


                                                                     Mean       Std. Dev.        Min         Max
            FOREIGN AFFILIATES (342,239 obs.)
            Employment                                              474.30        2394.8         (confidential)
            ln(Employment)                                          4.3788        1.9213         (confidential)
            Av. Annual Emp Growth (%)                               0.0909        0.7876         (confidential)
            BTT                                                     0.8099        0.3924           0        1
            High RID Indicator                                      0.5763        0.4941           0        1
            ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                       9.3112        0.2040        8.8665 10.093
            ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                      18.184        0.4946        14.841 18.933
            ln(Skill Difference)                                    1.0984        0.7194           0     2.494
            ln(Trade Cost)                                          2.6727        2.3737           0     4.5940
            BIT                                                     0.0516        0.2212           0        1
            FTA                                                     0.1216        0.3269           0        1
            Exchange Rate                                           140.50        819.37           0     16105
            Parent-Sibling BTTsa                                    0.5645        0.2053           0        1
            Affiliate-Sibling BTTsb                                 0.2944        0.3888           0        1

            U.S. PARENT FIRMS (43,233 obs.)
            Foreign Affiliate Employment                            3513.2        16010          (confidential)
            ln(Aff Emp)                                             5.6966        2.3485         (confidential)
            Av Annual Aff Emp Growth (%)                            0.1090        0.7911         (confidential)
            Parent Firm Employment                                  7906.7        28649          (confidential)
            ln(Parent Emp)                                          7.2009        2.0656         (confidential)
            Number of Affiliates                                    8.6924        18.445         (confidential)
            ln(GDPus + GDPd )c                                      4.5246         3.610           0     29.618
            ln(GDPus − GDPd )2 c                                    8.8243        7.0513           0     58.087
            ln(Skill Difference)c                                   0.4759        0.5094           0      4.240
            ln(Trade Cost)c                                         1.4748        1.6564           0     10.940
            BITc                                                    0.0178        0.0717           0        1
            FTAc                                                    0.1538        0.3261           0        1
            Exchange Ratec                                          21.485        217.81           0     23573

Authors’ calculations from BEA Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad 1987-2007 and various other data sources,
described in Section 2. a Weighted average share of total sibling employment covered by a BTT with the U.S., using fixed
affiliate employment shares. b Weighted average share of total sibling employment covered by a BTT with the affiliate’s country,
using fixed affiliate employment shares. c Parent-level versions of affiliate country controls are aggregated from the country to
the parent firm level using a weighted average, using fixed affiliate employment shares as weights.




                                                              29
                      Table 3: Reduced Form Difference-in-Differences Analysis:
                             The Effect of BTTs on Parent Employment


                      Dependent variable: log parent employment: ln(sf t )
                             (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)                                      (6)
   Sample:
         h            i
                             All    High RID Low RID          All   High RID                                   Low RID
   BTT ϕ̃f 1(t ≥ t̃f )      0.027   0.055***      -0.009     0.012  0.064***                                     -0.027
                           (0.007)   (0.014)     (0.013) (0.090)     (0.023)                                    (0.018)
   ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                         0.025    -0.076                                      0.196
                                                           (0.123)   (0.147)                                    (0.189)
   ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                       -0.054    -0.006                                     -0.135
                                                           (0.061)   (0.072)                                    (0.094)
   ln(Skill Difference)                                     -0.077    -0.084                                     -0.066
                                                           (0.050)   (0.059)                                    (0.095)
   ln(Trade Costs)                                           0.003     0.012                                      0.003
                                                           (0.015)   (0.017)                                    (0.030)
   BIT                                                      -0.287    -0.242                                     -0.259
                                                           (0.177)   (0.244)                                     (0.23)
   FTA                                                      -0.008     -0.08                                      0.02
                                                           (0.062)   (0.088)                                    (0.079)
   Exchange Rate                                           -0.0001   -0.0001                                    0.0001
                                                           (0.000)   (0.000)                                    (0.000)
   Parent FE                 YES       YES         YES       YES        YES                                       YES
   Industry-Year FE          YES       YES         YES       YES        YES                                       YES
   N                        43233     29765       13468     43233     29765                                      13468
   R-sq                    0.0021    0.0033       0.0002    0.0573    0.0644                                    0.0431

Notes: Documents the effects of newly signed bilateral tax treaties (BTTs) on parent employment at multinational firms. “High
RID” and “Low RID” refer to firms within industries that exhibit ratios of total payments in royalties, interest, and dividends
relative to total industry sales that are above and below the median sector (see Appendix A.2 for details). Sample covers
1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by both parent firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                             30
                                 Table 4: Foreign Affiliate-Level Analysis:
                                The Effect of BTTs on Offshore Employment


                    Dependent variable: log affiliate employment: ln(mat )
                            (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)                                       (6)
 Sample:                    All     High RID Low RID             All   High RID                                   Low RID
 BTT                     0.232*** 0.461***           -0.022   0.132*    0.338***                                    -0.089
                          (0.066)     (0.077)       (0.086)   (0.072)    (0.083)                                   (0.088)
 ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                            7.062**     6.658*                                  7.331***
                                                              (3.129)    (3.451)                                   (2.800)
 ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                                               0.480*     0.512*                                   0.416*
                                                              (0.264)    (0.286)                                   (0.244)
 ln(Skill Difference)                                         -0.185*    -0.173*                                  -0.195**
                                                              (0.095)    (0.102)                                   (0.087)
 ln(Trade Costs)                                                0.031      0.029                                     0.033
                                                              (0.034)    (0.036)                                   (0.032)
 BIT                                                         -0.548**    -0.528*                                  -0.566**
                                                              (0.258)    (0.279)                                   (0.240)
 FTA                                                           0.016       0.075                                     -0.05
                                                              (0.105)    (0.099)                                   (0.112)
 Exchange Rate                                               -0.00002 -0.00003                                    -0.00001
                                                              (0.000)    (0.000)                                   (0.000)
 Parent-Sibling BTTs                                          -0.044*   -0.046**                                    -0.044
                                                              (0.026)    (0.021)                                   (0.033)
 Affiliate-Sibling BTTs                                        0.133*    0.173**                                     0.083
                                                              (0.075)    (0.081)                                   (0.090)
 Affiliate FE              YES         YES            YES       YES        YES                                       YES
 Industry-Year FE          YES         YES            YES       YES        YES                                       YES
 N                        342239      197116        145123    342239      197116                                   145123
 R-sq                     0.0014      0.0047        0.0001    0.0131       0.015                                   0.0145
 F-Statistic               12.47       35.58          0.06      7.31       24.31                                     4.12

Notes: Documents the effect of newly-signed Bilateral Tax Treaties (BTTs) on foreign affiliate employment. “High RID” and
“Low RID” refer to firms within industries that exhibit ratios of total payments in royalties, interest, and dividends relative
to total industry sales that are above and below the median sector (see Appendix A.2 for details). Sample covers 1987-2007.
Standard errors clustered by both affiliate country and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10,
5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                             31
                               Table 5: U.S. Parent-Level Analysis:
                The Effect of Offshore Employment on Domestic MNE Employment


                     Dependent variable: log parent employment: ln(sf t )
                               (1)          (2)        (3)      (4)                                       (5)      (6)
 Specification:                OLS         OLS         IV       IV                                        IV       IV
 Sample:                       All          All        All      All                                    New Aff Cont Aff
 log affiliate employment: 0.289*** 0.263*** 0.174*** 0.130***                                           0.103 0.139***
                  (ln Mit )  (0.017)     (0.017)    (0.017)  (0.015)                                   (0.116)  (0.016)
 ln(GDPus + GDPd )                        -0.039               0.006                                    -0.331   -0.004
                                         (0.126)             (0.092)                                   (0.366)  (0.088)
 ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                          -0.006              -0.007                                    0.148    -0.001
                                         (0.064)             (0.047)                                   (0.189) ( 0.045)
 ln(Skill Difference)                  -0.167***            -0.097**                                     0.093 -0.118**
                                         (0.057)             (0.044)                                   (0.106)  (0.047)
 ln(Trade Costs)                           0.005              -0.017                                     0.017    -0.02
                                         (0.018)             (0.013)                                   (0.035)  (0.014)
 BIT                                     -0.473*            -0.432**                                    -0.335 -0.460**
                                          (0.25)             (0.167)                                   (0.208)  (0.201)
 FTA                                      -0.016              -0.004                                     0.083   -0.009
                                         (0.082)             (0.048)                                   (0.125)  (0.053)
 Exchange Rate                            -0.000              -0.000                                    0.000    -0.000
                                         (0.000)             (0.000)                                   (0.000)  (0.000)
 Parent FE                     YES         YES        YES      YES                                       YES      YES
 Year FE                       YES         YES        YES      YES                                       YES      YES
 N                            29765       29765      29765    29765                                      6077    23688
 R-sq                        0.1865      0.2189      0.1406  0.1581                                     0.3536  0.1663
 First Stage F-Stat             -            -       508.14  413.36                                     117.5   402.53
 Endog Test P-Val               -            -       0.0017  0.0019                                     0.0022  0.0015

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment of multinational
firms in industries that exhibit high ratios of royalty, interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales. Columns
(5) and (6) respectively restrict the sample to parent firms that did and did not open new affiliates in countries newly receiving
a BTT. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns
appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is
rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by parent firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                               32
                               Table 6: U.S. Industry-Level Analysis:
                 The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. Industry Employment


                         Dependent variable: log industry employment: ln(Lit )
                                                 (1)        (2)    (3)         (4)
                   Specification:               OLS        OLS     IV          IV
                   log affiliate employment: 0.013*** 0.011** 0.006** 0.006**
                                    (ln Mit )  (0.005) (0.005) (0.003) (0.003)
                   ln(GDPus + GDPd )                      -0.062            -0.017
                                                         (0.094)            (0.06)
                   ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                                           0.023             0.006
                                                         (0.048)           (0.018)
                   ln(Skill Difference)                    0.029              0.01
                                                         (0.046)           (0.017)
                   ln(Trade Costs)                       0.031**           0.011**
                                                         (0.014)           (0.005)
                   BIT                                    -0.019            -0.006
                                                         (0.056)           (0.021)
                   FTA                                     0.036             0.013
                                                         (0.043)           (0.016)
                   Exchange Rate                          -0.000            -0.000
                                                         (0.000)           (0.000)
                   Industry FE                  YES        YES    YES         YES
                   Year FE                      YES        YES    YES         YES
                   N                            1268       1268   1268        1268
                   R-sq                        0.4836    0.5309 0.4821 0.5292
                   First Stage F-Stat             -          -   234.99      208.2
                   Endog Test P-Val               -          -   0.0213 0.0225

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment at the industry level for industries that
exhibit high ratios of royalty, interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales. First-stage F-statistics are large
for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table
4 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard
errors clustered by industry and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels,
respectively.




                                                                33
                             Table 7: U.S. Industry Level Analysis:
          The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. MNE vs. non-MNE Employment


                      Dependent variable: log industry employment: ln(Lit )
                                                (1)         (2)     (3)                                            (4)
        Specification:                          IV          IV      IV                                             IV
        Sample:                               MNE         MNE    non-MNE                                      non-MNE
        industry log affiliate employment: 0.042*** 0.043***      0.0009                                         -0.001
                                  (ln Mit )  (0.005)     (0.005)  (0.004)                                       (0.005)
        ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                 0.097                                                  -0.036
                                                         (0.093)                                                (0.046)
        ln(GDPus − GDPd )     2
                                                          -0.048                                                  0.015
                                                         (0.048)                                                (0.024)
        ln(Skill Difference)                               -0.06                                                  0.015
                                                         (0.037)                                                (0.022)
        ln(Trade Costs)                                   -0.006                                                  0.011
                                                         (0.007)                                                (0.009)
        BIT                                                0.047                                                 -0.009
                                                         (0.066)                                                (0.026)
        FTA                                                0.06                                                   0.015
                                                         (0.036)                                                (0.016)
        Exchange Rate                                   -0.00002                                               -0.00001
                                                         (0.000)                                                (0.000)
        Industry FE                            YES         YES     YES                                            YES
        Year FE                                YES         YES     YES                                            YES
        N                                      1268        1268    1268                                           1268
        R-sq                                  0.2678     0.3086   0.4244                                        0.4702
        First Stage F-Stat                    276.32     205.84   214.75                                        189.12
        Endog Test P-Val                      0.0089     0.0052   0.0198                                        0.0187

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment at the industry level for industries that
exhibit high ratios of royalty, interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales. Columns (1) and (2) examine
employment for multinational parents in the U.S. industry while columns (3) and (4) examine all other employment in each
industry. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns
appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected.
Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by industry and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance
at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                34
                              Table 8: U.S. Industry Level Analysis:
                The Effect of Offshore Employment at Vertically Oriented Affiliates
                             on U.S. MNE vs. non-MNE Employment


                      Dependent variable: log industry                   employment: ln(Lit )
                                               (1)                           (2)       (3)                     (4)
       Specification:                          IV                            IV        IV                       IV
       Sample:                              V-MNE                         V-MNE non-MNE                   non-MNE
       industry log affiliate employment: 0.144***                       0.143*** -0.016**                -0.023***
                                 (ln Mit )   (0.022)                      (0.022)   (0.007)                 (0.008)
       ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                                   -0.373                            -0.297
                                                                          (0.676)                           (0.299)
       ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                                   0.207                             0.143
                                                                          (0.341)                            (0.15)
       ln(Skill Difference)                                              -0.416***                            0.059
                                                                          (0.135)                           (0.117)
       ln(Trade Costs)                                                     -0.006                            -0.001
                                                                          (0.034)                           (0.017)
       BIT                                                                 -0.036                          0.447***
                                                                          (0.257)                            (0.17)
       FTA                                                                 -0.013                              0.14
                                                                          (0.151)                           (0.090)
       Exchange Rate                                                        0.000                            0.000
                                                                          (0.000)                           (0.000)
       Industry FE                                          YES             YES       YES                     YES
       Year FE                                              YES             YES       YES                     YES
       N                                                    1217            1217      1217                    1217
       R-sq                                                0.1535          0.1769    0.4529                 0.5009
       First Stage F-Stat                                  249.75          214.42    274.63                 223.05
       Endog Test P-Val                                    0.0093          0.0069    0.0194                 0.0178

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment at foreign affiliates that have non-zero
sales to their U.S. parent on domestic employment at the industry level for industries that exhibit high ratios of royalty,
interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales. Columns (1) and (2) examine employment for multinational
parents in the U.S. industry while columns (3) and (4) examine all other employment in each industry. First-stage F-statistics
are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5)
of Table 4 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007.
Standard errors clustered by industry and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent levels, respectively.




                                                              35
                             Table 9: U.S. Metro Area Level Analysis:
                 The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. Regional Employment


                      Dependent variable: log regional employment: ln(Lmt )
                                                 (1)         (2)      (3)                                      (4)
         Specification:                         OLS         OLS       IV                                       IV
         regional log affiliate employment: 0.035*** 0.033*** 0.018***                                     0.017***
                                    (ln Mmt ) (0.008)     (0.008)  (0.004)                                  (0.004)
         ln(GDPus + GDPd )                               -0.756**                                          -0.326**
                                                          (0.343)                                           (0.152)
         ln(GDPus − GDPd )     2
                                                          0.365**                                          0.158**
                                                          (0.173)                                           (0.077)
         ln(Skill Difference)                              0.209                                              0.094
                                                          (0.129)                                           (0.057)
         ln(Trade Costs)                                    0.058                                             0.022
                                                          (0.060)                                           (0.026)
         BIT                                                0.077                                             0.030
                                                          (0.289)                                           (0.127)
         FTA                                               0.010                                              0.003
                                                          (0.091)                                           (0.040)
         Exchange Rate                                    -0.0009                                           -0.0004
                                                          (0.001)                                           (0.000)
         Industry FE                            YES         YES      YES                                      YES
         Year FE                                YES         YES      YES                                      YES
         N                                      6080        6080     6080                                     6080
         R-sq                                  0.7312      0.7377   0.7308                                   0.7374
         First Stage F-Stat                       -           -     165.96                                   171.84
         Endog Test P-Val                         -           -     0.0205                                   0.0249

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment at the region
level. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns
appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is
rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by parent firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                               36
Online Appendices
(Not for publication)

A Data, Definitions, and Supplemental Empirical Results                                       2
  A.1 Yearly Coverage Relative to BTT Dates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           2
  A.2 High versus Low RID Industries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3
  A.3 Alternative Specifications for BTTs’ Effects on Employment at U.S. Multina-
      tionals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
  A.4 Empirical Results Using Variation in the Change in Withholding Tax Rates .               9
  A.5 Empirical Results for Vertically Oriented Multinational Firms . . . . . . . .           17
  A.6 Imputation in CBP Employment Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             25

B Supplemental Theoretical and Econometric Results                                            27
  B.1 Detailed Model of Double Taxation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
  B.2 Model with CES Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         30
  B.3 Smearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    32




                                               1
A        Data, Definitions, and Supplemental Empirical Re-
         sults
A.1       Yearly Coverage Relative to BTT Dates
Figure A1 shows the coverage our 1987-2007 sample provides relative to the date in which
each country’s BTT went into force, making clear that we can observe many pre-BTT years
for some countries and many post-BTT years for others.

                       Figure A1: Sample Coverage Relative to BTT Implementation


               Bangladesh	  
                                                                 Estonia	  
                                                                                       India	  
                                                                              Indonesia	  
                                                                      Isreal	  
                                                                   Latvia	  
                                                               Lithuania	  
                                                                       Mexico	  
                                                               Portugal	  
                                                                                           Russia	  
                                                          Slovenia	  
                                                                                      Spain	  
                             Sri	  Lanka	  
                                                     Thailand	  
                                                                                    Tunisia	  
                                                         Turkey	  
                                                                Ukraine	  
                                              Venezuela	  
                 -­‐25	          -­‐20	          -­‐15	            -­‐10	            -­‐5	         0	           5	     10	     15	     20	  
                                                                                  Years	  RelaGve	  to	  BTT	  


Source: Authors’ calculations based on BEA Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad 1987-2007 and information
from U.S. Treasury publications (see footnote 11). BTT implementation dates appear in Table 1. Each country shown has a
new BTT during our sample period. Darker bars show the number of available years before the BTT and lighter bars show the
number of available years after the BTT. Note that Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania first appear in the BEA data in 1991, while
Russia, Slovenia, and Ukraine first appear in 1992.




                                                                                                    2
A.2     High versus Low RID Industries
As discussed in Section 2, double taxation is more likely to occur in industries where the
value of withholding taxes paid to foreign tax authorities is large. Limits on the foreign
tax credit available to U.S. multinational firms are more likely to bind when the amount of
income subject to taxation by a foreign authority – in the form of royalties, interest, and
dividends – is high. Appendix B.1 formally demonstrates this argument in a general context
of payments from a foreign affiliate to a U.S. parent firm. The purpose of this section is
to provide details on how we delineate industries with high versus low royalty, interest, and
dividend payments (RID), and thus high and low exposure to treatment from a BTT.
    The BEA collects information on the total value of royalty, interest, and dividend pay-
ments from each foreign affiliate to its U.S. multinational parent firm in their Benchmark
Surveys of U.S. Foreign Direct Investment Abroad. These surveys are conducted every five
years and contain information such as details about royalty, interest, and dividend payments,
that are not available in the annual surveys. We use information on the value of RID pay-
ments from the 1989 benchmark survey, which is the earliest available benchmark year, to
minimize concerns about endogeneity. We aggregate total RID payments by 3-digit industry
and country, and then calculate the ratio of total RID payments to total foreign affiliate sales
for each industry-by-country cell. We then regress this ratio on an industry fixed effect and
a country fixed effect. The value of the industry fixed effect is our measure of RID intensity
for a particular industry, independent of country-specific factors that may otherwise affect
RID payments. We classify those industries with RID intensity above the observed median
as being high RID industries and those below the median as being low RID industries, as
shown in Table A1




                                               3
Table A1: Industry Classification by Royalties, Interest, and Dividend Payments as a Share
                              of Total Foreign Affiliate Sales

                                   Low RID                                                         High RID
     Rank   SIC   SIC Name                                             Rank   SIC   SIC Name
     1      505   Metals and minerals, except petroleum Wholesale      61     477   Transportation, nec, and related services
     2      250   Furniture and fixtures Mfg                           62     742   Information retrieval services
     3      530   General merchandise retail stores                    63     554   Gasoline service stations
     4      120   Coal mining                                          64     352   Farm and garden machinery Mfg
     5      631   Life insurance                                       65     483   Other communications services
     6      810   Legal services                                       66     461   Pipelines, petroleum and natural gas
     7      540   Food retail stores                                   67     873   Research, development, and testing services
     8      449   Water transportation                                 68     752   Automotive parking, repair, and other services
     9      470   Petroleum storage for hire                           69     262   Pulp, paper, and board mills Mfg
     10     507   Hardware, & plumbing & heating equipment Wholesale   70     501   Motor vehicles and equipment Wholesale
     11     515   Farm product raw materials Wholesale                 71     590   Retail, nec
     12     503   Lumber and other construction materials Wholesale    72     560   Apparel and accessory retail stores
     13     871   Engineering, architectural, and surveying services   73     230   Apparel and other textile products Mfg
     14     379   Other transportation equipment, nec Mfg              74     201   Meat products Mfg
     15     639   Other insurance                                      75     204   Grain mill products Mfg
     16     632   Accident and health insurance                        76     354   Metalworking machinery Mfg
     17     800   Health services                                      77     331   Ferrous Metals Mfg
     18     363   Household appliances Mfg                             78     205   Bakery products Mfg
     19     138   Oil and gas field services                           79     481   Telephone and telegraph communications
     20     292   Petroleum refining without extraction                80     351   Engines and turbines Mfg
     21     600   Depository Institutions                              81     353   Construction, mining, & materials handling Mfg
     22     140   Nonmetallic minerals mining, except fuels            82     355   Special industry machinery Mfg
     23     511   Paper and paper products Wholesale                   83     780   Motion pictures, including television tape and film
     24     514   Groceries and related products Wholesale             84     208   Beverages Mfg
     25     731   Advertising                                          85     508   Machinery, equipment, and supplies Wholesale
     26     20    Agricultural production–livestock and animal         86     450   Transportation by air
     27     341   Metal cans, forgings, and stampings Mfg              87     743   Computer related services, nec
     28     349   Metal services, ordinance, & fabricated metal Mfg    88     272   Miscellaneous publishing Mfg
     29     751   Automotive rental and leasing, without drivers       89     749   Business sevices, nec
     30     202   Dairy products Mfg                                   90     369   Electronic and other electric equipment, nec Mfg
     31     359   Industrial machinery and equipment, nec Mfg          91     512   Drugs, proprietaries, & sundries Wholesale
     32     358   Refrigeration and service industry machinery Mfg     92     102   Copper, lead, zinc, gold, and silver ores mining
     33     203   Preserved fruits and vegetables Mfg                  93     390   Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
     34     240   Lumber and wood products Mfg                         94     736   Personnel supply services
     35     335   Nonferrous Metals Mfg                                95     872   Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services
     36     265   Other paper and allied products Mfg                  96     890   Other services provided on a commercial basis
     37     519   Nondurable goods, nec Wholesale                      97     329   Stone, clay, concrete, gypsum, etc Mfg
     38     107   Other metallic ores mining                           98     612   Other finance, including security and commodity br
     39     760   Miscellaneous repair services                        99     650   Real estate
     40     90    Fishing, hunting, and trapping                       100    284   Soap, cleaners, and toilet goods Mfg
     41     275   Commercial printing and services Mfg                 101    367   Electronic components and accessories Mfg
     42     308   Miscellaneous plastics products Mfg                  102    509   Durable goods, nec Wholesale
     43     513   Apparel, piece goods, & notions Wholesale            103    291   Integrated petroleum refining and extraction
     44     386   Photographic equipment and supplies Mfg              104    343   Heating equipment, plumbing fixtures, etc Mfg
     45     305   Rubber products Mfg                                  105    366   Household audio & video, & communications Mfg
     46     289   Chemical products, nec Mfg                           106    741   Computer processing and data preparation services
     47     210   Tobacco products Mfg                                 107    735   Equipment rental and leasing, exc automobiles
     48     299   Petroleum and coal products, nec                     108    504   Professional & commerical eq & supplies Wholesale
     49     310   Leather and leather products Mfg                     109    10    Agricultural production–crops
     50     506   Electrical goods Wholesale                           110    283   Drugs Mfg
     51     321   Glass products Mfg                                   111    220   Textile mill products Mfg
     52     108   Metal mining services                                112    342   Cutlery, hardware, and screw products Mfg
     53     381   Measuring, scientific, & optical instruments Mfg     113    357   Computer and office equipment Mfg
     54     281   Industrial chemicals and synthetics Mfg              114    133   Crude petroleum (no refining) and natural gas
     55     384   Medical instruments & supplies and ophthalmic Mfg    115    287   Agricultural chemicals Mfg
     56     150   Construction                                         116    874   Management and public relations services
     57     700   Hotels and other lodging places                      117    820   Educational services
     58     356   General industrial machinery Mfg                     118    580   Eating and drinking places
     59     209   Other food and kindred products Mfg                  119    790   Amusement and recreation services
     60     371   Motor vehicles and equipment Mfg                     120    671   Holding companies
                                                                       121    679   Franchising, business – selling or licensing


Classification of industries into high-RID and low-RID groups. Ranks listed from low to high RID. See text for details.




                                                                   4
A.3     Alternative Specifications for BTTs’ Effects on Employment
        at U.S. Multinationals
This section presents reduced-form specifications examining the effects of BTTs on domestic
employment at U.S. multinational firms. The main results use the specifications in equations
(1) and (2), with results in Table 3 and Figure 1.
    We also estimate alternative difference-in-difference specifications that employ different
weighting schemes to assign the value of treatment from a BTT. Our first alternative spec-
ification drops the affiliate employment rescaling term, ϕ̃f from the BTT indicator, so the
variable of interest is simply 1(t ≥ t̃f ). The difference-in-difference and event study results
appear in Table A2 and Figure A2. As in the main specification, the effect of BTTs is posi-
tive, and significant only for high RID firms. The scale of the coefficients is smaller however,
reflecting the fact that the scale of the regressor is larger without the affiliate employment
share adjustment. As in the main specification, there is no sign of pre-BTT differential
employment growth between firms with and without affiliates receiving a BTT, and the
employment effects emerge in the period of BTT implementation (t = 0 in Figure A2).
    Our second alternative integrates information from all BTTs faced by affiliates during
our sample period, not just the first one as in the main analysis or the previous alternative.
For a given multinational firm f , we examine the share of initial affiliate employment covered
by BTTs in year t (see footnote 16 for notation definitions).
                                                                         mf,c,t̃f −1
                                    ϕf,c 1(t ≥ tc ),                                         (15)
                             X
                BT T f t ≡                                 ϕf,c ≡ P
                             c∈Cf                                     c0 ∈Cf mf,c0 ,t̃f −1


where ϕf,c is affiliate c’s initial share of firm f ’s total affiliate employment. We measure
affiliate employment in the year prior to the first BTT faced by the firm (t̃f − 1) to avoid
including any endogenous employment adjustments. Because a given parent firm may be
“treated” multiple times by receiving BTTs in multiple affiliate countries over time, we can
not implement a traditional event study, as we did when focusing only on the first BTT a firm
experiences. However, we can use a similar approach to rule out the presence of confounding
pre-BTT trends by including leads and lags of the BTT coverage measure in (15). Figure A3
plots the associated coefficients, confirming the similarity of pre-existing employment growth
rates for firms that would and would not later experience increases BTT coverage.




                                                       5
   Table A2: Reduced Form Difference-in-Differences Analysis Without Affiliate Scaling:
                      The Effect of BTTs on Parent Employment


                      Dependent variable: log parent employment: ln(sf t )
                             (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)                                     (6)
   Sample:
         h          i
                             All    High RID Low RID          All   High RID                                  Low RID
   BTT 1(t ≥ t̃f )          0.013   0.022***      -0.008     0.015  0.039***                                    -0.008
                           (0.015)   (0.008)     (0.025)    (0.05)   (0.015)                                   (0.025)
   ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                          0.02    -0.063                                     0.163
                                                           (0.121)   (0.145)                                   (0.193)
   ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                       -0.052    -0.013                                    -0.118
                                                           (0.059)   (0.071)                                   (0.096)
   ln(Skill Difference)                                     -0.074    -0.093                                    -0.048
                                                           (0.047)   (0.057)                                   (0.095)
   ln(Trade Costs)                                           0.002     0.015                                    -0.002
                                                           (0.015)   (0.018)                                   (0.030)
   BIT                                                      -0.281    -0.259                                    -0.246
                                                           (0.172)   (0.237)                                   (0.237)
   FTA                                                      -0.008    -0.078                                     0.013
                                                           (0.062)   (0.088)                                   (0.079)
   Exchange Rate                                           -0.0001   -0.0001                                   0.0001
                                                           (0.000)   (0.000)                                   (0.000)
   Parent FE                 YES       YES         YES       YES        YES                                      YES
   Industry-Year FE          YES       YES         YES       YES        YES                                      YES
   N                        43233     29765       13468     43233     29765                                     13468
   R-sq                    0.0014    0.0023       0.0004    0.0573    0.0643                                   0.0416

Notes: Documents the effects of newly signed bilateral tax treaties (BTTs) on parent employment at multinational firms. “High
RID” and “Low RID” refer to firms within industries that exhibit ratios of total payments in royalties, interest and dividends
relative to total industry sales that are above and below the median sector (see Appendix A.2 for details). Sample covers
1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by both parent firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                              6
   Figure A2: Effect of BTTs on U.S. Multinational Firm Employment Without Affiliate
                                          Scaling
                    in High Royalty, Interest, and Dividend Industries

                                                                        0.10



                                                                        0.08
       Coefficient Estimate: Effect of First BTT on Parent Employment




                                                                                                                               event-study estimates

                                                                        0.06



                                                                        0.04



                                                                        0.02

                                                                                                                                                diff-in-diff estimate

                                                                        0.00
                                                                                -6   -5   -4   -3   -2     -1       0      1          2     3          4        5       6


                                                                        -0.02



                                                                        -0.04



                                                                        -0.06
                                                                                                     Years Since BTT Effective Date


Source: Authors’ calculations based on BEA Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad 1987-2007. Sample restricted to
firms in industries with high RID payments to U.S. parent firms. Each point on the black line represents a coefficient estimate
from the event study specification in (2). Dashed lines reflect 95 percent confidence intervals for these event-study estimates
when clustering standard errors by both parent firm and year. Gray lines reflects the diff-in-diff estimate described in (1),
located so the lower line corresponds to the average of pre-BTT event study coefficients. Both specifications include firm and
industry × time fixed effects and a full set of controls, as in column (5) of Table 3.




                                                                                                                7
    Figure A3: Effect of BTTs on U.S. Multinational Firm Employment Using All BTTs
                    in High Royalty, Interest, and Dividend Industries

                                                     0.15




                                                     0.10
       Effect of BTT Coverage on Parent Employment




                                                     0.05




                                                     0.00
                                                             -5   -4   -3   -2       -1        0        1         2   3   4   5



                                                     -0.05




                                                     -0.10




                                                     -0.15
                                                                                 Years Since BTT Effective Date


Source: Authors’ calculations based on BEA Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad 1987-2007. Sample restricted to
firms in industries with high RID payments to U.S. parent firms. Each point on the black line represents a coefficient estimate
on leads or lags of the BTT coverage measure in (15). Dashed lines reflect 95 percent confidence intervals for these estimates
when clustering standard errors by both parent firm and year. The regressions include firm and industry × time fixed effects
and a full set of controls, as in column (5) of Table 3.




                                                                                          8
A.4     Empirical Results Using Variation in the Change in With-
        holding Tax Rates
This section presents all of the main empirical results utilizing additional variation in the
magnitude of the withholding tax changes across the various countries signing new BTTs
with the U.S. As shown in Table 1, the decline in withholding rate varied across treaties and
across the relevant financial flows (royalties, interest, and dividends) for a given treaty. It
is therefore plausible that countries whose affiliates faced larger declines in withholding tax
rates would exhibit larger effects. Accounting for these differences might therefore improve
the statistical power of our analysis.
    The results of such an analysis appear in Tables A3 - A8. We refer to the treaty-induced
change in withholding tax rate as the “dosage” for affiliates in that country. In order to
calculate this dosage measure, we made a number of decisions. First, the analysis presented
here omits affiliates in Tunisia, Venezuela, Slovenia, and Bangladesh, since we do not have
pre- and post-treaty tax rates for those countries (Table 1). This leaves us with 14 treated
countries rather than the 18 we use in the main analysis. Second, in many cases withholding
rates are reported as a range, rather than a specific value (see Table 1). We use the maximum
possible change in the tax rate for each type of income (results based on the minimum possible
change are extremely similar).
    Third, since countries generally apply different withholding tax rates to each of the three
different types of payments (royalties, interest, and dividends - RID), we weight these three
financial flows by their importance for a given affiliate. In order to avoid endogeneity concerns
in which withholding rates distort the size of each financial flow, we created country-level
weights using data for RID payments from the 1989 BEA Benchmark Survey. However, the
former Soviet republics in our sample did not exist in 1989, and most of them did not have
RID payments in 1994, so we use data from 1999 for this set of countries (and 1989 for all
others).
    Fourth, after aggregating across royalty, interest, and dividend payments using the weights
just described, we had to choose a functional form for how the change in average withholding
tax rate influenced the size of the BTT’s effects on employment outcomes. In Appendix B.1
equation (26), the withholding tax rate is parameterized as

                           ln τcti = ln [(1 + t − t∗c )(1 − φci ) − h∗ φci ] ,              (16)

where h∗ is the withholding tax rate. For simplicity, assume t ≈ t∗c and φci ≈ 0.5. With
those assumptions,
                               ln τcti ≈ ln(0.5) + ln(1 − h∗ )                      (17)
A BTT changes h∗ , such that the change in the effective tax on offshore activity is

                                      d ln τcti ≈ d ln(1 − h∗ )                             (18)

We use the righthand side of this expression as our measure of the magnitude of a given
BTT. For example, if a country’s withholding tax rate fell from 25% to 10%, then the
dosage measure will be 0.182 = ln(1 − 0.10) − ln(1 − 0.25). One way to think about this
measure is by noting that ln(1 − x) ≈ 1 − x when x is small. So, for small values of h∗ , our


                                                   9
measure is just the negative of the change in withholding tax rate.
    Given these choices, we take the withholding tax rates from Table 1 and multiply the
BTT indicator in the main analysis by this dosage measure. We then use this dosage-scaled
BTT indicator in Tables A3 - A8. The affiliate-level first-stage analysis in Table A3 is indeed
stronger, with larger partial F-statistics than in the main analysis. However, this difference
in the first stage does not lead to substantive changes in the second-stage results at the
parent, industry, or region level, showing that our findings are robust to utilizing variation
in withholding tax changes across BTTs. Also note that even though the affiliate-level first-
stage coefficients are roughly ten times higher than the corresponding coefficients on the
binary BTT treatment variable in Table 4 of the paper, the predicted effects are very similar
across the two specifications, as the average “dosage” is approximately 0.1.




                                              10
                             Table A3: Foreign Affiliate-Level Analysis:
                   The Effect of BTTs on Offshore Employment - Dosage Measure


                    Dependent variable: log affiliate employment: ln(mat )
                            (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)      (6)
 Sample:                    All     High RID Low RID             All     High RID Low RID
 BTT Dosage              3.003*** 3.694***          1.398**   2.641*** 3.466***       0.917
                          (0.614)     (0.402)        (0.56)    (0.672)      (0.51)   (0.58)
 ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                             2.749*       0.944  5.159***
                                                               (1.628)     (3.419)  (1.966)
 ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                                                 0.07       0.021     0.198
                                                               (0.122)     (0.166)  (0.169)
 ln(Skill Difference)                                        -0.077***      -0.047 -0.120***
                                                               (0.024)     (0.113)  (0.037)
 ln(Trade Costs)                                               0.019**      0.012    .031**
                                                               (0.008)     (0.026)  (0.012)
 BIT                                                         -0.390***      -0.317 -0.489***
                                                               (0.085)     (0.202)  (0.123)
 FTA                                                          0.070**       0.123    -0.022
                                                               (0.032)     (0.075)  (0.043)
 Exchange Rate                                               -0.000008 -0.00005 -0.000008
                                                             (0.00002) (0.00005) (0.00003)
 Parent-Sibling BTTs                                         -0.045*** -0.051**     -0.036*
                                                               (0.139)     (0.023)  (0.019)
 Affiliate-Sibling BTTs                                        0.129*      0.157**    0.053
                                                               (0.075)     (0.072)  (0.081)
 Affiliate FE              YES         YES            YES        YES         YES      YES
 Industry-Year FE          YES         YES            YES        YES         YES      YES
 N                        337787      194727        143060     337787      194727   143060
 R-sq                     0.0208      0.0322        0.0043     0.0255      0.0358    0.0139
 F-Statistic               23.89       84.51          6.23      23.62       50.91     7.08

Notes: Documents the effect of newly-signed Bilateral Tax Treaties (BTTs) on foreign affiliate employment using the “dosage”
measure described in the text. “High RID” and “Low RID” refer to firms within industries that exhibit ratios of total payments
in royalties, interest, and dividends relative to total industry sales that are above and below the median sector. (see Appendix
A.2 for details). Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by both affiliate country and year are in parentheses.
*,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                              11
                           Table A4: U.S. Parent-Level Analysis:
   The Effect of Offshore Employment on Domestic MNE Employment - Dosage Measure


                          Dependent variable: log parent employment: ln(sf t )
                                               (1)          (2)     (3)            (4)
                Specification:                 IV           IV      IV             IV
                Sample:                        All          All  New Aff Cont Aff
                log affiliate employment: 0.190*** 0.144***        0.06       0.151***
                                            (0.019)      (0.018) (0.170)        (0.018)
                ln(GDPus + GDPd )                         -0.007  -0.293         -0.019
                                                         (0.092) (0.397)        (0.088)
                ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                                           0.001  0.127           0.009
                                                         (0.047) (0.207)        (0.045)
                ln(Skill Difference)                    -0.099**  0.096        -0.120**
                                                         (0.045) (0.110)        (0.047)
                ln(Trade Costs)                           -0.017   0.017          -0.02
                                                         (0.013) (0.035)        (0.014)
                BIT                                    -0.468*** -0.355        -0.513**
                                                         (0.171) (0.227)        (0.209)
                FTA                                       -0.005  0.082          -0.012
                                                         (0.048) (0.127)        (0.053)
                Exchange Rate                           -0.00005 0.00001 -0.00008
                                                         (0.000) (0.000)        (0.000)
                Parent FE                     YES          YES     YES            YES
                Year FE                       YES          YES     YES            YES
                N                            29765        29765    6077          23688
                R-sq                         0.1358      0.1576   0.3427        0.1663
                First Stage F-Stat           335.28      356.85   10.41         351.67
                Endog Test P-Val             0.0015      0.0018   0.0026        0.0014

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment of multinational
firms in industries that exhibit high ratios of royalty, interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales, using the
“dosage” measure described in the text. Columns (5) and (6) respectively restrict the sample to parent firms that did and did
not open new affiliates in countries newly receiving a BTT. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though
the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table A3 (see text for discussion). In
all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by parent
firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                12
                          Table A5: U.S. Industry-Level Analysis:
    The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. Industry Employment - Dosage Measure


                         Dependent variable: log industry employment: ln(Lit )
                                                              (1)        (2)
                        Specification:                        IV         IV
                        industry log affiliate employment: 0.007*** 0.008***
                                                            (0.003)   (0.003)
                        ln(GDPus + GDPd )                              -0.013
                                                                      (0.036)
                        ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                              0.004
                                                                      (0.018)
                        ln(Skill Difference)                            0.01
                                                                      (0.018)
                        ln(Trade Costs)                               0.011**
                                                                      (0.005)
                        BIT                                            -0.005
                                                                      (0.021)
                        FTA                                            0.013
                                                                      (0.016)
                        Exchange Rate                                -0.00003
                                                                      (0.000)
                        Industry FE                          YES        YES
                        Year FE                              YES        YES
                        N                                    1268       1268
                        R-sq                                0.4796    0.5252
                        First Stage F-Stat                  200.08    106.93
                        Endog Test P-Val                    0.0254     0.0298

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment at the industry level for industries
that exhibit high ratios of royalty, interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales, using the “dosage”
measure described in the text. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics
for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table A3 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications,
the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by industry and year are in
parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                            13
                          Table A6: U.S. Industry Level Analysis:
   The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. MNE vs. non-MNE Employment - Dosage
                                         Measure


                     Dependent variable: log industry employment: ln(Lit )
                                               (1)         (2)     (3)                                        (4)
       Specification:                          IV          IV      IV                                         IV
       Sample:                               MNE         MNE    non-MNE                                  non-MNE
       industry log affiliate employment: 0.044*** 0.044***       0.002                                      0.001
                                            (0.005)     (0.005)  (0.004)                                   (0.005)
       ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                 0.101                                              -0.029
                                                        (0.092)                                            (0.046)
       ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                 -0.05                                              0.012
                                                        (0.047)                                            (0.024)
       ln(Skill Difference)                               -0.06                                              0.014
                                                        (0.037)                                            (0.022)
       ln(Trade Costs)                                   -0.007                                              0.011
                                                        (0.007)                                            (0.009)
       BIT                                               0.047                                              -0.007
                                                        (0.067)                                            (0.026)
       FTA                                                0.06                                               0.015
                                                        (0.037)                                            (0.016)
       Exchange Rate                                   -0.00002                                           -0.00001
                                                        (0.000)                                            (0.000)
       Industry FE                            YES         YES     YES                                        YES
       Year FE                                YES         YES     YES                                        YES
       N                                      1268        1268    1268                                       1268
       R-sq                                  0.2555     0.2984   0.4236                                    0.4697
       First Stage F-Stat                    151.44      82.25   182.04                                      98.39
       Endog Test P-Val                      0.0091     0.0053   0.0201                                    0.0189

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment at the industry level for industries that
exhibit high ratios of royalty, interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales, using the “dosage” measure
described in the text. Columns (1) and (2) examine employment for multinational parents in the U.S. industry while columns
(3) and (4) examine all other employment in each industry. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though
the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table A3 (see text for discussion). In
all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by industry
and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                             14
                              Table A7: U.S. Industry Level Analysis:
                The Effect of Offshore Employment at Vertically Oriented Affiliates
                   on U.S. MNE vs. non-MNE Employment - Dosage Measure


                      Dependent variable: log industry                  employment: ln(Lit )
                                               (1)                          (2)       (3)                     (4)
       Specification:                          IV                           IV        IV                      IV
       Sample:                              V-MNE                        V-MNE non-MNE                   non-MNE
       industry log affiliate employment: 0.156***                      0.149***    -0.009                -0.016**
                                             (0.008)                     (0.008)   (0.008)                 (0.008)
       ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                                 -0.364*                            -0.289
                                                                         (0.191)                           (0.193)
       ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                                0.203**                             0.141
                                                                         (0.096)                           (0.097)
       ln(Skill Difference)                                             -0.429***                            0.042
                                                                         (0.061)                           (0.065)
       ln(Trade Costs)                                                    -0.006                            -0.002
                                                                         (0.016)                           (0.016)
       BIT                                                                -0.036                           0.444*
                                                                         (0.266)                           (0.233)
       FTA                                                                 -0.02                           0.130*
                                                                         (0.066)                           (0.069)
       Exchange Rate                                                      0.0002                          0.00009
                                                                         (0.000)                           (0.000)
       Industry FE                                          YES            YES       YES                     YES
       Year FE                                              YES            YES       YES                     YES
       N                                                    1217           1217      1217                    1217
       R-sq                                                0.1301         0.1654    0.4532                 0.5019
       First Stage F-Stat                                  339.61         241.63    301.56                 309.69
       Endog Test P-Val                                    0.0091         0.0066    0.0191                 0.0174

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment at foreign affiliates that have non-zero
sales to their U.S. parent on domestic employment at the industry level for industries that exhibit high ratios of royalty,
interest, and dividend payments relative to total industry sales, using the “dosage” measure described in the text. Columns
(1) and (2) examine employment for multinational parents in the U.S. industry while columns (3) and (4) examine all other
employment in each industry. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for
weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table A3 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications,
the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by industry and year are in
parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                             15
                         Table A8: U.S. Metro Area Level Analysis:
    The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. Regional Employment - Dosage Measure


                          Dependent variable: log regional employment: ln(Lmt )
                                                                (1)       (2)
                          Specification:                        IV         IV
                          regional log affiliate employment: 0.025** 0.026***
                                                             (0.005) (0.005)
                          ln(GDPus + GDPd )                             0.137*
                                                                       (0.076)
                          ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                          -0.029**
                                                                       (0.015)
                          ln(Skill Difference)                         0.107**
                                                                       (0.052)
                          ln(Trade Costs)                                 0.03
                                                                       (0.025)
                          BIT                                            0.226
                                                                       (0.205)
                          FTA                                            0.052
                                                                       (0.035)
                          Exchange Rate                               -0.00002
                                                                       (0.000)
                          Industry FE                          YES       YES
                          Year FE                              YES       YES
                          N                                    6080      6080
                          R-sq                                0.7312   0.7387
                          First Stage F-Stat                  72.97     91.22
                          Endog Test P-Val                    0.0209    0.0261

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment at the region
level, using the “dosage” measure described in the text. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the
relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table A3 (see text for discussion). In all
IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors clustered by parent firm
and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                              16
A.5     Empirical Results for Vertically Oriented Multinational Firms
This appendix replicates the empirical results in the main text for a subsample of vertically
oriented multinational firms, i.e. those whose foreign affiliates exhibit sales back to the U.S.
parent. The results are similar to those in the main text, which use the full sample of multi-
nationals irrespective of vertical or horizontal orientation. One exception is the industry-level
effect of offshoring activity on non-multinational firm employment, which is why we include
the effects for vertically oriented firms in Table 8 in the main text and discuss the differences
in Section 4.2.3.
    For reference, Appendix Figure A4 corresponds to Figure 1 in the main text, Table A9
corresponds to Table 2, Table A10 corresponds to Table 3, Table A11 corresponds to Table
4, Table A12 corresponds to Table 5, Table A13 corresponds to Table 6, and Table A14
corresponds to Table 9.




                                               17
  Figure A4: Effect of BTTs on Vertically Oriented U.S. Multinational Firm Employment
                    in High Royalty, Interest, and Dividend Industries

                                                                        0.15
       Coefficient Estimate: Effect of First BTT on Parent Employment




                                                                        0.10


                                                                                                                                                   event-study estimates

                                                                        0.05

                                                                                                                                              diff-in-diff estimate


                                                                        0.00
                                                                                -6   -5   -4   -3   -2     -1        0     1          2   3          4         5      6



                                                                        -0.05




                                                                        -0.10




                                                                        -0.15
                                                                                                     Years Since BTT Effective Date


Source: Authors’ calculations based on BEA Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. Sample restricted to firms in
industries with high royalty, interest, and dividend payments. Each point on the black line represents a coefficient estimate from
the event study specification in (2). Dashed lines reflect 95 percent confidence intervals for these event-study estimates when
clustering standard errors by both parent firm and year. Gray lines reflects the diff-in-diff estimate described in (1), located so
the lower line corresponds to the average of pre-BTT event study coefficients. Both specifications include firm and industry ×
time fixed effects and a full set of controls, as in column (5) of Table 3.




                                                                                                                18
           Table A9: Summary Statistics for Vertically Oriented Multinational Firms


                                                                     Mean       Std. Dev.        Min         Max
            FOREIGN AFFILIATES (107,458 obs.)
            Employment                                              647.65        2158.0         (confidential)
            ln(Employment)                                          4.8569        1.9544         (confidential)
            Av. Annual Emp Growth (%)                               0.1074        0.8576         (confidential)
            BTT                                                     0.8315        0.3743           0        1
            High RID Indicator                                      0.5481        0.4977           0        1
            ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                       9.3503         0.215        8.8665 10.093
            ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                      18.219        0.5496        14.841 18.933
            ln(Skill Difference)                                    1.0233        0.7481           0     2.4850
            ln(Trade Cost)                                          2.6179        2.3767           0     4.4888
            BIT                                                     0.0384        0.1921           0        1
            FTA                                                     0.1712        0.3767           0        1
            Exchange Rate                                           115.44        762.15           0     16105
            Parent-Sibling BTTsa                                    0.5513        0.2010           0        1
            Affiliate-Sibling BTTsb                                 0.2935        0.3797           0     3.3712

            U.S. PARENT FIRMS (26,418 obs.)
            Foreign Affiliate Employment                            2778.4        10855          (confidential)
            ln(Aff Emp)                                             5.9015        2.1264         (confidential)
            Av Annual Aff Emp Growth (%)                            0.1355        0.8722         (confidential)
            Parent Firm Employment                                  9236.3        28622          (confidential)
            ln(Parent Employment)                                   7.5790        1.9188         (confidential)
            Number of Affiliates                                    4.5014        7.3598         (confidential)
            ln(GDPus + GDPd )c                                      4.0454        3.5220           0     29.618
            ln(GDPus − GDPd )2 c                                    7.8928        6.8857           0     58.087
            ln(Skill Difference)c                                   0.4125        0.4980           0     4.1650
            ln(Trade Cost)c                                         1.2377        1.5908           0     10.328
            BITc                                                    0.0048        0.0560           0        1
            FTAc                                                    0.1437        0.3116           0        1
            Exchange Ratec                                          17.835        178.47           0     23574

Authors’ calculations from BEA Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad and various other data sources, described in
Section 2. a Weighted average share of total sibling employment covered by a BTT with the U.S., using fixed affiliate employment
shares. b Weighted average share of total sibling employment covered by a BTT with the affiliate’s country, using fixed affiliate
employment shares. c Parent-level versions of affiliate country controls are aggregated from the country to the parent firm level
using a weighted average, using fixed affiliate employment shares as weights.




                                                              19
                  Table A10: Reduced Form Difference-in-Differences Analysis:
              The Effect of BTTs on Parent Employment, Vertically Oriented Firms


                      Dependent variable: log parent employment: ln(sf t )
                             (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)                                      (6)
   Sample:
         h            i
                             All    High RID Low RID          All   High RID                                   Low RID
   BTT ϕ̃f 1(t ≥ t̃f )      0.011    0.034**      -0.014    0.013   0.046***                                     -0.015
                           (0.014)   (0.017)     (0.022) (0.019)      (0.012)                                   (0.062)
   ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                        0.722*      1.649                                     0.244
                                                           (0.413)    (1.307)                                   (0.986)
   ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                      -0.388*     -0.275                                    -2.381
                                                           (0.209)    (0.655)                                   (1.932)
   ln(Skill Difference)                                     -0.006   -0.731**                                     0.733
                                                           (0.041)    (0.288)                                    (0.65)
   ln(Trade Costs)                                           0.541     -0.782                                     0.127
                                                           (0.704)    (0.966)                                   (0.286)
   BIT                                                      0.577      -0.405                                    -0.623
                                                           (0.389)    (0.308)                                   (1.069)
   FTA                                                      0.314      -0.374                                    0.721
                                                           (0.793)    (0.328)                                   (1.499)
   Exchange Rate                                            0.000      0.000                                     0.000
                                                           (0.002) (0.0002)                                     (0.002)
   Parent FE                 YES       YES         YES       YES        YES                                       YES
   Industry-Year FE          YES       YES         YES       YES        YES                                       YES
   N                        26418     15092       11326     26418      15092                                     11326
   R-sq                    0.0894    0.1137       0.0732   0.1023     0.1481                                    0.0896

Notes: Documents the effect of newly-signed Bilateral Tax Treaties (BTTs) on parent employment in U.S. multinational
enterprises. “High RID” and “Low RID” refer to firms within industries that exhibit ratios of total payments in royalties,
interest and dividends relative to total industry sales that are above and below the median sector (see Appendix A.2 for
details). Standard errors clustered by both parent firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                             20
                           Table A11: Foreign Affiliate-Level Analysis:
             The Effect of BTTs on Offshore Employment, Vertically Oriented Firms


                    Dependent variable: log affiliate employment: ln(mat )
                             (1)      (2)            (3)        (4)       (5)                                      (6)
 Sample:                    All    High RID Low RID             All  High RID                                  Low RID
 BTT                       0.133   0.337***        -0.083      0.085  0.312***                                   -0.152
                         (0.082)    (0.069)       (0.139)    (0.085)   (0.059)                                  (0.113)
 ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                             1.302    -2.958                                 6.943***
                                                             (2.826)   (3.649)                                  (2.334)
 ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                                               0.079    -0.222                                  0.478**
                                                             (0.171)   (0.186)                                  (0.198)
 ln(Skill Difference)                                         -0.122    -0.096                                 -0.161**
                                                             (0.095)   (0.121)                                  (0.072)
 ln(Trade Costs)                                               0.035      0.02                                    0.053
                                                             (0.039)   (0.040)                                  (0.039)
 BIT                                                        -0.907** -0.889**                                   -0.947*
                                                             (0.416)   (0.383)                                  (0.489)
 FTA                                                           0.061     0.135                                   -0.032
                                                             (0.064)   (0.073)                                  (0.062)
 Exchange Rate                                               -0.0001   -0.0001                                  -0.0001
                                                            (0.0001) (0.0001)                                  (0.0001)
 Parent-Sibling BTTs                                        -0.031** -0.038***                                   -0.025
                                                             (0.013)   (0.008)                                  (0.032)
 Affiliate-Sibling BTTs                                        0.076     0.051                                   0.109*
                                                             (0.053)   (0.032)                                  (0.065)
 Affiliate FE              YES        YES           YES        YES       YES                                      YES
 Industry-Year FE          YES        YES           YES        YES       YES                                      YES
 N                       107458      59775         47683     107458     59775                                    47683
 R-sq                     0.0005    0.0028         0.0002     0.0135    0.0154                                   0.0222
 F-Statistic                2.61     21.86          0.35       8.97     23.18                                     5.36

Notes: Documents the effect of newly-signed Bilateral Tax Treaties (BTTs) on foreign affiliate employment. “High RID” and
“Low RID” refer to firms within industries that exhibit ratios of total payments in royalties, interest and dividends relative
to total industry sales that are above and below the median sector (see Appendix A.2 for details). Standard errors clustered
by both affiliate country and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels,
respectively.




                                                             21
                         Table A12: U.S. Parent-Level Analysis:
 The Effect of Offshore Employment on Domestic MNE Employment, Vertically Oriented
                                         Firms


                     Dependent variable: log parent employment: ln(sf t )
                               (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)      (6)
 Specification:                OLS        OLS         IV        IV           IV       IV
 Sample:                                   All        All       All       New Aff Cont Aff
 log affiliate employment: 0.285*** 0.264*** 0.120*** 0.089*** 0.056** 0.102***
                             (0.021)    (0.019)    (0.019)   (0.015)      (0.029)  (0.016)
 ln(GDPus + GDPd )                       -0.281               -0.198       -0.309 -0.297*
                                        (0.203)              (0.144)      (0.226)  (0.164)
 ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                          0.084                0.091        0.153   0.133
                                        (0.102)              (0.073)      (0.116)  (0.082)
 ln(Skill Difference)                    -0.026               -0.093      -0.152*    0.082
                                        (0.098)              (0.079)      (0.089)  (0.139)
 ln(Trade Costs)                          0.002                0.002        0.018   -0.024
                                        (0.022)              (0.016)      (0.016)  (0.025)
 BIT                                    -0.932*              -0.814* -0.831**       0.439
                                        (0.498)              (0.489)      (0.419)  (0.813)
 FTA                                     -0.155              -0.129*       -0.056 -0.285*
                                        (0.108)              (0.069)      (0.071)  (0.160)
 Exchange Rate                           0.0006             0.00016 0.00001 -0.00002
                                        (0.000)             (0.0003) (0.0001) (0.0001)
 Parent FE                     YES        YES        YES       YES          YES      YES
 Year FE                       YES        YES        YES       YES          YES      YES
 N                            15092      15092      15092     15092         4678    10414
 R-sq                        0.1722      0.2646     0.1589    0.1779       0.2771  0.2295
 First Stage F-Stat             -           -       412.66   443.21        206.88  341.83
 Endog Test P-Val               -           -       0.0089    0.0081       0.0096  0.0084

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment of multinational
firms in high RID industries. Columns (5) and (6) respectively restrict the sample to parent firms that did and did not
open new affiliates in countries newly receiving a BTT. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the
relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 (see text for discussion). In all IV
specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Standard errors clustered by parent firm and year are in parentheses.
*,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                              22
                          Table A13: U.S. Industry-Level Analysis:
   The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. Industry Employment, Vertically Oriented
                                           Firms


                        Dependent variable: log industry employment: ln(Lit )
                                                 (1)      (2)     (3)         (4)
                 Specification:                 OLS      OLS      IV          IV
                 log affiliate employment:    0.024** 0.015**    0.005      0.003
                                    (ln Mit ) (0.011) (0.007) (0.004) (0.004)
                 ln(GDPus + GDPd )                      -0.253*           -0.157*
                                                        (0.136)           (0.084)
                 ln(GDPus − GDPd )    2
                                                        0.120*             0.074*
                                                        (0.068)           (0.042)
                 ln(Skill Difference)                    0.863              0.054
                                                        (0.550)           (0.037)
                 ln(Trade Costs)                         0.078              0.005
                                                        (0.069)           (0.004)
                 BIT                                     0.728              0.045
                                                        (0.958)           (0.059)
                 FTA                                     0.774              0.048
                                                        (0.563)           (0.035)
                 Exchange Rate                          0.0004            0.00002
                                                       (0.0002)          (0.0000)
                 Industry FE                    YES      YES     YES         YES
                 Year FE                        YES      YES     YES         YES
                 N                              1217     1217    1217        1217
                 R-sq                          0.5061   0.5832  0.5095     0.5679
                 First Stage F-Stat               -         -   293.18     249.28
                 Endog Test P-Val                 -         -   0.0029     0.0031

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment at the industry
level for high RID industries. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for
weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the
equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Standard errors clustered by industry and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate
significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                              23
                        Table A14: U.S. Metro Area Level Analysis:
   The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. Regional Employment, Vertically Oriented
                                         Firms


                       Dependent variable: log regional employment: ln(Lmt )
                                                  (1)         (2)      (3)       (4)
          Specification:                         OLS         OLS       IV        IV
          regional log affiliate employment: 0.048*** 0.048*** 0.036*** 0.036***
                                     (ln Mit )  (0.018)    (0.018)  (0.010)   (0.009)
          ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                 -0.084             -0.072
                                                           (0.129)            (0.463)
          ln(GDPus − GDPd )2                                 0.035              0.037
                                                           (0.065)            (0.231)
          ln(Skill Difference)                               0.264              0.03
                                                           (0.182)            (0.059)
          ln(Trade Costs)                                   -0.114             -0.039
                                                           (0.087)            (0.030)
          BIT                                               -0.121             -0.282
                                                           (0.101)            (0.353)
          FTA                                             0.050***           0.171***
                                                           (0.014)            (0.047)
          Exchange Rate                                     0.000              -0.000
                                                          (0.0001)           (0.0000)
          Industry FE                            YES         YES      YES       YES
          Year FE                                YES         YES      YES       YES
          N                                      6080        6080     6080      6080
          R-sq                                  0.7205     0.7242    0.7163   0.7196
          First Stage F-Stat                       -           -     220.29   217.76
          Endog Test P-Val                         -           -     0.0109   0.0073

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment at the region
level. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns
appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 (see text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is
rejected. Standard errors clustered by parent firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                               24
A.6     Imputation in CBP Employment Data
When the size of a particular cell would risk violating data confidentiality requirements,
the County Business Patterns data report an employment range rather than the precise
employment count. This issue does not arise in the industry-level analysis in Section 4.2.3,
but does appear in the county-level data that we use to generate metro-area employment
in Section 4.2.4. The results presented in the main text (Table 9) utilize an imputation
procedure that replaces the employment ranges with their midpoints. For example, when
the CBP data report an employment range of 0-19 employees, we impute a value of 10. We
use the midpoint of each reported range and impute 175,000 employees when the CBP data
report employment ≥ 100,000.
   In order to ensure that this imputation procedure is not substantively affecting our find-
ings, Table A15 presents metro-area results in which we treat the suppressed employment
values as zeros rather than imputing them at the midpoint of the reported ranges. Compar-
ing against Table 9, the results are quite similar, with the more careful imputation in the
main text implying somewhat smaller magnitudes, but a similar qualitative interpretation.




                                             25
                            Table A15: U.S. Metro Area Level Analysis:
                 The Effect of Offshore Employment on U.S. Regional Employment
                                       Alternative Imputation


                      Dependent variable: log regional employment:                         ln(Lmt )
                                                  (1)        (2)                              (3)       (4)
          Specification:                         OLS        OLS                               IV        IV
          regional log affiliate employment: 0.043*** 0.042***                             0.026** 0.025***
                                     (ln Mit ) (0.012)    (0.013)                          (0.005) (0.005)
          ln(GDPus + GDPd )                                0.201                                     0.111*
                                                          (0.210)                                    (0.065)
          ln(GDPus − GDPd )     2
                                                           -0.132                                   -0.067**
                                                          (0.070)                                    (0.033)
          ln(Skill Difference)                            0.336*                                     0.110*
                                                          (0.191)                                    (0.064)
          ln(Trade Costs)                                  -0.011                                      0.002
                                                          (0.068)                                    (0.022)
          BIT                                               0.06                                       0.042
                                                          (0.129)                                    (0.044)
          FTA                                            0.268***                                   0.096***
                                                          (0.099)                                    (0.035)
          Exchange Rate                                  -0.0003*                                     -0.000
                                                          (0.000)                                    (0.000)
          Industry FE                            YES        YES                              YES       YES
          Year FE                                YES        YES                              YES       YES
          N                                      6080       6080                             6080      6080
          R-sq                                  0.7229    0.7271                            0.7189   0.7239
          First Stage F-Stat                       -          -                             182.15   175.54
          Endog Test P-Val                         -          -                             0.0211   0.0265

Notes: Documents the effects of BTT-induced changes in foreign-affiliate employment on domestic employment at the
region level. Suppressed county employment values in the County Business Patterns are treated as zeros when computing
regional employment. See Table 9 for the results using a more careful imputation. First-stage F-statistics are large for all IV
specifications, though the relevant F-statistics for weak-instrument concerns appear in columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 (see
text for discussion). In all IV specifications, the equality of OLS and IV is rejected. Sample covers 1987-2007. Standard errors
clustered by parent firm and year are in parentheses. *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels,
respectively.




                                                              26
B       Supplemental Theoretical and Econometric Results
B.1       Detailed Model of Double Taxation
In this section, we consider double taxation in the context of the U.S. corporate tax, demon-
strating the conditions under which we can model double taxation as a proportional increase
in the costs of foreign affiliate employment, τcti in equation (5) of the main text.
    The U.S. taxes worldwide profits, but provides a credit for foreign tax liabilities in an
effort to avoid double taxation. However, the U.S. offers only a limited credit, such that a
multinational firm cannot claim a credit larger than the tax the U.S. would levy on foreign
earnings (otherwise the U.S. tax authority would effectively subsidize foreign tax liabilities).
The limited tax credit for foreign taxes paid can then subject the multinational firm to
double taxation. To see how the incidence of double taxation arises with a limited foreign
tax credit, here we derive the total taxes paid in each jurisdiction and the total tax liability
of the multinational enterprise
    Let φ denote the share of revenue that is remitted to the U.S. parent firm.34 The domestic
and foreign tax rates are t and t∗ , where we assume t > t∗ reflecting the fact that the U.S.
has one of the highest corporate tax rates in the world. Moreover, the foreign tax authority
collects an additional withholding tax on royalties, interest, and dividends. We denote the
foreign withholding rate by h∗ .
    Given this notation, the taxes paid to the foreign tax authority are the corporate tax on
the income of the affiliate plus the withholding tax:

                                    t∗ [(1 − φ)r − wc m]             +       h∗ φr         .                     (19)
                                    |             {z             }           | {z }
                                         foreign corporate tax           withholding tax


The U.S. tax liability for the multinational enterprise is the tax on worldwide income less
any credit for foreign taxes paid. The tax on worldwide income can be written as t[φr −
ωs] + t[(1 − φ)r − wc m] to reflect the domestic and foreign components of worldwide income.
The firm is then eligible for a foreign tax credit designed to avoid double taxation, but
this credit is limited so that it can not exceed the U.S. tax liability on foreign activities,
t[(1 − φ)r − wc m]. Thus, if this value is smaller than the foreign tax payments in (19), the
foreign tax credit limit binds, and the firm faces double taxation. Combining terms, the U.S.
tax liability, including the potentially limited foreign tax credit is

    t[φr − ωs] + t[(1 − φ)r − wc m] − min{t∗ [(1 − φ)r − wc m] + h∗ φr, t[(1 − φ)r − wc m]},
    |                 {z                     }    |                                   {z                         }
          U.S. worldwide corporate tax                                        foreign tax credit
                                                                                        (20)
   Summing the foreign and domestic tax liabilities yields the total tax burden of the multi-
national firm.

        t[φr − ωs − wc m] + max{0, t∗ [(1 − φ)r − wc m] + h∗ φr − t[(1 − φ)r − wc m]}                            (21)
   34
      In the context of the Antràs and Helpman (2004) model outlined in Section 4.1, the U.S. parent earns a
share φ ≡ [δcαi + β(1 − δcαi )] of total revenue, while the foreign affiliate earns a share 1 − φ ≡ (1 − β)(1 − δcαi ).
Yet, the following discussion about limits on foreign tax credits and the efficacy of BTTs holds for any
determination of φ.


                                                             27
The first term reflects the U.S. worldwide tax system, which in the absence of double taxation
imposes the U.S. tax rate on global taxable income. The second term reflects the possibility
of double taxation, which occurs only when the foreign tax credit limit binds, increasing
the total tax liability above what the U.S. worldwide system would impose. This expression
makes clear two important points. First, higher withholding tax rates, h∗ , make it more
likely that double taxation occurs, which explains why BTTs aim to reduce withholding
rates as a mechanism for lowering double taxation. Second, the double taxation relief from
a reduction in the withholding tax rate is increasing in φr; i.e., the total payments to the
U.S. parent. This fact motivates our delineation between high and low RID industries as we
measure treatment arising from BTTs.
     We now consider the implications of this tax structure for the multinational parents’ and
affiliates’ employment choices. We assume that any foreign tax credit goes to the affiliate for
their foreign tax payments. Generally, we require only that any burden of double taxation
to the parent is uncorrelated with the change in withholding rates following a new BTT. In
this case, the parent’s problem is

                                       max
                                        s
                                           φr − ωs − t[φr − ωs].                                      (22)

Note that the withholding tax rate h∗ does not enter the parent’s problem in (22), explicitly
demonstrating that the effects of BTTs in reducing withholding rates are excluded from
parent hiring decisions. Solving the parent’s problem and reintroducing subscripts yields the
following first order condition.

  ln st (f ) =
                 ln αi − ln ω − ln(1 − t) + αi [ln θ(f ) − (1 − ηi ) ln(1 − ηi )] + ln(φci (1 − t))
       ln ηi +
                                                    1 − αi ηi
       |                                               {z                                         }
                                                    ψf ci

                                                         αi − µ            αi (1 − ηi )
                                                   −              ln Xti +              ln mct (f ) . (23)
                                                        1 − αi ηi           1 − αi ηi
                                                   |         {z       }
                                                             ϑti

We can collect the terms in the first line on the right side of the equal sign in an affiliate-level
fixed effect, ψf ci , and the first term on the second line into an industry-time fixed effect, ϑti .
This expression corresponds to (6) in the main text.
    The affiliate pays the foreign tax and faces partial reimbursement when the foreign tax
credit limit is reached. Specifically, the affiliate’s problem is

           max(1 − φ)r − wc m − t∗ [(1 − φ)r − wc m] − h∗ φr                                          (24)
            m
                                  + min{t∗ [(1 − φ)r − wc m] + h∗ φr, t[(1 − φ)r − wc m]}.

When the foreign tax credit does not bind, the affiliate is fully reimbursed for its tax pay-
ments and the withholding tax rate drops out of the problem. In this case, a change in the
withholding tax resulting from a BTT would have no effect on firm incentives, and we would
not observe the various empirical effects that we document. If instead double taxation is


                                                    28
present because the foreign tax credit does bind for some firms, changes in withholding tax
rates do affect the affiliate’s problem. In this case (24) reduces to.

                        max(1 − φ)r − wc m + (t − t∗ )[(1 − φ)r − wc m] − h∗ φr.                        (25)
                         m

Solving the affiliate’s problem and reintroducing subscripts yields the following first order
condition.
                       αi − µ
  ln mct (f ) = −                    ln Xti
                    1 − αi (1 − ηi )
                |            {z            }
                             ζti
                                   αi [ln θ(f ) − ηi ln ηi ] + ln αi − ln wc − ln(1 + t − t∗c )
              + ln(1 − ηi ) +
                                                          1 − αi (1 − ηi )
                    |                                   {z                                    }
                                                       νf ci
                     αi ηi                           1
            +                    ln st (f ) +                  ln [(1 + t − t∗c )(1 − φci ) − h∗ φci ] . (26)
                1 − αi (1 − ηi )              1 − αi (1 − ηi )

Again, we can group terms into an affiliate fixed effect, νf ci , and an industry-time fixed effect,
ζti . Affiliate employment relates to parent employment, fixed effects, and the final term that
depends upon withholding rates, h∗ . Note that the last term in equation (26) corresponds
precisely to the last term in (7) in the main text, so that a reduction in h∗ corresponds to a
reduction in τcti . BTTs lower withholding rates in an effort to resolve double taxation, which
is equivalent to a decline in τcti , as modeled in the main text. Thus, the simplified notation
in the main text is equivalent to this more detailed model of how BTTs lower effective tax
rates for firms experiencing double taxation.




                                                      29
B.2     Model with CES Production
In Section 4 we consider a model with a Cobb-Douglas production function, following Antràs
and Helpman (2004). In this section we derive the relationship between foreign affiliate
employment and domestic parent employment using a CES production production function.
In this more general setting, the effect of affiliate employment on parent employment may
be positive or negative, depending upon the relative size of scale and substitution effects.
    We suppress subscripts to simplify notation. The CES production function is given by
                                                                          1
                                      x = θ(ηsρ + (1 − η)mρ ) ρ .                                              (27)

where σ = 1−ρ
            1
               indicates the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign labor.
   The parent’s problem is maxs As r − ωs, where r = X µ−α xα , and As ≡ δ α + β(1 − δ α ).
Let Bs ≡ As X µ−α αηθρ , so that the parent’s first-order condition can be written

                                                Bs xα−ρ sρ−1 = ω.                                              (28)

   The affiliate’s problem is maxm Am r − wc m, where Am ≡ (1 − β)(1 − δ α ).
Let Bm ≡ Am X µ−α α(1 − η)θρ , so the affiliate’s first-order condition can be written

                                               Bm xα−ρ mρ−1 = wc .                                             (29)

   Combining the first-order conditions, we can solve for parent hiring s as a function of
parameters, which yields
                                                                                      α−ρ
                                                                              σ−1 ! ρ(1−α)
                            1
                                                                     ωBm
                                                                      
                                      −1       α−ρ
                     s = Bs1−α
                                 ω   1−α   θ   1−α       η + (1 − η)                                           (30)
                                                                     wc Bs

   Our goal is to determine the effect of a change in the cost of foreign hiring wc on s (note
that the effect of a change in wc is isomorphic to a change in the τ in the main body of the
text). Thus, we want to obtain
                                        d ln s   d ln s
                                               =        wc .                              (31)
                                       d ln wc    dwc
We first calculate
         d ln s                      1
                                                                                        σ−1
                   α−ρ                                        ωBm
                                                                              
                =         ·                    σ−1 · (1 − η)                                  (1 − σ)wc−σ .   (32)
          dwc     ρ(1 − α) η + (1 − η) ωBm                     Bs
                                       
                                         wc Bs


Then, simplifying and using    1−σ
                                ρ
                                      = −σ and the expression in (31) we have

                    d ln s                               (1 − η)σ       wcσ−1
                           =     (ρ − α)             ·            ·                                            (33)
                   d ln wc                                1−α
                                                                                 σ−1
                                                         | {z } η + (1 − η)
                                 | {z }                                       ωBm
                               determines sign                                         wc Bs
                                                            >0    |               {z            }
                                                                                  >0

The sign of (33) is determined by the sign of ρ − α and may generally be positive or negative.


                                                            30
    The parameter-dependent relationship between foreign affiliate hiring and parent employ-
ment is intuitive. The substitution effect between s and m contributes a positive component
to (33), since a decrease in wc drives a decrease in the demand for s, holding output fixed.
As ρ approaches 1, the inputs become stronger substitutes, so this substitution effect grows
in magnitude. The scale effect contributes a negative component to (33), since a decrease
in wc drives a decrease in output price, an increase in output quantity, and an increase in
s. The demand elasticity is 1−α 1
                                  , so as α gets larger, demand becomes more elastic, and
the scale effect gets larger. The balance between ρ and α corresponds to the balance be-
tween substitution and scale effects determining the overall sign of the effect. Under the
Cobb-Douglas restriction ρ = 0, so ρ − α < 0 and a decrease in offshore costs increases
domestic employment. Our empirical results confirm that scale effect dominates on average
in our sample, and additional offshore hiring by U.S. multinational firms leads to greater
employment at domestic parent firms.




                                            31
B.3     Smearing
In Section 4.2.2, we discuss the need to aggregate affiliate-level predicted values from the
first-stage regression in (11) up to the parent-firm level. Because this aggregation involves
nonlinear transformations, we must account for the sampling distribution of the affiliate-level
predictions using a procedure known as “smearing.”
    The affiliate-level first-stage regression in (11) yields predicted values for log affiliate
employment, ln \  mat . Our objective is to generate an unbiased estimate of log total affili-
ate employment at the parent firm level, ln    \ Mf t , where Mf t ≡ a∈f mat . Rewriting this
                                                                     P

aggregation definition to incorporate logs,
                                                                          

                                     ln Mf t = ln             exp (ln mat ) .                  (34)
                                                          X

                                                       a∈f


This expression makes clear that there are three steps in constructing an estimate of ln Mf t
from the constituent ln\mat .
    First, we generate unbiased estimates of mat = exp (ln mat ). Assume that the errors
in (11) are i.i.d. and normally distributed, at ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), and refer to the regressors and
coefficients on the right side of (11) as X a β. Then mat is lognormally distributed
                                                                                          with
                                                                                             2
location parameter X a β and variance parameter σ . Thus, E[mat ] = exp X a β + σ2 ,
                                                      2
                                                              2
                                                                   
which we can estimate as m̂at = exp X a β̂ + σ̂2 . Similarly, we can use the variance of the
lognormal distribution to estimate var(
                                    ˆ m̂at ) = (exp(σ̂ 2 ) − 1) · exp(2X a β + σ̂ 2 ).
   Second, we must sum across sibling affiliates to estimate Mf t ≡ a∈f mat . Since the
                                                                          P

summation operator is linear, we can construct
                                                                                  !
                           d =                              σ̂ 2
                                    m̂at =     exp X a β̂ +                                      (35)
                                       X               X
                           M ft                                  .
                                a∈f        a∈f               2

Assuming zero covariance between errors for sibling affiliates, the variance estimate for Md
                                                                                            ft
is                                   Xh                                         i
            ˆ M  d =        ˆ m̂at ) =      (exp(σ̂ 2 ) − 1) · exp(2X a β + σ̂ 2 ) .      (36)
                        X
           var    ft       var(
                           a∈f                    a∈f

    Finally, we need to estimate the log of total affiliate employment at the parent level,
ln
 \ Mf t . Note that the sum of lognormal random variables is well approximated by a lognormal
distribution (Mehta et al., 2007). Thus, we simply implement the reverse of the lognormal
transformation from the first step. Therefore, our estimate of parent-level log total affiliate
employment is
                                                 1
                                                             !
                                                       2
                                                     s
                                 ln
                                  \ Mf t = ln µ − ln     +1 ,                             (37)
                                                 2   µ2
                                                                                  !
                                                                           σ̂ 2
                           where µ = M
                                     d =                      exp X a β̂ +
                                                          X
                                       ft
                                                          a∈p               2
                                              Xh                                         i
                and s2 = var
                          ˆ Md =
                              ft                      (exp(σ̂ 2 ) − 1) · exp(2X a β + σ̂ 2 ) .
                                                a∈p



                                                          32
Our parent-level estimates of predicted total affiliate employment are constructed following
(37). Because the final step of this process involves an approximation, we implemented
alternatives including a naive plug-in estimate and a nonparametric smearing procedure
following Duan (1983), finding very similar results.




                                            33
References
Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman. Global sourcing. Journal of Political Economy, 112(3):
  552–580, 2004.

Naihua Duan. Smearing estimate: A nonparametric retransformation method. Journal of
  the American Statistical Association, 78(383):605–610, 1983.

Neelesh Mehta, Jingxian Wu, Andreas Molish, and Jin Zhang. Approximating a sum of
  random variables with a lognormal. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 6
  (7), 2007.




                                          34
