                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   VERTICAL INTEGRATION, SUPPLIER BEHAVIOR, AND QUALITY UPGRADING
                          AMONG EXPORTERS

                                    Christopher Hansman
                                         Jonas Hjort
                                      Gianmarco León
                                     Matthieu Teachout

                                     Working Paper 23949
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23949


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 2017, Revised July 2018

We are especially grateful to Francesco Amodio, Bob Gibbons, Amit Khandelwal, Eric
Verhoogen, and Chris Woodruff for detailed feedback. We also thank Charles Angelucci, David
Atkin, Jie Bai, Jing Cai, Lorenzo Casaburi, Wouter Dessein, Dave Donaldson, Marina Halac,
Oliver Hart, Rocco Macchiavello, Ameet Morjaria, Kaivan Munshi, Andrea Prat, John Van
Reenen, Xiao Yu Wang, and Daniel Wolfenzon for very helpful comments and suggestions;
seminar participants at Cambridge, Columbia, LSE, MIT, NBER, UPF, Zurich, the Markets and
Organizations in Emerging Economies Conference, the Society of Institutional and
Organizational Economics, the Summer School in Development Economics (SSDEV), and the
IGC/Stanford SCID conference on Firms, Trade and Development; and Patrick Kennedy and
Leonor Lamas for great research assistance and field work. The Peruvian Ministry of Production,
Cesar Casahuamán, and IFFO (in particular Enrico Bachis and Jorge Mora) kindly shared access
to data. León acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness, through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D
(SEV2015-00563) and grant ECO2011-25272. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Christopher Hansman, Jonas Hjort, Gianmarco León, and Matthieu Teachout. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Vertical Integration, Supplier Behavior, and Quality Upgrading among Exporters
Christopher Hansman, Jonas Hjort, Gianmarco León, and Matthieu Teachout
NBER Working Paper No. 23949
October 2017, Revised July 2018
JEL No. D2,O1

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the relationship between firms’ output quality and their choice of organizational
structure. To do so, we use data on each step of the production and transaction chain that makes
up Peruvian fishmeal manufacturing. We first show that quality upgrading is an important motive
for vertically integrating. Firms integrate suppliers when the quality premium—the relative price
of high quality output—rises for exogenous reasons, but not when average or low quality prices
rise. The greater a firm’s scope for shifting low to high quality production, the greater its
integration response. We then show that integration changes suppliers’ production behavior. A
given supplier’s actions are less geared towards increasing quantity and more geared towards
maintaining input quality after the supplier is integrated and loses access to alternative pay-per-
kilo buyers. Finally, we show that firms and individual plants that use integrated suppliers at the
time of production ultimately produce a significantly higher share of high quality output. In sum,
our results suggest that firms change their organizational structure when their output quality
objectives change because controlling the incentives of independent suppliers facing a quantity-
quality trade-off is difficult, as classical theories of the firm predict.

Christopher Hansman                              Gianmarco León
Imperial College Business School                 Universitat Pompeu Fabra &
Imperial College London                          Barcelona Graduate School of Economics &
South Kensington Campus                          IPEG
London SW7 2AZ                                   Jaume I building, 20.1E74
U.K.                                             Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
c.hansman@imperial.ac.uk                         08005 Barcelona, Spain
                                                 Spain
Jonas Hjort                                      gianmarco.leon@upf.edu
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University                              Matthieu Teachout
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 622                     Department of Economics
New York, NY 10027                               Columbia University
and NBER                                         New York, NY 10027
hjort@columbia.edu                               mrt2138@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
Why do so many of our economic transactions occur within firm boundaries (Coase, 1937; Gibbons, 2005a;
Lafontaine & Slade, 2007)? Vertical integration occurs for many different reasons, and motives vary by con-
text.1 However, as global incomes rise and barriers to trade fall, one potential motive has gained increased
relevance: integrating in order to improve product quality. Access to wealthier, quality sensitive markets
brings rising returns to output quality,2 but producing high quality output typically requires high quality
inputs (see e.g. Kugler & Verhoogen, 2012; Halpern et al. , 2015; Amodio & Martinez-Carrasco, 2018). Be-
cause input quality is often hard for firms to measure and contract over (Gibbons, 2005a; Lafontaine & Slade,
2007)—especially where institutions are weak (Woodruff, 2002; Nunn, 2007)—organizational structure may
play a crucial role in firms’ ability to meet demand for quality.
    In this paper we test the hypothesis that firms vertically integrate in order to produce higher quality
products. This hypothesis is inspired by classical theories characterizing how firm boundaries are expected
to respond to output objectives (Baker et al. , 2001, 2002; Gibbons, 2005a,b) when suppliers multitask (Holm-
strom & Milgrom, 1991). However, given the rarity of data on product quality and internal firm structure,
and the challenges of isolating firm strategy from confounding factors, causal evidence on the extent to
which firms change their organizational structure to upgrade quality has remained elusive.
    The context we study, the Peruvian fishmeal industry, enables progress. The simple structure of the
sector creates an ideal setting in which to study the relationship between integration and output quality.
Independent and integrated suppliers deliver inputs of hard-to-observe quality to manufacturers. Manu-
facturers convert these inputs into a vertically differentiated but otherwise homogeneous product.3 Fur-
thermore, uniquely rich data on the sector’s entire chain of production is available, including within-firm
transactions and direct measures of output quality. Finally, there is substantial—and plausibly exogenous—
variation in the quality premium, the price differential between high and low quality fishmeal. This allows
us to isolate explicit strategic responses to incentives to quality upgrade.
    Our analysis proceeds in several steps. We first present a simple theoretical framework that describes
how and why a firm’s choice of organizational structure may depend on its output quality objectives. We
then ask if quality upgrading motives are—empirically—a direct determinant of integration decisions; that
is, whether a manufacturer is more likely to integrate its suppliers when its returns to shifting from low
to high quality production are higher. Next, we explore the mechanisms through which output quality
objectives may impact integration decisions. We estimate how organizational structure affects supplier
behavior, focusing particularly on “switchers”—suppliers who supply the same plant before and after being
integrated (or sold). To conclude, we investigate whether integration ultimately raises output quality.
    There are several reasons why unique data is available on the fishmeal industry in Peru. The regulatory
authorities record all transactions between fishmeal plants and suppliers, and require firms to report each of
their plants’ production of fishmeal in the “prime” (high) quality and the “fair average” (low) quality range
each month, providing a direct measure of quality.4 We can link these input and output quantities to all ex-
   1 Empirical work on the causes and consequences of firms’ choice of organizational structure in developing countries began in

earnest with Woodruff (2002). Gibbons (2005a); Lafontaine & Slade (2007); Bresnahan & Levin (2012) provide excellent overviews of
the broader literature on firms’ structure.
   2 See e.g. Sutton (1991, 1998); Hallak (2006); Verhoogen (2008); Manova & Zhang (2012); Atkin et al. (2017); Bastos et al. (2018).
   3 Fishmeal is a brown powder made by burning or steaming fish, and mostly used as animal feed. Peru’s fishmeal industry accounts

for around 3 percent of GDP (Paredes & Gutierrez, 2008; De La Puente et al. , 2011). Price differentials across shipments of a given
quality level in a given time period are negligible (see Sub-section 2.2).
   4 See Goldberg & Pavcnik (2007); Khandelwal (2010); Hallak & Schott (2011) for discussion of the indirect quality proxies used in the




                                                                   2
port transactions, which are recorded in customs data. Furthermore, researchers—but not manufacturers—
directly observe both independent and integrated suppliers’ behavior because fishing boats are required to
transmit GPS signals to the regulatory authorities.5 In combination, these data sources allow us to track the
flow of goods—from suppliers, to manufacturers, to foreign buyers—and provide the measures of output
quality and firm-supplier transactions necessary to establish a correlation between the quality of a firm’s
output and the organizational structure of its production chain.
    However, even if documented with ideal data, such a correlation may reflect third factors rather than
an explicit organizational choice made in order to “climb” the quality ladder. It could be, for example,
that productivity or demand affect both firms’ choice of structure and products produced without the two
being directly related. It could also be that firms integrate for reasons other than quality—for example to
assure their own or restrict competitors’ general access to inputs—but in the process coincidentally produce
higher quality output. To identify a direct relationship between output quality objectives and integration,
exogenous variation in incentives to upgrade quality—the quality premium—that firms are differentially
exposed to is needed.
    The quality premium facing Peruvian fishmeal firms varies considerably during the period we study.
This allows us to test our causal hypothesis. Our empirical strategy exploits season-to-season variation in
the quality premium that is driven by fluctuations in the regulatory fishing quota-driven supply of high (and
low) quality fishmeal in countries other that Peru. We construct an instrument for the quality premium, and
test whether these fluctuations affect firms differently depending on their scope for upgrading quality.
    We begin our analysis with a stylized model, which demonstrates how characteristics of the Peruvian
fishmeal industry map directly to the existing theoretical work we build on. Fishmeal manufacturers face
two important contracting challenges. First, the quality of the product’s primary input—fish—is difficult to
observe and, because of its perishable nature, even harder to contract upon. Second, the presence of outside
options—other fishmeal firms who may value input quality less—complicates controlling the incentives of
an independent supplier (see also McMillan & Woodruff, 1999).6 Holmstrom & Milgrom (1991) elegantly
demonstrate how, when suppliers face a trade-off between producing inputs of high quality or in high
volumes, weakening incentives over easier-to-measure quantity may be necessary to ensure that suppliers
do not neglect quality (see also Holmstrom & Tirole, 1991; Holmstrom, 1999). In many situations, the best or
only way to do so may be to bring the suppliers inside the firm (Baker et al. , 2001, 2002; Gibbons, 2005a,b).
    To take these textbook theoretical insights to the data, we first demonstrate that output quality is in
fact significantly positively correlated with integration. Our primary measure of quality is the share of a
firm’s output that is of high quality grade—which we directly observe in production data. We also consider
the average fine-grained quality grade of a firm’s output, as inferred in exports and auxiliary price data.
Our primary measure of integration is the fraction of inputs that are sourced from integrated suppliers
existing literature, which risk conflating quality with mark-ups and horizontal differentiation, and Atkin et al. (2017) for an example
of direct measures of quality.
    5 The regulators do not allow manufacturers to access data on the behavior of independent suppliers. This is the primary reason

why manufacturers and independent suppliers cannot contract over GPS-measured actions.
    6 It is in theory possible to imperfectly measure fish quality with chemical tests. As discussed in Section 2, industry insiders informed

us that such tests were much too expensive and impractical to use during our data period. Alternatively, manufacturers and their
suppliers could attempt to contract on plants’ output quality. This would be difficult because of noise—input from multiple suppliers
is, for technological reasons, typically used in a given batch of fishmeal, and other hard-to-measure exogenous factors also influence
output quality realizations—and, more importantly, because outside inspectors would need to be able to determine if low output
quality was due to poor input quality or actions taken by the fishmeal plant itself during the production process. The dynamic version
of our model in Appendix B demonstrates why the presence of other fishmeal manufacturers who value input quality less can make
repeated interactions solutions to these challenges infeasible.



                                                                     3
(“Share VI”)—a measure that is closely tied to the hypothesis that integration and output quality are causally
linked.7 Alternatively, we also consider the number of suppliers owned. The relationship we establish holds
across each of these measures of a firm’s output quality and organizational structure at a given point in time.
    We then proceed to our central empirical analysis, which consists of three key pieces of evidence. The
first of these—and this paper’s main finding—shows that vertical integration is used by firms as a strategy
for increasing output quality. To demonstrate this causally, we develop an IV for firm-specific incentives
to upgrade quality. We instrument for the quality premium—the difference between the price of high and
low quality grades—using the quantities produced by other top exporters. Because the other top exporters
specialize in particular quality grades (e.g. Norway produces primarily high quality fishmeal, while Thai-
land produces primarily low quality), and because their production quantities are driven by country specific
regulatory fishing quotas, these quantities generate plausibly exogenous variation in the premium. We test
if this variation differentially impacts Peruvian firms’ integration decisions depending on their firm-specific
scope for upgrading quality. When the quality premium is high, firms producing mostly low quality output
face strong incentives to shift low to high quality production. Firms already producing mostly high quality
output face less strong incentives to do so. The opposite holds when the quality premium is low.
    We find that Peruvian manufacturers integrate when their incentives to upgrade quality rise, and vice
versa.8 In an alternative approach shown in the Appendix, we exploit a different form of variation to show
that firms similarly integrate when faced with greater firm-specific relative demand for high quality output.
Finally, and crucially, we show that firms’ organizational response to the quality premium does not reflect
associated income shocks or general incentives to expand production of any-quality fishmeal: firms do not
integrate suppliers when faced with higher average prices.
    This first piece of evidence is hard to reconcile with alternative theories in which higher output quality
is an unforeseen by-product of vertical integration driven by other motives, and with stories wherein orga-
nizational structure and output quality are not causally linked in the “minds” of firms. Our results indicate
that quality upgrading itself is an important motive for integrating suppliers.9
    Next we explore why firms use integration as a strategy for upgrading quality. Our second key piece
of evidence shows that integration changes suppliers’ behavior, causing them to shift towards quality-
increasing actions. We proxy for actions that increase input quality—i.e., fish freshness (FAO, 1986)10 —using
GPS-based measures. We show that a given supplier supplying a given plant delivers lower total quantities, but
inputs whose quality has been better maintained, when integrated with the plant. We also show that, in the
context we study, it is integration per se—not repeated interactions—that influences a supplier’s quantity-
    7 If integration directly affects output quality, it presumably does so through firms’ (and individual plants’) production process—that

is, use of integrated versus independent suppliers. Since boats’ total seasonal catch is governed by a quota—and boats almost always
exhaust their quota over the course of a season—Peruvian fishmeal manufacturers can generally increase the total amount of inputs
they obtain from integrated suppliers in a given production season only by acquiring suppliers (see Section 2). On use of integrated
versus independent suppliers, see also, among others, Baker & Hubbard (2003); Breza & Liberman (2017).
    8 The long-term trend is towards more integration in the Peruvian fishmeal industry, and the long-term trends in demand for quality

and average output quality in Peru are also positive. These broad patterns are consistent with our hypothesis. However, it is higher
frequency variation around the long-term trends that we exploit to test our hypothesis. For example, we also observe de-integration
during our data period—sales of boats from fishmeal firms to independent co-ops or captains, and from one fishmeal firm to another.
    9 Several of the most prominent alternative explanations are also inconsistent with other features of the context we study and

auxiliary findings. We show e.g. that the relationship between output quality and integration holds when we control for a firm’s
share of the industry’s total production, in contrast to what traditional “foreclosure” theories would predict. Similarly, Peruvian fish-
meal manufacturers appear to achieve general supply assurance primarily through repeated interactions with independent suppliers
(Martinez-Carrasco, 2017); the quantity supplied by a given supplier to a given firm is lower after integration (/before de-integration).
   10 “Freshness of raw material is important in its effect on the quality of the protein in [quality of] the end product [fishmeal]. The

importance of minimizing the time between catching fish and processing, and of keeping the fish at low temperatures by icing [which
reduces the amount of fish a boat can fit], has already been mentioned” (FAO, 1986, sub-section 10.1.2).



                                                                    4
versus-quality behavior. This result is consistent with a dynamic version of our model—both are shown in
Appendix B—and with the fact that suppliers that de-integrate from a firm/plant supply that firm/plant al-
most as often after the change in status. Finally, we consider the possibility that integration affects behavior
not via a supplier’s quantity-quality trade-off, but instead via associated knowledge transfers (Atalay et al.
, 2014). We show that a given supplier behaves “as an integrated supplier” only when supplying its owner
firm, and not when owned by one firm but supplying another. Though we ultimately cannot rule out that
other incentives emanating from organizational structure itself also help explain the impact of integration
on supplier behavior, reconciling this finding with pure knowledge transfer theories is challenging.
    Our third piece of evidence suggests that vertical integration in fact increases output quality. We first
show that the firm level relationship between the share of inputs coming from integrated suppliers—Share
VI—and output quality holds also at the individual plant level, including within firms. We then instrument
for a plant’s Share VI using a leave-firm-supplied-out measure of the local presence of a particular type of
supplier that is regulatorily prohibited from being integrated. The presence of such suppliers fluctuates
due to natural variation in fish density, weather, and decisions made by their captains. The logic behind
the instrument is simply that a plant—holding fixed output quality objectives—will be forced to source a
higher share of its inputs from integrated suppliers when there happens to be a local scarcity of independent
suppliers.11 The IV estimates are very similar to OLS estimates.
    When viewed through the lens of our model, the three key pieces of evidence we present each follow
logically from each other. We conclude that firms vertically integrate in order to produce higher quality
products, and that the reason they do so appears to be that integration changes supplier behavior in a way
that increases output quality.
    A natural question is whether our results are specific to Peru’s fishmeal industry. However, because
input quality is so frequently difficult to observe (and hence incentivize), the challenges we describe—while
far from universal—are likely typical of industries producing vertically differentiated output, particularly
in settings where contracts are difficult to enforce.12 In the concluding section of the paper, we document a
positive relationship between (a proxy for) the average quality of a given type of manufacturing product a
country exports to the U.S. and the average degree of vertical integration among the exporters. This provides
suggestive evidence that the relationship between firms’ output quality and organizational structure we
establish in this paper may hold more broadly in export manufacturing industries.
    Our study bridges and advances the literatures on the boundaries of the firm and quality upgrading.13
We make three contributions to the former. First, we identify an overlooked motivation for vertical inte-
gration. By showing that firms vertically integrate in order to raise output quality, we advance the body of
work on the causes of organizational form (for early empirical work, see Hart et al. (1997); Baker & Hub-
bard (2003, 2004); Forbes & Lederman (2009)). Existing studies convincingly demonstrate how firms change
their relative use of integrated suppliers in response to changes in e.g. available contracts (Breza & Liber-
man, 2017) or monitoring technology (Baker & Hubbard, 2003). We instead study how firms change their
  11 Plausible arguments against the exclusion restriction underlying our interpretation of the IV results would require a positive sign

on the first stage (negative correlation between the use of independent suppliers by different plants in a locality), a negative sign
on the second stage (use of independent suppliers increasing output quality), and/or a time-varying, location level component of
output quality (that goes beyond the presence of independent suppliers)—none of which we find. The IV results are very similar if we
instrument with the total number of independent suppliers present, rather than the subset that is independent by law.
  12 There is a robust relationship between countries’ input-output structure and their level of contract enforcement (Nunn, 2007;

Boehm, 2016), and vertical integration is more common in developing countries (Acemoglu et al. , 2009; Macchiavello, 2011).
  13 There is also a prominent literature studying the relationship between integration and international trade (Antràs (2014, 2016)

provides excellent overviews of this literature), but our focus is on firms’ domestic organizational structure.


                                                                   5
organizational structure when their output objectives change.14
    Second, and building on earlier studies of the behavior of integrated and independent suppliers (Mul-
lainathan & Sharfstein, 2001; Baker & Hubbard, 2003, 2004; Macchiavello & Miquel-Florensa, 2016), we pro-
vide what to our knowledge is the first evidence on how integration changes the quality-oriented behavior
of a given supplier supplying a given firm.15
    Finally, we show that vertically integrating raises output quality, which to our knowledge has not been
done before. The one-dimensional nature of quality differentiation in our setting allows us to document
this.16 In general, there is little existing evidence on causal consequences of organizational structure for firm
performance (see Gibbons & Roberts (2013), and Forbes & Lederman (2010) for a notable exception). Our
results also imply that using independent suppliers is often efficient for producing output in high volumes
rather than of high quality (see also Kosová et al. , 2013). An especially unusual aspect of this paper is
that the data and variation we exploit allow us to identify both the effectiveness of particular firm strategy
and corresponding determinants of its use. We can therefore show that Peruvian fishmeal manufacturers
vertically integrate when quality objectives indicate that they should do so.17
    Both the friction—imperfect contracting over input quality—and the firm objective—producing high
quality output—we focus on are especially relevant for poorer countries attempting to help meet growing
global demand for quality. This connects our paper with a smaller empirical literature on the causes and
consequences of firms’ choice of organizational structure in the developing world that began with Woodruff
(2002)’s landmark study (see also Natividad, 2014; Macchiavello & Miquel-Florensa, 2016; Martinez-Carrasco,
2017).18
    The literature on quality upgrading is larger. It is now well-documented that producers of high qual-
ity goods use high quality inputs (Kugler & Verhoogen, 2012; Halpern et al. , 2015; Amodio & Martinez-
Carrasco, 2018; Bastos et al. , 2018), skilled workers (Verhoogen, 2008; Frías et al. , 2009; Brambilla et al. , 2012;
Brambilla & Porto, 2016; Brambilla et al. , forthcoming), and export to richer destinations (Hallak, 2006; Ver-
hoogen, 2008; Manova & Zhang, 2012; Atkin et al. , 2017; Bastos et al. , 2018). Firms with such a profile tend
on average to be bigger, more productive, based in richer countries themselves, and to face foreign competi-
tion in low-quality segments (Schott, 2004; Hummels & Klenow, 2005; Baldwin & Harrigan, 2011; Johnson,
2012; Medina, 2017). We provide the first evidence linking quality upgrading to the boundaries of the firm.
   14 In a superficial sense, our finding that higher average fishmeal prices do not lead to more integration in the Peruvian fishmeal

industry contrasts with the innovative work of Alfaro et al. (2016). We see our results as largely consistent with and complementary to
theirs, however. Both their analysis and ours emphasize the impact of prices in the context of certain goods—in our case high quality
products—where integration generates a gain in efficiency. We highlight that this efficiency gain is not generic, but rather depends on
firms’ quality objectives, while they emphasize that efficiency gains can also depend on the need to coordinate production stages.
   15 We follow Atalay et al. (2014) in exploiting changes in integration within supplier-firm pairs. They focus on transfers of knowledge.
   16 In settings where product differentiation is multidimensional, an analysis like ours would be difficult. Like this paper, the pio-

neering study by Forbes & Lederman (2010) exploits exogenous drivers of use of integrated suppliers, showing that routes airlines
self-manage have fewer delays/cancellations (see also Gil et al. , 2016; Gil & Kim, 2016). Other important evidence on the consequences
of organizational structure includes, among others, Novak & Stern (2008); Gil (2009).
   17 Existing empirical papers on firms almost exclusively study either the effectiveness of a strategy or the determinants of its use.
   18 Woodruff finds that forward integration is less common in the Mexican footwear industry when non-contractible investment by

retailers is important, as the property rights framework predicts (Grossman & Hart, 1986; Hart & Moore, 1990). Macchiavello & Miquel-
Florensa (2016) convincingly show how supply assurance motives influence organizational structure in the Costa Rican coffee industry
by relating measures of ex post reneging temptations to ex ante choice of structure (see also Banerjee & Duflo, 2000; Macchiavello &
Morjaria, 2015). We follow Natividad (2014) in studying organizational structure in the Peruvian fishmeal industry. He focuses on
an earlier period when an unusual regulatory system—industry-wide fishing quotas—generated common pool incentives famously
overshadowing other forms of supplier/plant incentives (see e.g. Tveteras et al. , 2011), which lead to an “Olympic race” for fish.




                                                                    6
2      Background on Peru’s Fishmeal Manufacturing Sector
In this section we provide an overview of Peru’s fishmeal manufacturing sector. We argue that three features
are particularly salient for firms attempting to source high quality inputs: input quantity is measurable at
the time of delivery, but input quality is not, and formal contracts appear to be difficult to write.


2.1     Sector profile
Fishmeal is a brown powder made by burning or steaming fish (in Peru, the anchoveta), and is primarily
used as feed for agriculture and aquaculture. Peru makes up around 30 percent of the world’s fishmeal
exports. During our data period, 2009 to 2016, around 95 percent of the country’s total fishmeal production
was exported. The three largest buyers are China, Germany, and Japan, but many other countries also
import Peruvian fishmeal (see Appendix Table A1).
      Fishmeal is produced in manufacturing plants located along the coast of Peru, of which there were
94 in 2009. These plants were in turn owned by 37 firms. There is heterogeneity in processing capacity,
technology, and the share of production that is of high quality grade across both firms and individual plants
in our sample. Firms differ considerably in their average number of export transactions per season, and in
the size and value of their shipments. As seen in Appendix Figure A1, firm size correlates positively with
average quality grade produced.
      Plants receive inputs of raw fish from their suppliers. The suppliers may be large steel boats—which
may be independent or owned by the firm that owns the plant—or smaller wooden boats. Regulations
prohibit fishmeal firms from owning wooden boats. There are on average 812 boats active in a given season,
and significant heterogeneity in boat characteristics such as storage capacity, engine power, and average
quantity caught per trip. Fishing trips last 21 hours (s.d. = 10 hours) and boats travel 76 kilometers away
from the port of delivery (s.d. = 46 kilometers) on average. Changes in installed technology are observed in
our data but rare both for boats and plants. Table 1 shows summary statistics, providing further detail on
the sector.
      Since 2009, boats in Peru have operated under Individual Transferable Quotas (ITQs), a common re-
source management system used in fisheries and natural resource sectors worldwide. Individual boats are
assigned a share of an industry-wide quota. We limit our analysis to the time period after ITQs were imple-
mented to avoid any potential changes in quality production or integration driven by the quota system.


2.2     Product differentiation and quality
An important feature of fishmeal is that output quality effectively depends on a single—measurable—
dimension: protein content. Batches with protein content above a specified percentage are labeled “prime”
quality, and plants report their production of prime and “fair average” (below prime) quality fishmeal to
regulatory authorities each month. Price differentials across transactions for Peruvian fishmeal of a given
quality grade in a given time period are negligible, highlighting the horizontal homogeneity of the product.
      Fishmeal’s protein content depends crucially on input characteristics, namely the freshness and integrity
of the raw fish that boats deliver (see e.g. FAO, 1986). Freshness at the time of delivery in turn depends on
choices made by the boat’s captain before and during a trip, such as the amount of ice brought on board,




                                                        7
how tightly fish is packed, and the time spent between a catch and delivery to a plant (FAO, 1986). Because
of the relationship between freshness and output quality, fish is processed as soon as possible after offload.
   While it is easy to weigh and determine the quantity of fish a boat delivers, it is difficult to quantify or
measure fish freshness directly. In theory, chemical tests of total volatile nitrogen content can be used to do
so (imperfectly), but such tests were too costly and time-consuming to be usable in Peru during our data
period. In addition to the fixed cost of (the human and physical capital required for) adoption, this was due
to high marginal cost of use and the value lost if fish was not processed immediately after offload. Footnote
6 discusses the extent to which input quality can be inferred from output quality post-production.
   After offload, the fish is weighed, cleaned, and converted to fishmeal using one of two technologies:
steam drying (hereinafter “High technology”) or exposing the fish directly to heat (hereinafter “Low tech-
nology”). The technology used can matter for the protein content achieved.
   Peru allows anchovy fishing for fishmeal production during two seasons each year and because of the
need for fresh fish, fishmeal plants operate only during the fishing seasons. There were thus 14 fishing
and fishmeal production seasons during our 2009-2016 study period. In theory fishmeal can be stored for a
short period of time, but we find that almost all is sold before the next production season begins, as shown
in Appendix Figure A2 and discussed below.


2.3     Organizational structure
Consistent with our hypothesis, both integration and average output quality have slowly increased over
time in the Peruvian fishmeal industry. However, these long-term trends are not the source of the relation-
ship between organizational structure and quality upgrading we establish in this paper. This is because our
empirical strategy exploits variation around the long-term trends for identification.
      There is significant buying and selling of suppliers during our sample period. As seen in Panel A of
Table 2, we observe 317 instances where ownership of a steel boat changes hands. In 103 of these instances,
a fishmeal firm acquires a supplier that is initially owned independently, that is, by a co-op or an individual
captain. However, we also observe 32 instances where a supplier is sold from a fishmeal firm to an inde-
pendent buyer, and 50 instances where a supplier is sold from one fishmeal firm to another. On average, 28
percent of the boats that are active in a given season are integrated with a fishmeal firm.
      In our data, we observe not only supplier ownership but also deliveries from integrated and independent
suppliers. We can therefore construct a measure of the vertical structure of firms’ production process, namely
the share of inputs coming from integrated suppliers (“Share VI”). Peruvian fishmeal manufacturers’ Share
VI is on average 45 percent. Firms can generally increase or decrease the total amount of inputs that come
from integrated suppliers only by buying or selling boats. The reason is that a boat’s total catch in a given
season is governed by a regulatory quota, and each boat typically exhausts its quota. Of course, a firm may
vary its Share VI also by increasing or decreasing its use of independent suppliers. As seen in Appendix
Figure A3, and following the trend in ownership, Share VI slowly increased during our data period—by 2.9
percent from season to season. Approximately 77 percent of this growth came solely from increasing the
amount of input coming from integrated suppliers, and the rest from lower total input purchases, as shown
in Panel B of Table 2.
      Importantly for our purposes, Share VI can be defined not just for firms, but also for individual plants
within firms. A plant’s Share VI at a given point in time depends mostly on the organizational structure of the


                                                       8
firm the plant belongs to, but there is significant variation across plants within the same firm. This variation
depends both on the extent to which firm managers direct integrated suppliers to deliver to one plant over
another, and on the presence of independent suppliers near a given plant. The latter varies considerably
over time, and depends on variation in weather, fish density, and independent captains’ decisions.
      Figure 1 shows that integration and de-integration primarily represents a change in the formal status of
the relationship between a firm/plant and a supplier engaged in frequent and continuing interactions. The
figure displays the fraction of trips suppliers deliver to various firms and plants. The top part of the figure
focuses on all boats, while the bottom part of the figure restricts attention to the “switchers” we focus on
in our empirical analysis of supplier behavior in Section 6. These switchers—suppliers that get integrated
or sold—deliver to the plant (within the acquiring/selling firm) they interact with most frequently around
41 percent of the time when independent (i.e. before getting acquired or after getting sold), and around 45
percent of the time when integrated. Similarly, switchers deliver to the acquiring/selling firm around 63
percent of the time when independent and around 81 percent of the time when integrated.19


2.4     Contracting and supplier incentives
There is no centralized spot market for fish purchases: plants are spread out along the coast, in part because
the fish move around. Where a boat makes a catch thus constrains the set of ports it can deliver to. Because
of the importance of fish freshness, independent captains typically begin contacting plants over the radio
on their way to a port after fishing.
      We interviewed fishmeal industry associations, a major company’s Chief Operating Officer, and others in
the sector to gain a qualitative understanding of the characteristics of the contracts used and the incentives
suppliers face. The interviewees reported that captains of boats owned by fishmeal firms generally are paid
a fixed wage, in some cases with a bonus tied to some measure of performance.20
      We are not aware of formal contracts between independent suppliers and firms over when, where,
or what quality of fish to deliver. Interviewees reported that payments to independent suppliers—while
agreed upon case by case—are typically simply the quantity multiplied by a going price. We use internal
data on payments to suppliers from a large firm to confirm this. These indicate that independent suppliers
at a given point in time are paid a price per metric ton of fish delivered that is essentially fixed: Port×Date
fixed effects explain 99 percent of the price variation across transactions.
      Our data on suppliers’ behavior—discussed in Section 4—come from a map the regulators update roughly
every hour using the GPS signals all boats are required to transmit to authorities while fishing. Firms are
allowed to access information on their integrated suppliers’ whereabouts if they install the required tech-
nology, but not the GPS data of independent suppliers or those owned by other firms. This is a primary
reason why manufacturers and independent suppliers cannot contract over GPS-measured actions.
  19 In the top part of the figure, we see that, as a whole, integrated suppliers deliver to the firm they deliver to most often (i.e., the

parent firm) about 90 percent of their trips, and the plant they deliver to most often 38 percent of trips. Independent suppliers deliver
to the firm they deliver to most often around 65 percent of trips, and the plant they deliver to most often 45 percent of trips.
  20 The fishmeal industry associations reported that payment schemes vary across firms; that some pay bonuses tied to measures of

performance; but that these are on top of a fixed wage and usually small.




                                                                    9
3      Theoretical Framework

3.1     Description
In this section we present a simple model to highlight how vertical integration may resolve the contracting
issues facing downstream firms that aim to produce high quality output. The intuition of the model is based
on two insights. First, high powered incentives to produce quantity can lead to actions that are wasteful
and even harmful to quality. Second, the open market provides independent suppliers strong incentives
to produce quantity and, in a setting where contracts are difficult to write, the only way to temper those
incentives may be to integrate.
      The first point of intuition above—the tradeoff between quality and quantity—is one of the classic exam-
ples of the challenges of designing incentives in a multitask environment, and in fact is used by Holmstrom
& Milgrom (1991) to motivate their seminal work. This is for the simple reason that input quantity is typ-
ically straightforward to measure and reward, while quality is not. As a result, care must be taken not to
over-incentivize quantity to the detriment of quality.
      Of course, the difficulty of determining quality is somewhat of a stereotype: there are goods for which
quality depends on something like strength or size or durability that is just as easy to measure as quantity.
However, in our setting, this stereotype seems broadly accurate. While the quantity of fish that suppliers de-
liver is easily measured, the quality of that fish is difficult to ascertain for a purchasing manager examining
several tons of anchoveta.
      A few pieces of context are helpful to understand the second point of intuition above. Firstly, it appears
that contracts are difficult to write ex-ante: independent suppliers retain their right to deliver their catch
where they choose. Additionally, while some firms primarily produce high protein content fishmeal, others
primarily produce low quality grades, and hence provide a (presumably less quality sensitive) alternative
for suppliers to deliver their catch.21
      With this in mind, a logic applies that is familiar from the models presented in Baker et al. (2001, 2002),
based on the notion of integration as asset ownership that follows Grossman & Hart (1986). Even if a firm
interested in sourcing high quality inputs has no interest in high volumes, the fact that an independent
supplier has the option to sell its inputs to an alternative downstream firm that values quantity creates
powerful incentives. The independent supplier will then invest in producing quantity—although it may
be wasteful or detrimental—if only to improve its bargaining position with the quality focused firm. By
acquiring the supplier, the manufacturer removes this outside option, and hence any incentive for wasteful
or harmful investment in quantity. In this sense, integration is valuable precisely because it mutes the power
of market incentives, a notion that has been described by Williamson (1971), Holmstrom & Milgrom (1994),
and Gibbons (2005a), among others.


3.2     Model details
We consider a static game with two actors: suppliers and high quality firms. Suppliers take costly actions
to produce a good that is valuable both to the firms and in an alternative use. They may be integrated or
independent. If the suppliers are integrated, the firms that own them have the right to the good after the
  21 A question that our model abstracts from is why firms might want to produce different quality levels simultaneously. We return

to this question at the end of Section 3.



                                                                10
actions are taken. If the suppliers are independent, they retain the right to the good. They bargain with the
high quality firms over whether to deliver the good or consign it to its alternative use.
                                                                                                                  1 2
    We assume that suppliers have two potential actions {a1 , a2 }, with costs c(a1 , a2 ) =   + 21 a22 . These   2 a1
actions impact the surplus created by delivering their inputs to a downstream quality focused firm. We
denote this surplus by Q, and refer to it as the quality surplus. Suppliers’ actions also impact the surplus
they receive by delivering the inputs to an alternative—quantity focused—downstream firm. We denote
this by P , and refer to it as the quantity surplus. We assume that the good is specific, in the sense that
Q > P . In particular, we define:

                                                      P = a1
                                                      Q = Q0 − γa1 + δa2 .

with γ, δ ≥ 0.22 In this sense, a1 is a quantity focused action, while a2 is a quality focused action. While
this is a simplified model, a1 can be thought of along the lines of fishing for extended periods to catch the
maximum amount, traveling long distances to find fish in high volumes, or packing the hold tightly with
fish. On the other hand, a2 can be thought of as carrying extra ice on board to keep the catch cool, or taking
care to ensure that the fish are not crushed. Q0 is a baseline level of quality surplus.23 Note also that a1
enters negatively in Q, to capture the notion that actions taken to increase the quantity caught, such as
packing the hold tightly with fish, often adversely affect quality.
    We assume that neither P nor Q is contractible, but that P —the quantity surplus—is perfectly observable
at the time of bargaining and Q—the quality surplus—is not. All parties know the value of Q0 , and because
P = a1 is observable, Q in effect has an observable portion: Q̃ = Q0 − γa1 = Q − δa2 .


Integrated suppliers

If a supplier is integrated, the firm has rights to the supplier’s catch. However, because the firm cannot
write contracts over Q and P , it cannot credibly commit to rewarding the supplier’s actions. As a result, the
supplier chooses a1 = 0 and a2 = 0, and the total surplus is simply Q0 .


Independent suppliers

Although neither Q nor P is contractible24 , the firm and supplier may bargain ex-post over the price of
the delivery. We assume a Nash bargaining concept, with the supplier’s bargaining coefficient equal to α.
Because the supplier can always deliver its catch to the alternative quantity focused firm and receive P ,
the supplier must always receive at least P . The supplier additionally receives a share α of the observable
portion of the surplus Q̃ − P that accrues to the firm: α(Q0 − γP − P ). As a result, an independent supplier
solves the problem:

                                                                    1     1
                                          max αQ0 + (1 − αγ − α)a1 − a21 − a22
                                          a1 ,a2                    2     2
  22 More specifically, we assume that 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 − α. Also, note that P could itself be the result of a bargaining process

between the boat and a quantity focused firm.
  23 This can be thought of as the amount that suppliers will catch before exerting any costly action, or perhaps more reasonably as the

result of some limited contractual agreement that we abstract from.
  24 Alternatively, we could assume that only a portion of Q and P is non-contractible, and that we consider only this portion as in

Baker et al. (2002).


                                                                  11
      This gives: a1 = (1 − αγ − α), a2 = 0, and social surplus is

                                                        1
                                   Q0 − γ (1 − αγ − α) − (1 − αγ − α)2 < Q0
                                                        2

      Because of the counterproductive actions to increase quantity (a1 > 0), and the adverse effects of those
actions on the quality surplus, the surplus is lower when the suppliers are independent. As a result, the
more efficient organizational structure to produce quality is vertical integration.
      It is worth noting that a number of assumptions made in this model are not strictly necessary to get
this result. The relative efficiency of integration holds whether or not quantity focused actions directly
negatively impacts the quality surplus (because of the inefficiency of quality actions), and would hold even
more strongly if, for example, there were complementarities in the costs of quality and quantity actions.


3.3     Discussion
The theoretical role of vertical integration is a contentious topic. Our framing follows Baker et al. (2001,
2002) in combining elements of the incentives based theories in the tradition Holmstrom & Milgrom (1991)
and the property rights theories in the vein of Grossman & Hart (1986). Such a framing is not the only type
of model that would produce a relationship between integration and output quality. In actuality, integration
is a complex organizational change whose causes and consequences operate through multiple mechanisms.
However, because the foundations of the model above depend on a series of salient features of our context—
unobservable quality, observable quantity, and alternative buyers that are less concerned with quality—
and because we are able to directly test the predictions of the model, we see these alternative theories as
complementary to the mechanisms our framework focuses on, rather than contradictory.
      Our model presents a highly stylized, and somewhat stark, example to highlight a key intuition: that
integration can act as a valuable tool for muting the incentives provided in the open market. We believe
this starkness most simply portrays why firms in our context might want to integrate in order to produce
high quality output. That said, this oversimplification does have a few drawbacks, most notably the lack of
incentive to take quality focused actions, and to take any actions at all when integrated. This is in some sense
a strong version of what are sometimes called the drone employees (Gibbons, 2005a) that appear in property
rights theories of the firm that follow Grossman & Hart (1986). However, this feature may be easily remedied
in more complex models that preserve the basic intuition and result. For example, assuming observability
over Q induces quality focused actions among independent suppliers and—for sufficiently small values of
δ—does not affect the main result. Perhaps more realistically, introducing dynamics into the model, with
long-term relationships between firms and suppliers, creates an environment in which the incentives of the
downstream and the upstream parties can be aligned through repeated interactions.
      In Appendix B, we present and test the empirical implications of exactly such a dynamic model, in which
we allow the downstream party to use relational contracts to incentivize the quality action. We posit that
Q—the quality surplus—can be observed to the downstream party but only with some lag (e.g. once the
inputs are processed and output quality is measurable). The firm can then offer the supplier a (delayed)
reward contingent on this surplus, but can only credibly promise to pay this reward if it interacts repeatedly
with the upstream party. In this context, we show that the value of the relationship can incentivize the
supplier to take the first best actions, but that this sort of relational contract may be difficult to sustain if the



                                                         12
supplier is independent. The intuition for this result is similar to our static baseline: independent suppliers
own the rights over the inputs, and when the value of these inputs in their alternative use is high, they face
incentives to renege on the relational contract and sell the goods in their alternative use.
      Our model above also implicitly demonstrates the costs of integration. The market provides strong in-
centives for quantity, and for a low quality firm that is aiming to produce quantity, integration would only
interfere with and lessen the strength of these incentives. Accordingly, quantity focused firms prefer inde-
pendent suppliers. A similarly formulated model, with the roles of high and low quality firms switched
(e.g. P >> Q), provides precisely this result.
      In our stylized model, firms are either quality-oriented or not. In reality, a firm’s output objectives are
likely a combination of quality surplus and quantity surplus in which the weight attached to each depends
on the demand the firm faces at a particular point in time. In this case, firms should not source all inputs
from either integrated or non-integrated suppliers, but choose an intermediate organizational structure—
that is, an intermediate level of integration—that depends on the relative importance of Q and P in the
firm’s current objective function.
      The framework presented in this section motivates three empirical predictions that we test in the remain-
der of the paper:

    1. Firms’ organizational structure responds to variation in the relative profitability of producing high
        quality output. An increase in the quality premium—for example due to increased demand for high
        quality grades—leads to more integration, that is, a higher share of inputs from sourced from inte-
        grated suppliers.

    2. The reason is that the actions of a supplier differ when the supplier is integrated. In particular, suppli-
        ers that get integrated reduce their effort to produce quantity, especially in ways that benefit quality.

    3. As a result, the degree to which a firm or plant uses integrated suppliers affects output quality. Firms
        that use inputs from integrated suppliers produce higher quality output.


4      Data, Variables, and the Relationship of Interest

4.1     Data
The primary datasets we use to test our three predictions are the following:
      Plant production. Administrative data on all plants’ production come from Peru’s Ministry of Produc-
tion, which regulates the fishmeal industry. Every month plants are required to submit information on how
much prime (high quality) and fair average (low quality) fishmeal they produce. Quality grade is thus di-
rectly reported in the plant production data, and subject to auditing by government inspectors. As discussed
in Sub-section 2.2, the distinction between prime and fair average quality is based on the fishmeal’s protein
content. From these records, we construct each individual plant’s and each firm’s “high quality share of
production” in a given month or production season.
      Plant registry. We link the production data with an administrative plant registry that contains monthly
information on each plant’s (i) technological production capacity and (ii) owner, typically a multi-plant




                                                         13
fishmeal firm.25 We also use this registry to link the production data to export data. We can do so for almost
all firms, but not the smallest firms, which use intermediaries to export.
      Export transactions. Detailed data on the universe of fishmeal exports at the transaction level come from
Peru’s customs authority. We observe the date of the transaction, the export port, the destination country,
the weight of the fishmeal, the value of the transaction, and the exporting firm.
      Internal data from a large firm. One of the largest fishmeal firms in Peru shared its internal sales records
with us. The firm owns many plants along the coast. The sales records include information on the ship-
ment’s packing, its free-on-board value, the price per metric ton, the buyer, destination country, date of
the contract, and the terms. Most importantly for our purposes, the specific plant that produced a given
shipment of fishmeal is reported.
      Supply transactions. The Ministry of Production records all transactions between the fishmeal plants
and their suppliers of raw materials, i.e. fishing boats. Information on the date of the transaction, the boat,
the plant, and the amount of fish involved (though not the price), is included.
      Boat registry. We merge the supply transactions data with an administrative boat registry that provides
information on a boat’s owner, the material the boat is made of, its storage capacity and engine power, and
whether it has a cooling system installed.26
      Boat GPS data. Peruvian fishing boats that supply fishmeal plants are required to have a GPS tracking
system installed, and to continuously transmit their GPS signal to the Ministry of Production while at sea.
The ministry stores the transmitted information—the boat’s ID, latitude, longitude, speed, and direction—
each hour on average, and shared the resulting dataset with us.27


4.2     Variables of interest
Our primary measure of an individual plant’s output quality is the share of the fishmeal the plant produces
in a given month that is of “prime” quality grades—a direct measure of quality whose interpretation re-
quires no assumptions. We aggregate this measure up to firm level to construct a corresponding measure of
a firm’s “high quality share of production”.
      We also construct a granular measure of the average quality grade—protein content—of the fishmeal a
firm produces. While we do not directly observe the exact protein content of each export shipment, we can
go beyond simply using unit prices and approximate the precise quality grade. This is because we observe
quality grade-specific fishmeal prices in detailed (week×export port×protein content level) data recorded
by a fishmeal consulting company. We infer the protein content of each of a firm’s export shipments by
comparing the corresponding unit values to this price data. To construct a firm×season level measure, we
average protein content across export shipments, weighting by quantity.28 A priori, we have little reason to
  25 The data contains information on the number of metric tons that can be produced per hour with currently installed Low and High

technology. As very few firms in our sample only have the Low technology, we define a High technology firm as one for which the
High technology share of total processing capacity is higher than the median (0.67).
  26 Information on engine power is only available for 2004-2006. However, changes in engine power are extremely rare in that period,

so we treat this characteristic as fixed over time.
  27 Only about half of the observations in the Supply transactions dataset can be matched to a GPS recording. Some boat owners,

for example, disappear from the GPS data for a complete calendar year. However, such missingness is unlikely to be of concern for
within-boat analysis, the level at which we use the GPS data.
  28 The export transaction records do not report the specific plant that made the fishmeal so the inferred quality grade is only available

at the firm level—except for data covering the fishmeal firm that shared internal data with us, including information on the plant
that produced a given export shipment. One potential concern is that fishmeal can be stored for a short period, and hence firms
could attempt to strategically time their export transactions. In practice the product is almost always sold before the next production
season starts. (The reason why inventories are small—between +10 and -10 percent of total season production (see Appendix Figure


                                                                    14
believe that this inferred protein content measure could be systematically biased.29 Empirically, it is highly
correlated with the “high quality share of production” directly observed for a firm’s plants in production
data, and with the exact quality grade reported in the sales records of a firm that shared its data with us.
      To quantify vertical integration, we consider both the number of suppliers a firm owns, and the correspond-
ing share of inputs used in its production process that come from integrated suppliers (“Share VI”). Share VI is
our preferred measure of integration for a number of reasons. Because we observe all transactions between
plants and suppliers, we can construct Share VI in a consistent manner for both firms and individual plants.
This allows us to move from the across firm comparisons we make in Section 5 to the within firm compar-
isons we make in Section 7. Furthermore, Share VI automatically captures suppliers’ size, allowing us to
avoid assumptions on “scale effects”—e.g. how the benefit of one big integrated supplier compares to two
small ones. Finally, Share VI is the more relevant measure when asking whether organizational structure
and output quality are causally related: if firms vertically integrate when the quality premium rises because
doing so allows them to increase input quality, then it should matter not just if a firm owns suppliers, but
the degree to which the firm as a whole and its individual plants actually source inputs from those suppli-
ers at the time of production. Recall from Sub-section 2.3 that Peruvian fishmeal manufacturers generally
use integrated suppliers to capacity over the course of a season, so in the context we study, Share VI and
supplier ownership are closely related measures of integration.


4.3     Relationship of interest
In Section 5 we begin our analysis of how exogenous changes in incentives to quality upgrade affect inte-
gration decisions. Before doing so, we first demonstrate that the basic relationship predicted by our model
holds empirically: integration and output quality are positively correlated. To do so, we estimate regressions
of the form:
                                   Qualityit = α + β1 VIit + β2 HighTechit + γi + δt + εit                                              (1)

where Qualityit and VIit respectively measure the quality of the output produced by firm i in season t
and how vertically integrated the firm’s organizational structure is in the same season. We control for the
technology the firm uses to convert fish into fishmeal,30 HighTechit , and firm and season fixed effects γi
and δt . We thus estimate changes in output quality for those firms that vertically integrate in a given season,
relative to other firms that do not. We cluster the standard errors at the firm level.
      The results in Panel A of Table 3 point towards a strong baseline relationship between owning suppliers
and output quality. The estimates in column 3 imply, for example, that moving from the 25th to 75th per-
A2)—is likely that many contracts are entered into before the production season starts (which helps the fishmeal manufacturers and
their foreign buyers reduce demand/supply uncertainty), and because firms’ ability to strategically “time” their sales is in actuality
limited). A shipment can thus be traced back to a specific production season (but not a specific production month; constructing the
inferred protein content measure at month level would require an assumption about how firms manage their inventories—for example,
first-in-first-out versus first-in-last-out). A related concern is that firms that are about to end operations and close down might sell off
their fishmeal, in which case a lower unit price might not reflect lower quality but rather a “going-out-of-business” discount. We
thus exclude data from any firm×season observations that correspond to a firm’s last season producing and exporting fishmeal, but
the results are robust to including these observations. These issues are not relevant for our directly observed “high quality share of
production” measure of output quality.
   29 Fishmeal is a vertically differentiated but otherwise homogenous product, and price differentials across shipments of a given

quality level (and across firms producing a given quality level) in a given time period are negligible (see Sub-section 2.2). This implies
that pricing-to-market, bulk discounts, etc, are not a concern.
   30 A firm’s production technology is an important potential determinant of output quality, and one that could plausibly correlate with

organizational structure (Acemoglu et al. , 2007, 2010). We thus control for installed HighTechit , i.e., steam drying (High) technology.
At the firm level, HighTechit is equal to the share of installed capacity that is of the high type.



                                                                    15
centile of number of boats owned is associated with an increase in protein content of just under 10 percent
of the range observed in Peru.31
      In Panel B we show that, beyond simply owning suppliers, what matters for output quality is Share VI:
the share of a firm’s supplies coming from integrated suppliers at the time of production. The results imply that a
firm that uses inputs coming entirely from integrated suppliers rather than inputs entirely from independent
suppliers sees a share of high quality output that is 50 percent higher, and an average protein content that
is higher by about 20 percent of the range observed in Peru.
      In Panel C we show that these results are not not driven by observable, time-varying supplier or firm
characteristics. We control for the firm’s share of total industry production and a series of supplier charac-
teristics. Doing so has little impact on the estimated coefficient.32
      In Appendix B, we consider whether the relationship between output quality and integration might be
the result of long-term supplier-firm relationships, rather than ownership per se. This does not appear to
be the case, as we do not observe the association between quality and the share of inputs coming from
suppliers in long-term relationships that we do for Share VI. In other words, it is integration itself, not the
relationship, that co-varies with output quality. This is in line with the predictions of a dynamic version of
our model, also shown in Appendix B.
      The relationship between a firm’s organizational structure and its output quality that we established in
this sub-section is the starting point of our empirical analysis. This basic relationship is consistent with this
paper’s hypothesis. However, it is also consistent with the alternative theories discussed in the introduction.
In these theories, a correlation between integration and output quality arises, but the relationship is either
not causal or not known to (or ignored by) firms. We rule out such explanations in the next section.


5       The Quality Premium and Organizational Structure
We now show that the relationship between output quality and vertical integration we established in the
previous section reflects an explicit organizational choice firms make in order to “climb” the quality ladder.
Specifically, Peruvian fishmeal manufacturers integrate suppliers when the returns they earn from upgrad-
ing quality rises for exogenous reasons. This finding provides empirical support for the prediction that
a vertically integrated organizational structure is efficient for producing high quality output. We provide
additional evidence that makes clear why this finding is difficult to reconcile with alternative theories.


5.1      Estimating how the quality price premium affects vertical integration
In Table 4, we first show that firms as a whole do vertically integrate when the quality premium is high
and de-integrate when the quality premium is low. We quantify a firm’s decision to integrate (de-integrate)
as a season-to-season increase (decrease) in the share of inputs the firm obtains from integrated suppliers.
Specifically, if VIit is defined as Share VI, we analyze VIit − VIit−1 , where t indicates a season. Column 1
    31 Firmsin the 25th percentile own four boats, while firms in the 75th percentile own 36 boats. β̂ × (asinh(36) − asinh(4)) = 0.43.
The range of protein content observed in Peru is approximately 63-68 percent.
  32 Controlling for the share of inputs coming from steel boats, high capacity boats, and boats with a cooling system leaves the

magnitude and significance of the coefficient on share of inputs coming from VI suppliers essentially unchanged. Note that two
of the supplier characteristics variables included—Share of inputs from high capacity boats and Share of inputs from boats with
cooling system—are significantly correlated with output quality in the cross-section of firms. One reason why the coefficients on these
characteristics are not significant is that we observe little change in these boat characteristics over time. Controlling for the firm’s share
of total industry production also leaves the magnitude and significance of the coefficient on Share VI essentially unchanged.


                                                                     16
shows results from regressing this measure on the quality premium—the difference between the (log) price
of high and low quality fishmeal. We control for firm fixed effects and cluster the standard errors at the firm
level. The positive and significant estimated coefficient on the quality premium seen in the table does not
by itself allow causal conclusions—variation in the quality premium could correlate with other important
factors that influence firms’ organizational choices. But the industry-wide relationship between integration
decisions and the quality premium underscores the general plausibility of the firm level causal relationship
we establish below.
    In column 2 we show that firms’ response to the quality premium is not due to associated income shocks
or general incentives to expand or reduce production. We repeat the regression from column 1, but with the
Log(Average Price)—the average fishmeal price in season t—replacing the quality premium as the regressor
of interest. The estimated coefficient is near zero and insignificant, indicating that firms are not more likely
to vertically integrate when the overall price level is high. Figure 2 highlights that the quality premium in
Peru is at most weakly correlated with average prices in Peru. It is thus not surprising that firms respond
differently to the two.
    To isolate firm-specific incentives to upgrade quality, we categorize firms based on their upgradeable share
of production, or the share of their production that is currently low quality and hence could potentially be up-
graded. For example, a firm currently producing 25 percent high quality output has a 75 percent upgradeable
share of production. Our conjecture is that—when the quality premium is high—firms that produce mostly
low quality output should face greater incentives to quality upgrade than firms which already produce
mostly high quality output. Absent a direct relationship between quality upgrading and vertical integra-
tion, we would expect no differential impact on VIit − VIit−1 for these firms. We thus run the following
specification:

                         VIit − VIit−1 = α + β1 QualityUpgradingIncentivesit                                                           (2)
                                          + β2 UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 + γi + δt + εit

where QualityUpgradingIncentivesit is UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 × QualityPremiumt . Our hy-
pothesis implies that β1 > 0. We control for UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 itself and firm and produc-
tion season fixed effects γi and δt and cluster the standard errors at firm level.
    The approach in (2) is a generalized difference-in-differences in which firms that are more versus less
exposed to changes in quality upgrading incentives are compared in each of 13 different production seasons,
and in each of these 13 seasons the quality premium may be relatively high or relatively low. The season-to-
season variation in the quality premium is shown in Figure 2. While the long-term trend is weakly positive
during our data period, the quality premium fluctuates substantially from season to season, sometimes
rising and other times falling. We thus identify how firms respond to their incentive to produce high rather
than low quality output by comparing integration choices both during periods when the returns to quality
are high and during periods when the returns are low. Additionally, the characteristic that defines a firm’s
exposure to the quality premium at a given point in time—UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 —is itself
controlled for.33
   33 The fact that we control for the characteristic that defines a firm’s exposure to a “treatment” variable that varies across time—here

UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 —distinguishes our approach from traditional Bartik instrument approaches (Goldsmith-Pinkham
et al. , 2017). Note also that firms’ upgradeable share of production evolves over time. Another strength of our approach is thus that
the high and low UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 firms being compared across one rise or fall in the quality premium may differ



                                                                    17
    The results in column 3 of Table 4 show that firms with greater scope to shift from low to high quality
production are more likely to vertically integrate when the quality premium is high and vice versa when
the quality premium is low—consistent with our hypothesis and the model in Section 3.
    A potential concern is the possibility that the quality premium could be endogenous to individual Peru-
vian firms’ output quality objectives and organizational structure. To address this concern, we instrument
for the quality premium in Peru using the quantities exported by other top fishmeal producing countries
that specialize in either high or low quality fishmeal. The total quantities these other countries produce are
ideal instruments because they are driven by aggregate fishing quotas set by each country’s (and European)
regulatory authorities. Aggregate fishing quotas are set based on sustainability considerations so the quan-
tities of fishmeal these other countries produce are unlikely to correlate with factors influencing Peruvian
firm’s integration decisions, except via their influence on market prices. In addition, the production vol-
umes of countries that specialize in high or low quality grades generate meaningful variation in the quality
premium in Peru—and we know from column 2 of Table 4 that any impact these volumes may ultimately
have on integration decisions in Peru does not arise through the general price level.
    Specifically, our instruments are the quantities exported in the relevant production season by those of
the top 10 fishmeal exporting countries—excluding Peru—for which such quantity data is available, all of
which specialize in high or low quality grades.34 The first stage of our IV approach is the following:

         QualityUpgradingIncentivesit = α + ∑ βc UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 × Quantityct                                   (3)
                                                        c
                                                     + β2 UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 + γi + δt + εit

where c is an exporter country, and UpgradableShareOfProductionit−1 × Quantityct are our excluded in-
struments. Quantityct is quantity of fishmeal exported from country c in season t.
    The first stage results—shown in Appendix Table A2—are strong, confirming that the total quantities
of high and low quality fishmeal produced by countries with aggregate fishing quotas impact the quality
premium in Peru.35
    The second stage results are shown in column 4 of Table 4. The IV estimate of β̂1 is of very similar
magnitude to the OLS estimate in column 3. The estimates in column 3 and 4 both imply that, when the
quality premium in Peru rises by 10 percent, a firm with a high upgradeable share of production—one that
produces only low quality output—increases its Share VI by about 30 percent when compared to a firm
producing only high quality output.
    We argue that the quantities produced by other top fishmeal exporting countries affect integration de-
cisions in Peru through their impact on market prices. If this argument is correct, we would expect these
production volumes to manifest themselves in the price of high and low quality fishmeal locally, and ul-
timately in the quality premium in Peru. This is what we find in column 5, where we instrument for the
quality premium in Peru using the quality-grade specific price in other top exporting countries, rather than the
from those being compared across another rise or fall.
   34 These countries are Chile, Denmark, Iceland, Japan, Norway, and Thailand. Information on total monthly exports from these

countries is available from COMTRADE (a dataset described in footnote 48).
   35 Chile, Denmark, Iceland, Japan, and Norway have had aggregate fishing quotas in place for the relevant fish species throughout

our sample period (IFFO, 2014; Tanoue, 2015; IRF, 2017; European Commission, 2018), while Thailand introduced such a system in
2015. As noted above, these are the top 10 fishmeal exporting countries for which quantity data is available. Our results are very
similar if we instead use only the top five global fishmeal exporters (excluding Peru)—Chile, Denmark, Iceland, and Thailand—and if
we exclude Thailand.



                                                                18
quantities exported themselves. The estimates are again nearly identical to the OLS estimates in column 3
and the quantity-based IV estimates in column 4.36
      In the last column of Table 4, we show that firms’ estimated response to QualityUpgradingIncentivesit
does not mask an underlying response to firm-specific average prices. We construct the firm-specific average
price by weighting low and high quality grade prices by the firm’s t − 1 output shares. The results in column
6 underscore that firms do not integrate in response to income shocks that differ across firms because firms
produce different shares of high and low quality fishmeal.
      In Appendix C we exploit a different form of variation and find results consistent with those discussed in
this sub-section. We show that manufacturers respond the same way to variation in firm-specific, quality-
differentiated demand shocks as they do to analogous shocks to the quality price premium—integrating
suppliers and increasing Share VI when relative demand for high quality grades increases, and selling boats
and decreasing Share VI when relative demand for high quality grades decreases. To do so we construct
instruments for firm-specific demand shocks that exploit the fact that each importer country tends to import
very specific quality grades; that importer countries’ relative demand fluctuates over time; and that changes
in demand from a given country matter more for firms that previously exported to that country.37


5.2     Interpretation
The results discussed in this section are consistent with this paper’s hypothesis and the theoretical frame-
work in Section 3. In our model, a firm integrates suppliers when its returns to upgrading quality rise
because it is difficult to ensure that independent suppliers deliver high quality inputs when the quantity
they produce is valued by other buyers in the market. We now consider whether firms’ decision to integrate
suppliers when the benefits of quality upgrading rise can be explained by alternative theories.
      A first possibility is that firms simultaneously choose their organizational structure and output quality,
and shocks—for example to demand (Legros & Newman, 2013; Alfaro et al. , 2016)—affect both without
the two being directly related. Such a story is difficult to reconcile with the fact that Peruvian fishmeal
manufacturers integrate suppliers in response to increases in the relative price of high quality output, but
not in response to increases in the average price of fishmeal.
      The same is true for a second possibility, namely that firms, when the benefits of producing high quality
output rise, buy suppliers so as to restrict competitors’ access to independent suppliers and thereby capture
a higher share of a newly appealing market segment that happens to be the high quality one (Ordover et al.
, 1990). If such a story explained our results, we should see manufacturers integrating suppliers also when
the price of low (or any) quality fishmeal rises—unless integrated suppliers are more useful when producing
high quality output (as we conjecture).
      A third—and related—possibility is that the integration decisions we observe are driven by supply as-
surance motives (Macchiavello & Miquel-Florensa, 2016; Martinez-Carrasco, 2017). One supply assurance
   36 Specifically, column 5 shows results from instrumenting for the quality premium in Peru using the high quality price in other top

exporting countries. This is because price data is available—from IFFO, an industry association—only for three of the top exporters
used in column 4 that all specialize in high quality fishmeal: Chile, Denmark, and Iceland. The results shown in column 5 comes from
first running a first stage regression identical to that described in equation (3), but replacing Quantityct with HighQualityPricect , the
high quality price in exporting country c in season t. High quality fishmeal prices in Chile, Denmark, and Iceland—shown in Appendix
Figure A4, along with Peru’s price—are highly correlated with those in Peru. The first stage results in Appendix Table A2 are thus
strong. (Note that the reason why high quality prices are not exactly the same across countries is that production seasons differ and
the distance between countries would make it difficult to conduct perfect arbitrage.)
   37 We follow many fruitful applications of such an approach in the trade literature (see e.g. Park et al. , 2009; Brambilla et al. , 2012;

Bastos et al. , 2018; Tintelnot et al. , 2017).


                                                                     19
story—namely that firms integrate suppliers to secure general access to inputs but in the process coinci-
dentally produce higher quality output—cannot explain our findings. Such a story is inconsistent with the
fact that manufacturers vertically integrate in response to the relative price of high quality output, but not
average prices. Another form of supply assurance—integrating to secure access to suppliers who are incen-
tivized to deliver the high quality inputs that are needed to meet the demand for high quality output—is
exactly the interpretation we favor.
      We conclude that manufacturers vertically integrate when the quality premium rises for exogenous rea-
sons in order to produce a higher share of high quality output.


6      Firms’ Organizational Structure and Supplier Behavior
The model in Section 3 predicts that integration is an efficient organizational structure for producing high
quality output for a specific reason: because integration weakens suppliers’ incentives to maximize quantity
in ways that might be detrimental to the quality of the inputs they produce. As a result, we expect to see
suppliers reduce behavior that increases quantity but is harmful to quality when integrated.


6.1     Estimating how vertical integration affects suppliers’ quality-enhancing actions
We analyze three measures of behavior that capture the tradeoff between input quantity and quality: the
total quantity supplied, the maximum distance travelled from the delivery port, and the total time the
supplier spends at sea on a given trip. The first of these three we observe in supply transactions data, while
the second two are constructed from boat GPS data. The total quantity supplied is a direct measure of
actions taken by the supplier to increase quantity. However, this variable also relates to input quality. This is
because the supplier may need to forego quality-increasing actions—such as bringing a lot of ice on board,
not stacking fish high on top of each other, etc—in order to bring back a high quantity of fish. The maximum
distance travelled and total time spent at sea are chosen because they explicitly capture quality-decreasing
actions that will tend to increase quantity. Fish freshness—which depends on the time between catch and
delivery—is paramount for the protein content of fishmeal. As the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations puts it, “Freshness of raw material is important in its effect on the quality of the protein
in the end product [fishmeal]. The importance of minimizing the time between catching fish and processing,
and of keeping the fish at low temperatures by icing [which reduces the amount of fish a boat can fit], has
already been mentioned” (FAO, 1986, sub-section 10.1.2). Captains must thus balance traveling further and
longer to catch more fish against ensuring freshness. Because all three of these measures of behavior increase
quantity but decrease quality, we expect them to decrease post-integration (or increase post-separation).
      Our empirical strategy focuses on “switchers”. Switchers are suppliers that are either bought or sold by
a fishmeal firm during our data period and observed supplying the same plant within the firm in question
both before and after the change in status. We include supplier×plant fixed effects and hence compare the
behavior of a specific supplier within a specific relationship before versus after integration (or de-integration).
      As discussed in Section 2, we observe 103 instances in which a fishmeal firm acquires a supplier that is
initially owned independently; 32 instances where a supplier is sold from a fishmeal firm to an independent
buyer; and 50 instances where a supplier is sold from one fishmeal firm to another. Conveniently, a subset
of our qualifying switches—in which the supplier is observed supplying the firm in question both before


                                                        20
and after the change in status—comes from this last set of firm-to-firm supplier transitions. This is because
integrated suppliers sometimes supply other fishmeal firms.38 We exploit these transitions in which an
always-integrated supplier’s relationship with a specific firm changes below.
    We do not observe any significant changes in suppliers’ characteristics when switching in or out of inte-
gration with the plant supplied. Thus, while any average differences between the behavior of independent
and integrated suppliers might be attributable in part to boat characteristics,39 our analysis of within sup-
plier changes in behavior is unlikely to be influenced by these attributes. Recall also that we saw in Figure
1 that suppliers that get integrated or sold deliver to the acquiring/selling firm 63 percent of the time before
integration (or after de-integration): integration typically implies a simple change in the formal status of the
relationship between a firm/plant and a supplier engaged in frequent and continuing interactions.
    We estimate regressions of the following form:

                               Bijt = α + βI[VI × supplies owner firm]ijt + γij + δt + εijt                                             (4)

where Bijt is a measure of the behavior of supplier i, delivering to plant j, on date t. [VI × supplies owner firm]ijt
is an indicator for the supplier being integrated with the plant it delivers to on date t. We include date fixed
effects (δt ) to control for potential date specific effects and Supplier×Plant fixed effects (γij ) to focus on how
integration affects the behavior of a specific supplier supplying a specific plant. We cluster the standard
errors at the boat level.
    Column 1 of Panel A shows that, when integrated and supplying a parent plant, a boat delivers on
average about ten percent less per trip compared to when it supplies the same plant while independent.
This result is clearly consistent with integration offering lower powered incentives to produce quantity,
and also suggests that integrated suppliers dedicate more of their storage capacity to ice and/or are more
concerned with crushing fish. Columns 2 and 3 show that boats fish approximately five percent closer to
the port of delivery, and spend on average three percent less time at sea on a trip when integrated with the
plant supplied. These results suggest that, when integrated, suppliers reduce costly actions associated with
long trips, and bring back fresher fish as a result.
    In our model, integration is defined by asset ownership, as in Grossman & Hart (1986). Indeed, suppli-
ers’ change in behavior appears to be the result of integration itself, as opposed to any long term relation-
ship that coincides with integration. In Appendix Table B1, we show that—absent integration—repeated
interactions with the same plant do not lead to a change in quality-increasing actions, consistent with the
predictions of the dynamic version of our theoretical framework also shown in Appendix B. Thus, while re-
peated interactions help fishmeal manufacturers and independent suppliers exchange supply and demand
assurance (Martinez-Carrasco, 2017), they appear not to offer an alternative way to achieve the change in
quality-conducive incentives associated with integration in the context we study.
  38 A firm’s output objectives may vary across time within seasons, and fish move around and the location of a catch constrains the
set of plants a boat can deliver to. As a result, and as seen in Figure 1, Panel (a), integrated suppliers on average deliver to other firms
just over 10 percent of the time.
  39 As shown in Appendix Table A3, the characteristics of integrated suppliers unsurprisingly differ from the characteristics of inde-

pendent suppliers. On observable features such as the size of the boat, the power of its engine, and whether or not it has a cooling
system installed, the average switcher falls in between the average always-independent boat and the average always-integrated boat,
but closer to the latter.




                                                                    21
6.2     Interpretation
In this section we have seen that a given supplier supplying a given plant takes more quality-oriented and
less quantity-oriented actions when the two are vertically integrated. Our interpretation is that integration
dampens high-powered incentives to prioritize quantity over quality that suppliers face on the open market.
Other changes in incentives that arise due to integration could also play a role. Perhaps the most plausible
possibility is that what constrains suppliers’ input quality is not their incentive to prioritize quality but
their knowledge of how to do so. If so, firms may be reluctant to “teach” a supplier how to upgrade input
quality if the supplier is independent (Pigou, 1912). We can shed some light on the likelihood that such a
story explains our results in this section by exploiting the fact that integrated suppliers occasionally deliver
inputs to other firms. We analyze the behavior of suppliers that are always integrated with a fishmeal firm,
but sold from one firm to another during our sample period, and that supply a plant belonging to the
acquiring and/or the selling firm both before and after the sale. We thus continue to focus on changes in
supplier behavior within a supplier×plant pair.40
      As seen in Panel B of Table 5, we find quite similar—even slightly larger—effects compared to Panel
A. If acquired, a supplier changes its behavior consistent with prioritizing quantity less—to the benefit of
quality—while delivering to the acquiring firm. This pattern is identical to how previously independent
“switchers” change their behavior once integrated, suggesting that a story in which integration enables
knowledge transfer from Peruvian manufacturers to their suppliers is unlikely to be the primary explanation
behind the difference in supplier behavior when integrated. In other contexts, such knowledge transfers
may provide an additional—or the primary—motivation for vertical integration (see Atalay et al. , 2014).
      The results in Panel B of Table 5 also underscore that it is not the case that firms simply choose to
integrate suppliers that have already begun changing their behaviors, providing support for the parallel
trends assumption that underlies a causal interpretation of the results in Panel A.
    Another alternative explanation of the change in supplier behavior when integrated is that our results
simply reflect the fact that integrated suppliers face low-powered incentives, the behaviors we see not gen-
erating any input quality benefits that manufacturers are aware of and act on them. Such a story is difficult to
reconcile with this paper’s central finding that firms integrate suppliers when the quality premium rises.41


7      Vertical Integration and Output Quality
In Section 5 we saw that firms vertically integrate when the benefits of shifting from low to high quality
production rise. In Section 6 we saw that suppliers that get integrated take more input quality-increasing
and less input quantity-increasing actions. In this section we show that plants’ output quality responds to
integrating suppliers in exactly the manner we expect if the integration-induced change in supplier behavior
improves input quality. This provides empirical support for our model’s third prediction, namely that
vertical integration is an effective organizational strategy for producing high quality output.
    We first show that there is a robust relationship between changes over time in the share of inputs in-
dividual plants obtain from integrated suppliers—Share VI—and changes in their output quality that goes
  40 To implement, we run the same specification as in Equation 4, but define I[VI×supplies owner firm] to be equal to one if the

supplier is (i) always owned by a fishmeal firm, and (ii) currently delivering to its parent firm.
  41 Additionally, such a story would raise a conceptual question: if there is no known input quality benefit, and integration lowers

input quantity, then why integrate at all?



                                                                 22
beyond the firm level evidence discussed in Sub-section 4.3. We then attempt to isolate shifts in a plants
Share VI that occur for exogenous reasons. We show evidence from an IV approach that exploits geographic
variation in the local concentration of a particular type of supplier that is regulatorily prohibited from be-
ing integrated. In sum the results we present suggest that the Share VI-output quality relationship arises
because integration increases output quality.


7.1     Estimating how vertical integration affects output quality
If integration increases output quality because integrated suppliers deliver higher quality inputs, then the
relationship between Share VI and output quality we observe at the firm level should hold at the plant level
as well. This is what we find in Table 6. We repeat regression (1) from Sub-section 4.3, but now at plant (i)
× month (t) level, the lowest level at which we directly observe output quality.
      The sample consists of all 94 plants we observe across Peru. We include plant and month fixed effects
and thus focus on variation in Share VI across months within a given plant.42 The results in columns 1 and
2 of Table 6 imply that the share of a plant’s output that is of the high quality type would be 8-12 percent
higher if its parent firm were to integrate all (relative to none) of the plant’s suppliers. We also find the same
integration-quality relationship across different plants within the same firm over time, as shown in Appendix
Table A4. There we use internal data provided to us by a single major firm.43
      In combination with Table 3, the first two columns of Table 6 establish a positive, statistically significant,
and quantitatively consistent association between Share VI and directly observed output quality at the firm
and plant levels. Of course, the fact that these correlations hold for individual plants does not rule out
non-causal interpretations. It may be that plant specific shocks, for example to productivity,44 occur and
independently affect the quality of a plant’s output and the share of the plant’s supply coming from integrated
suppliers.
    To evaluate this alternative explanation, we construct an instrument for a plant’s use of integrated sup-
pliers at a particular point in time. We use the local presence of wooden fishing boats—which are, by law,
independently owned—as a source of variation in a plant’s Share VI. These, and other independent boats,
move up and down the coast as a function of weather, presence of fish, and other factors. The logic of our
instrument is simply that, at times when there happens to be an abundance of independent suppliers in a
given area for exogenous reasons, firms are more likely to use those suppliers. A plant’s choice of suppliers
is the result of a complex optimization process involving output quality objectives on the one hand and the
relative cost of using integrated versus independent suppliers on the other. At times when input from inde-
pendent suppliers is relatively cheap, optimizing plants will tend to decrease their Share VI—even holding
their incentives to produce quality constant. When independent suppliers are scarce, the cost of their inputs
is likely to be high, and vice versa. This suggests that measures of the presence of independent suppliers
may serve as instruments for a plant’s Share VI.
    With this in mind, we consider the number of wooden—and hence independent by law—suppliers active
in a port (cluster of plants) in a given month as a proxy for the relative cost of using independent suppliers.
  42 We observe whether each plant has any high technology installed so HighTech is now a dummy variable.
                                                                                    it
  43 The firm’s data reports which plant produced the fishmeal included in a given export shipment. In addition to “share high quality”,

for this firm’s plants we can thus measure output quality also as the fine-grained quality grade inferred from exports unit values and
auxiliary price data, as we do for firms in columns 3 and 4 of Panel B of Table 3. The magnitude and significance of the estimates are
very similar to those in Panel B of Table 3.
  44 Another example of a shock that may affect different plants within a firm differently is El Niño, which hit Peru in late 2009.




                                                                  23
Of course, a plant’s quality objectives may themselves influence independent suppliers’ whereabouts. The
plant may for example request deliveries from independent suppliers. We thus use a leave-firm-out measure
of the presence of independent-by-law suppliers in a given port during a given period. In particular, our
instrument for Share VI is the number of wooden boats present, excluding any that supply the firm to which
the plant in question belongs. We also show results for an analogous instrument using all independent
suppliers, not restricting to wooden boats.
      The first stage, shown in Appendix Table A5, is strong: the number of wooden (or independent) boats
supplying other plants in the port is highly correlated with the share of integrated supply to the plant in
question during the same period. The sign is negative, suggesting that—even using our leave-out proxy—
the availability of independent suppliers influences Share VI in the manner we expect. A plant substitutes
towards integrated suppliers when independent suppliers are relatively scarce, and vice versa.
      Results from the IV specifications are in columns 3-6 of Table 6. The IV estimates are of the same sign,
statistical significance, and general magnitude as the corresponding OLS estimates, only slightly bigger.
This holds whether we restrict attention to suppliers that are independent by law or include all independent
suppliers. Additionally, the same is true in a similar specification show in Appendix Table A4, which utilizes
internal data from the firm that shared its data with us.
      Might the composition of neighboring plants’ suppliers correlate with the quality of a given plant’s out-
put for other reasons than having comparable access to independent suppliers? A time-varying, port level
component of output quality that correlates with our instrument for other reasons than independent sup-
pliers’ inputs lowering output quality is a possible concern. However, beyond the presence of independent
suppliers, we find no evidence of a relationship between changes in output quality across different plants
within the same port.45 This result, in combination with the sign we find on the first stage—greater pres-
ence of independent suppliers increases use of such suppliers—and the second stage—use of independent
suppliers lowers output quality—suggests that our instrument’s exclusion restriction holds.46
      In this section we began by documenting that the firm level relationship between inputs coming from
suppliers that are integrated at the time of production and output quality holds also at the plant level,
including within firms. We then showed that instrumenting for Share VI yields the same positive, estimated
relationship with the quality of a plant’s output as OLS regressions.


7.2     Interpretation
Our interpretation of the results in this section is that access to inputs from integrated suppliers directly in-
creases output quality because a manufacturer can incentivize suppliers to engage in less quality-decreasing
behavior once the suppliers are integrated. This follows the model in Section 3, and is consistent with the
results in Section 6. A priori, output quality may of course co-vary with organizational structure without
necessarily reflecting a causal relationship. Perhaps the most plausible non-causal links between quality up-
  45 For example, consider a regression of the share of high quality output at the plant level on the average share of high quality output

of other plants in the port, controlling for month and plant fixed effects, as well as the presence of independent suppliers. If a given
plant’s output quality and that of other plants were perfectly positively or negatively correlated across time, the coefficient on the
average share of high quality output of other plants in the port would be respectively one and minus one. We find a coefficient of 0.04,
with a standard error of 0.080.
  46 A priori, it could be that a plant’s use of independent suppliers itself affects the number of independent suppliers supplying other

plants in the port because firms compete for access to suppliers, or that high fish density near a cluster of plants simultaneously enables
plants to produce higher quality fishmeal and attracts independent fishing boats. The first of these scenarios would imply a positive
sign on the first stage and the second a negative sign on the second stage—the opposite of what we find.



                                                                    24
grading and integration—for example, that growing firms both produce higher quality output and acquire
more suppliers for independent reasons—are ruled out as explanations of our findings by the simple OLS
regressions in Table 6 and Appendix Table A4: output quality correlates with use of integrated suppliers at
the time of production across plants, including within firms. The IV regressions go a step further by docu-
menting that the same relationship holds when we restrict attention to fluctuations in the use of integrated
suppliers that is driven by variation in the local presence of independent suppliers.47
    Combining these findings with those found in Section 5, we conclude that it is not the case that higher
output quality in vertically integrated Peruvian fishmeal manufacturers is simply an ignored by-product of
integration decisions made for other reasons, nor that integration and output quality are causally unrelated
in the “minds” of the firms in our sample. In Section 5 we showed that one of firms’ explicit motives
for integrating suppliers is to produce a higher share of high quality output. Our evidence indicates that
vertical integration increases output quality and that, as a result, firms integrate suppliers when the quality
premium rises.


8     Conclusion
Guided by Holmstrom & Milgrom (1991)’s classical ideas and subsequent theories of the firm characterizing
how we expect firm boundaries to respond to the multitasking nature of suppliers’ work (Baker et al. , 2001,
2002; Gibbons, 2005a,b), this paper identifies an overlooked motivation for and consequence of vertical
integration in incomplete contracts settings: downstream firms integrate to be able to produce output of
high enough quality to sell to high-paying consumers abroad. Integration allows manufacturing firms to
incentivize quality-increasing behavior from existing suppliers and better control input quality.
    We first present a simple theoretical framework that captures how suppliers and the downstream firms
they supply are expected to behave in sectors where firms produce vertically differentiated goods and con-
tracts are incomplete. The model motivates three predictions that follow logically from each other: on
how the quality premium—the difference between the price of high and low quality output—affects firms’
choice of organizational structure; how suppliers’ behavior changes with integration; and how integration
consequently affects output quality.
    We test these predictions using transaction level data and direct measures of the quality grades manufac-
turers produce in Peru’s fishmeal industry. We show that, when firms’ returns to shifting from low to high
quality production rise for exogenous reasons, they acquire more of their suppliers. This strategy appears
to be effective because fishing boats change their behavior in a way consistent with delivering fresher fish
when they are acquired by the downstream firm they supply—which helps firms produce higher quality
fishmeal. Finally, we show that firms ultimately produce higher quality output when their organizational
structure is more vertically integrated.
    These results are inconsistent with alternative theories in which the integration-quality relationship re-
flects third factors that affect both firms’ choice of structure and products produced without the two being
directly related. They are also inconsistent with explanations in which firms integrate for reasons other than
quality—for example to assure their own or restrict competitors’ general access to inputs—but in the process
coincidentally produce higher quality output. Instead, the evidence we present suggests that—while firms
  47 In Table 3 we also showed that the firm level relationship between vertical integration and output quality holds when we control

for the firm’s share of total industry output and supplier characteristics.



                                                                 25
vertically integrate for many different reasons—in settings where output quality is vertically differentiated
and contracts incomplete, one motive for integration is quality upgrading. That is, integration is an explicit
organizational choice made in order to “climb” the quality ladder.
    A natural next question is the generality of this finding. In Figure 3, we plot a proxy for average quality
that is available for most exporter countries—the average unit value of manufacturing products exported to
the U.S.—against the share of those exports that is imported by “related party” downstream firms located in
the U.S. (a measure of vertical integration). The figure shows clear evidence of an upward-sloping relation-
ship between average unit values and related party import shares. The same relationship holds also within
product categories.48 This suggests that our findings reflect an association between vertical integration and
manufacturing output quality that tends to hold on average across countries and industries. We find this
unsurprising, as theory suggests that integration can help address the contracting problems that are typical
when producing high quality goods. Given this—and despite vertical integration overall being common in
developing countries (Acemoglu et al. , 2009; Macchiavello, 2011)—it may thus be that the extent of vertical
integration observed among firms in the developing world is actually suboptimally low, since upgrading
output quality is essential for export-driven economic development. Of course, in a world with perfect
contracting, there might be no need for integration. As such, our paper’s results conversely imply that im-
provements in contract enforcement may reduce the need for firms to rely on organizational structure to
align their suppliers’ incentives.




   48 We show this in Appendix Table A6. In Figure 3, the variable plotted on the y-axis is γ̂ from the regression log(unit value)
                                                                                                 c                                 cpt =
αpt + γc + εcpt , where log(unit value)cpt is the average log unit value of products exported from country c, of HS6 code p, in year t
to the U.S.; αpt is a product×year fixed effect; and γc is an origin country fixed effect. This regression is estimated using COMTRADE
data from BACI (See Gaulier & Zignago (2010) for a description of the data). The variable plotted on the x-axis is δ̂c from the regres-
sion Related party share of U.S. importscpt = βpt + δc + υcpt , where Related party share of U.S. importscpt is the share of products
exported from country c, of NAICS code p, in year t to the U.S. that are imported by related parties (usually other units of the same
firm (Ruhl, 2015)); βpt is a product×year fixed effect; and δc is an origin country fixed effect. This regression is estimated using data
from the U.S. Census Bureau.


                                                                   26
References
A CEMOGLU , D., A GHION , P., L ELARGE , C., VAN R EENEN , J., & Z ILIBOTTI , F. 2007. Technology, Informa-
  tion and the Decentralization of the Firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

A CEMOGLU , D., A GHION , P., G RIFFITH , R., & Z ILIBOTTI , F. 2010. Vertical Integration and Technology:
  Theory and Evidence. Journal of European Economic Association.

A CEMOGLU , D ARON , J OHNSON , S IMON , & M ITTON , T ODD. 2009. Determinants of vertical integration:
  financial development and contracting costs. Journal of Finance.

A LFARO , L AURA , C ONCONI , PAOLA , FADINGER , H ARALD , & N EWMAN , A NDREW F. 2016. Do Prices
  Determine Vertical Integration? Review of Economic Studies, 83, 855–888.

A MODIO , F RANCESCO , & M ARTINEZ -C ARRASCO , M IGUEL A. 2018. Input Allocation, Workforce Manage-
  ment and Productivity Spillovers: Evidence from Personnel Data. Review of Economic Studies.

A NTRÀS , P OL. 2014. Grossman-Hart (1986) Goes Global: Incomplete Contracts, Property Rights, and the
  International Organization of Production. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization.

A NTRÀS , P OL. 2016. Global Production: Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure. Princeton University Press.

ATALAY, E NGHIN , H ORTACSU , A LI , & S YVERSON , C HAD. 2014. Vertical Integration and Input Flows. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 104(4), 1120–48.

ATKIN , D AVID , K HANDELWAL , A MIT, & O SMAN , A DAM. 2017. Exporting and Firm Performance: Evidence
  from a Randomized Trial. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

B AKER , G, & H UBBARD , T. 2003. Make Versus Buy in Trucking: Asset Ownership, Job Design and Informa-
  tion. American Economic Review.

B AKER , G, & H UBBARD , T. 2004. Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board Computers and Gover-
  nance in US Trucking. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

B AKER , G EORGE , G IBBONS , R OBERT, & M URPHY, K EVIN J. 2001. Bringing the Market Inside the Firm?
  American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings.

B AKER , G EORGE , G IBBONS , R OBERT, & M URPHY, K EVIN J. 2002. Relational Contracts and the Theory of
  the Firm. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 39–84.

B ALDWIN , R., & H ARRIGAN , J. 2011. Zeros, Quality, and Space: Trade Theory and Trade Evidence. American
  Economic Journal: Microeconomics.

B ANERJEE , A., & D UFLO , E. 2000. Reputation Effects and the Limits of Contracting: A Study of the Indian
  Software Industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

B ASTOS , PAULO , S ILVA , J OANA , & V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2018. Export Destinations and Input Prices. Ameri-
  can Economic Review.

B OEHM , J OHANNES. 2016. The Impact of Contract Enforcement Costs on Outsourcing and Aggregate Productivity.
  mimeo, Sciences Po.

                                                       27
B RAMBILLA , I RENE , & P ORTO , G UIDO. 2016. High-Income Export Destinations, Quality and Wages. Journal
  of International Economics.

B RAMBILLA , I RENE , L EDERMAN , D ANIEL , & P ORTO , G UIDO. 2012. Exports, Export Destinations, and Skills.
  American Economic Review, 102(7), 3406–38.

B RAMBILLA , I RENE , L EDERMAN , D ANIEL , & P ORTO , G UIDO. forthcoming. Exporting Firms and the De-
  mand for Skilled Tasks. Canadian Journal of Economics.

B RESNAHAN , T IMOTHY F., & L EVIN , J ONATHAN D. 2012. Vertical integration and Market Structure. In:
  G IBBONS , R., & R OBERTS , D.J. (eds), Handbook of Organizational Economics.

B REZA , E MILY, & L IBERMAN , A NDRES. 2017. Financial Contracting and Organizational Form: Evidence
  from the Regulation of Trade Credit. Journal of Finance.

C OASE , R. 1937. The Nature of the Firm. Economica.

D E L A P UENTE , O SCAR , S UEIRO , J UAN C ARLOS , H ECK , C ARMEN , S OLDI , G IULIANA , & P UENTE , S ANTI -
  AGO   D E L A. 2011. Evaluacion de los sistemas de gestion pesquera en el marco de la certificacion a cargo del marine.
  La pesqueria Peruana de anchoveta. Stewardship Council, Cayetano Heredia University WP.

E UROPEAN C OMMISSION. 2018. European Commission: Fishing Quotas. https://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/
  cfp/fishing_rules/tacs_en.

FAO. 1986. The production of fish meal and oil. FAO FISHERIES TECHNICAL PAPER: 142.

F ORBES , S. J., & L EDERMAN , M. 2009. Adaptation and Vertical Integration in the Airline Industry. American
  Economic Review.

F ORBES , S ILKE J., & L EDERMAN , M ARA. 2010. Does vertical integration affect firm performance? Evidence
  from the airline industry. The RAND Journal of Economics, 41(4), pp. 765–790.

F RÍAS , J UDITH A., K APLAN , D AVID S., & V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2009. Exports and Wage Premia: Evidence from
  Mexican Employer-Employee Data. mimeo Columbia University.

G AULIER , G UILLAUME , & Z IGNAGO , S OLEDAD. 2010 (Oct.). BACI: International Trade Database at the Product-
  Level. The 1994-2007 Version. Working Papers 2010-23. CEPII research center.

G IBBONS , R., & R OBERTS , D.J. 2013. Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton University Press.

G IBBONS , R OBERT. 2005a. Four formal(izable) theories of the firm? Journal of Economic Behavior and Organi-
  zation, 58(2), 200 – 245.

G IBBONS , R OBERT. 2005b. Incentives Between Firms (and Within). Management Science.

G IL , R. 2009. Revenue sharing distortions and vertical integration in the movie industry. Journal of Law,
  Economics, and Organization.

G IL , R., & K IM , M. 2016. Does Competition Increase Quality? Evidence from the US Airline Industry. mimeo,
  Carey School of Business.


                                                           28
G IL , R., K IM , M., & Z ANARONE , G. 2016. The Value of Relational Adaptation in Outsourcing: Evidence from the
  2008 shock to the US Airline Industry. mimeo, Carey School of Business.

G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K, & PAVCNIK , N INA. 2007. Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing
  Countries. Journal of Economic Literature, 45, 39–82.

G OLDSMITH -P INKHAM , PAUL , S ORKIN , I SAAC , & S WIFT, H ENRY. 2017. Bartik Instruments: What, When,
  Why, and How. Mimeo, Yale.

G ROSSMAN , S ANFORD J., & H ART, O LIVER D. 1986. The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
  Vertical and Lateral Integration. Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), pp. 691–719.

H ALLAK , J UAN C ARLOS. 2006. Product quality and the direction of trade. Journal of International Economics.

H ALLAK , J UAN C ARLOS , & S CHOTT, P ETER. 2011. Estimating Cross-Country Differences in Product Qual-
  ity. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

H ALPERN , L ASZLO , K OREN , M IKLOS , & S ZEIDL , A DAM. 2015. Imported Inputs and Productivity. American
  Economic Review.

H ART, O LIVER , & M OORE , J OHN. 1990. Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm. Journal of Political
  Economy, 98(6), pp. 1119–1158.

H ART, O LIVER , S HLEIFER , A NDREI , & V ISHNY, R OBERT W. 1997. The proper scope of government: theory
  and an application to prisons. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1127–1161.

H OLMSTROM , B. 1999. The Firm as a Subeconomy. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization.

H OLMSTROM , B., & M ILGROM , P. 1994. The firm as an incentive system. American Economic Review.

H OLMSTROM , B., & T IROLE , J. 1991. Transfer pricing and organizational form. Journal of Law, Economics,
  and Organization.

H OLMSTROM , B ENGT, & M ILGROM , PAUL. 1991. Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts,
  asset ownership, and job design. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 24–52.

H UMMELS , D., & K LENOW, P. 2005. The variety and quality of a nation’s exports. American Economic Review.

IFFO. 2014. Chile fishing quotas set and landing information certification. http://www.iffo.net/node/544.

IRF.    2017.            Catch     quotas   for    2017/2018     in    accordance       with   scientific   advice.
  https://www.responsiblefisheries.is/news-and-media/news/catch-quotas-for-2017-2018-in-
  accordance-with-scientific-advice/328/.

J OHNSON , R OBERT C. 2012. Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms. Journal of International Economics.

K HANDELWAL , A MIT. 2010. The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders. The Review of Economic Studies, 77(4),
  1450–1476.

K OSOVÁ , R ENÁTA , L AFONTAINE , F RANCINE , & P ERRIGOT, R OZENN. 2013. Organizational Form and Per-
  formance: Evidence from the Hotel Industry. Review of Economics and Statistics.

                                                       29
K UGLER , M AURICE , & V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2012. Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality. Review of Economic
  Studies, 79(1), 307–339.

L AFONTAINE , F RANCINE , & S LADE , M ARGARET. 2007. Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries: The
  Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3), 629–685.

L EGROS , PATRICK , & N EWMAN , A NDREW F. 2013. A Price Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics.

M ACCHIAVELLO , R OCCO. 2011. Financial development and vertical integration: theory and evidence. Jour-
  nal of the European Economic Association.

M ACCHIAVELLO , R OCCO , & M IQUEL -F LORENSA , J OSEPA. 2016. Vertical Integration and Relational Contracts:
  Evidence from Costa Rica’s Coffee Chain. Unpub. paper.

M ACCHIAVELLO , R OCCO , & M ORJARIA , A MEET. 2015. The Value of Relationships: Evidence from a Supply
  Shock to Kenya Rose Exports. American Economic Review.

M ANOVA , K ALINA , & Z HANG , Z HIWEI. 2012. Export Prices Across Firms and Destinations. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 127(1), 379–436.

M ARTINEZ -C ARRASCO , J OSE. 2017. Coordination and Gains from Relational Contracts: Evidence from the Peru-
  vian Anchovy Fishery. Mimeo, Duke University.

M C M ILLAN , J OHN , & W OODRUFF , C HRISTOPHER. 1999. Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit in
  Vietnam. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

M EDINA , PAMELA. 2017. Import Competition, Quality Upgrading and Exporting: Evidence from the Peruvian
  Apparel Industry. Mimeo, University of Toronto.

M ULLAINATHAN , S., & S HARFSTEIN , D. 2001. Do firm boundaries matter? American Economic Review.

N ATIVIDAD , G ABRIEL. 2014. Integration and Productivity: Satellite-Tracked Evidence. Management Science,
  60(7), 1698–1718.

N OVAK , S HARON , & S TERN , S COTT. 2008. How Does Outsourcing Affect Performance Dynamics? Evidence
  from the Automobile Industry. Management Science, 54(12), pp. 1963–1979.

N UNN , N ATHAN. 2007. Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade. The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 122(2), 569–600.

O RDOVER , JA, S ALONER , G, & S ALOP, SC. 1990. Equilibrium vertical foreclosure. American Economic
  Review.

PAREDES , E. C ARLOS , & G UTIERREZ , M ARIA E. 2008. The Peruvian Anchovy Sector: Costs and Benefits. An
  analysis of recent behavior and future challenges. IIFET 2008 Vietnam Proceedings.

PARK , A LBERT, YANG , D EAN , S HI , X INZHENG , & J IANG , Y UAN. 2009. Exporting and Firm Performance:
  Chinese Exporters and the Asian Financial Crisis. NBER Working Papers 14632.

P IGOU , A RTHUR C. 1912. Wealth and Welfare. London: Macmillan.

                                                      30
R UHL , K IM J. 2015. How Well is U.S. Intrafirm Trade Measured? American Economic Review: Papers and
  Proceedings.

S CHOTT, P. 2004. Across-product versus within-product specialization in international trade. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics.

S UTTON , J. 1991. Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertising, and the Evolution of Concen-
  tration. MIT Press.

S UTTON , J. 1998. Technology and Market Structure: Theory and History. MIT Press.

TANOUE , WATARU. 2015.           Japan’s Total Allowable Catch Systems in Fishery Resource Management.
  https://digital.lib.washington.edu/researchworks/bitstream/handle/1773/34012/Tanoue_
  washington_0250O_14735.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.

T INTELNOT, F ELIX , M OGSTAD , K EN K IKKAWA M AGNE , & D HYNE , E MMANUEL. 2017. Trade and Domestic
  Production Networks. Mimeo, Chicago University.

T VETERAS , S IGBJORN , PAREDES , C ARLOS E., & T ORRES , J ULIO P ENA. 2011. Individual Vessel Quotas in
  Peru: Stopping the Race for Anchovies. Marine Resource Economics, 26, 225–232.

V ERHOOGEN , E RIC A. 2008. Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing
  Sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489–530.

W ILLIAMSON , O LIVER. 1971. The Vertical Integration of Production: Market Failure Considerations. The
  American Economic Review, 61(2), pp. 112–123.

W OODRUFF , C. 2002. Non-contractible Investments and Vertical Integration in the Mexican Footwear In-
  dustry. International Journal of Industrial Organization.




                                                        31
                                        TABLE 1: S UMMARY STATISTICS

 XXXXXXXXXXXXX               XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX                                 Mean        Sd

 Firms                       Total number of firms in sample                                         37
                             Export shipment (metric tons)                                          380      (351)
                             Export Price ($/metric ton)                                           1454      (303)
                             Number of destinations per season                                     7.05      (5.30)
                             Number of export transactions per season                                85       (99)

 Plants                      Total number of plants in sample                                       94
                             Has high technology                                                   0.85     (0.36)
                             High quality share of production                                      0.85     (0.35)
                             Monthly production (metric tons)                                      3116     (3266)
                             Processing capacity (metric tons/hour)                                 106      (54)

 Boats                       Number of boats operating per season                                  812         92
                             Fraction owned by a downstream firm per season                       0.28       (0.45)
                             Fraction of boats made of steel per season                            0.44      (0.50)
                             Storage capacity (m3)                                                 187       (165)
                             Power engine (hp)                                                     432       (343)
                             Number of fishing trips per season                                    24.6      (13.3)
                             Number of delivery ports per season                                   3.49      (1.90)
                             Offload weight (metric tons) per trip                                 110       (110)
                             Time at sea per trip (hours)                                         20.85      (9.96)
                             Max. distance from the plant’s port (kms)                              76        (46)
 Notes: This table gives summary statistics over our sample period. Has high technology is a dummy equal to 1
if the plant is equipped with steam drying technology. Plants’ processing capacity measures the total weight of
fish that can be processed in an hour. Steel is a binary variable equal to 1 if a boat is a steel boat (which tend to
be bigger, better suited for industrial fishing, and are subject to different regulations). Offload weight per trip is
the amount fished and delivered to a downstream firm on each trip. Time at sea per trip is the total time spent at
sea on a fishing trip. Max. distance from the plant’s port is the maximum distance between the boat and the port
it delivers to on any trip.




                                                          32
                                    TABLE 2: S UMMARY STATISTICS ON I NTEGRATION

                                                     Panel A: Boat purchases and sales

 Total number of steel boats registered                     741
 Number of steel boat transactions                          317
 Number of transactions Indep. → VI                         103
 Number of transactions VI → Indep.                             32
 Number of transactions VI → VI                                 50
 Number of transactions Indep. → Indep.                     132

                        Panel B: Decomposition of the growth rate of Share of inputs from VI suppliers
                                                                    VI                                                
                                                                      i,t+1             VIi,t+1              Totali,t+1
                                             Share VIi,t+1           Totali,t+1           Totalt + 1            Totalt + 1
                Growth (Share VI)i,t ≈ log        Share VIi,t= log              = log 
                                                                              VIi,t
                                                                                                      − log 
                                                                                                  VIi,t
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                       Totali,t
                                                                             Totali,t             Totalt                Totalt
                                                                                           |      {z       }   |      {z          }
                                                                                                  A                    B
                                                    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX                   XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX               XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
                                                          Total                                A                               B
                                                                                    (Boats purchases or sales)     (Buying less from Indep.)
 Growth                                                          2.1%                          1.4%                               0.7%
 Relative Contribution                                                                         67%                                33%
 Notes: Panel A displays basic statistics on boat purchases and sales. In Panel B, the growth rate of “Share VIi,t ” – the share of the inputs
sourced by firm i during production season t that comes from vertically integrated suppliers – can be decomposed as presented in the first
row of this table. VIi,t and Totali,t is respectively the amount of inputs firm i sources from vertically integrated suppliers and in total during
season t, and Totalt is the total amount of inputs sourced by the industry as a whole during season t. Term A can then be interpreted as
the contribution to the growth rate of Share VIi,t that comes from increasing solely the (relative) amount of inputs coming from integrated
suppliers. Since boats fish all their individual quota during the course of a season, the only way to increase (decrease) this term is by acquir-
ing (selling) suppliers. Term B can be interpreted as the contribution of a firm decreasing the (relative) amount of inputs sourced from all
suppliers. The table gives the growth rate of “Share VIi,t ”, Term A and Term B.




                                                                        33
                TABLE 3: O UTPUT QUALITY AND VERTICALLY INTEGRATED SUPPLIERS

                                                  Panel A: Output quality and number of suppliers owned
 Dep. var:                                                         High Quality share of prod.                  Protein content

                                                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)              (4)
 Asinh(Number of suppliers owned)                                     0.056               0.043               0.197∗∗          0.167∗∗
                                                                     (0.060)             (0.042)             (0.083)          (0.066)
 High technology share of capacity                                     No                  Yes                 No                Yes
 Season FEs                                                            Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Firm FEs                                                              Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                     0.75                0.75                65.7             65.7
 N                                                                     275                 275                 208              208
                                                             XXXXXX
                                              Panel B: Output quality and Share of inputs from VI suppliers
                                                            XXXXXXX         XXXXXXX         XXXXXXX XXXXXXX                                  XXXXXXX           XXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                                  High Quality share of prod.        Protein content

                                                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)              (4)
 Share of inputs from VI suppliers                                    0.377∗∗             0.375∗∗             0.982∗∗∗         1.040∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.166)             (0.164)             (0.293)          (0.283)
 High technology share of capacity                                     No                  Yes                 No                Yes
 Season FEs                                                            Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Firm FEs                                                              Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                     0.75                0.75                65.7             65.7
 N                                                                     275                 275                 208              208
                                                             XXXXXX
                                              Panel C: Output quality and Share of inputs from VI suppliers
                                                             XXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                                         High Quality share of prod.                                            Protein Content

                                                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
 Share of inputs from VI suppliers                                    0.313∗              0.373∗∗             0.313∗           1.153∗∗           0.936∗∗∗         1.190∗∗
                                                                     (0.159)             (0.148)             (0.159)          (0.457)           (0.260)          (0.461)
 Share of inputs from steel boats                                   −0.098                                  −0.092           −1.152                             −1.153
                                                                    (0.164)                                 (0.161)          (0.808)                            (0.794)
 Share of inputs from boats with high capacity                        0.152                                   0.139            0.988                              1.036
                                                                     (0.166)                                 (0.164)          (1.003)                            (0.976)
 Share of inputs from boats with cooling system                       0.191                                   0.202          −0.232                             −0.282
                                                                     (0.123)                                 (0.124)         (0.979)                            (0.986)
 Share of industry’s production                                                         −0.807              −0.748                               1.799            1.889
                                                                                        (0.925)             (0.891)                             (3.869)          (3.930)
 High technology share of capacity                                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
 Season FEs                                                            Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
 Firm FEs                                                              Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                     0.75                0.75                0.75             0.75              65.7             65.7
 N                                                                     275                 275                 275              208               208              208
 Notes: One observation is a firm during a production season. High Quality share of prod. is the share of a firm’s total production during a fishing season that is reported
as high quality (“prime”) output. Protein content is the quantity weighted average of a measure of quality inferred from a database that provides weekly prices by qual-
ity. Share of inputs from VI suppliers is the share of a firm’s inputs that come from VI suppliers during a season. Steel boats tend to be bigger, better suited for industrial
fishing, and are subject to different regulations. High capacity boats are boats whose hold capacity is in the upper quartile of the distribution. Boats without integrated
cooling system must use ice to keep fish fresh. High technology share of capacity controls for the share of the firm’s total processing capacity (measured in metric tons per
hour and averaged across all active plants within the firm) that uses steam drying technology. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are included in parentheses. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                     34
                       TABLE 4: V ERTICAL INTEGRATION AND THE Q UALITY PRICE PREMIUM

                                                               XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                                        Share of inputs from VI suppliers (t) - Share of inputs from VI suppliers (t-1)

                                                                   OLS             OLS            OLS             IV             IV             OLS
                                                                    (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)
 Quality Premium                                                   0.265∗∗
                                                                  (0.114)
 Log(Average Price)                                                                0.030
                                                                                  (0.052)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × Quality premium                                          3.014∗∗         3.006∗∗        3.382∗∗∗
                                                                                                (1.091)         (1.092)        (1.050)
 Firm specific price (weighted by past production)                                                                                           −1.225∗
                                                                                                                                             (0.596)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1)                               No             No             Yes            Yes             Yes            No
 Season FEs                                                         No             No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Firm FEs                                                          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                                 0.01            0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.01
 N                                                                 190             190            190            190            190             190
 Kleibergen-Paap LM p-value (Under-id)                                                                           0.01           0.01
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic (Weak inst)                                                                    106            38.3

Notes: One observation is a firm during a production season. Share of inputs from VI suppliers (t) - Share of inputs from VI suppliers (t − 1) is the
change between season t − 1 and season t of the share of inputs sourced from integrated suppliers. As shown in Table 2, most of the variation in
Share VI is driven by acquisition or sales of suppliers. Quality premium is equal to Log (High Quality) − Log (Low Quality) where High and Low
Quality are the average price of “Prime” and “FAQ” fishmeal in the month preceding the current fishing season. We choose to take the month pre-
ceding the fishing season rather than the fishing season itself as integration decisions are typically decided in the month preceding the season and
integration within a season is extremely rare in the data. Log (Average Price) is the Log of the average price of Peruvian fishmeal, again computed
in the month preceding the current fishing season. Upgradable share of production(t − 1) is the share of a firm’s production that was of low quality
in the previous season. A firm that produces almost only low quality output has more potential to upgrade than a firm already producing almost
only high quality output. Firm specific price (weighted by past production) is equal to: Low quality share of productioni,t−1 × Log (Low quality price)t +
High quality share of productioni,t−1 × Log (High quality price)t where Low quality share of productioni,t−1 is the share of firm i’s production that
was of low quality in the previous season and Log (Low quality price)t is the price of low quality fishmeal in the month preceding the current fishing
season. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are included in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                             35
                             TABLE 5: S UPPLIER BEHAVIOR AND VERTICAL INTEGRATION

                    Panel A: Identified from all switchers (Idependent to VI, VI to Independent and VI to VI)
                                           XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                  Log(Quantity supplied)      Log(Max. distance from           Log(Total time
                                                                            the plant’s port)             spent at sea)
                                                       (1)                          (2)                       (3)
 I[VI × supplies owner firm]                             −0.096∗∗∗                        −0.054∗∗∗                         −0.030∗
                                                         (0.023)                          (0.019)                           (0.016)
 Date FEs                                                   Yes                              Yes                               Yes
 Supplier × Plant FEs                                       Yes                              Yes                               Yes
 N                                                       315,442                           137,278                          159,724
                             Panel B: Idenfified only from VI switchers changing ownership (VI to VI)
                                                 XXXXXXXXXXX                XXXXXXXXXXX                                XXXXXXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                   Log(Quantity supplied)      Log(Max. distance from                         Log(Total time
                                                                            the plant’s port)                            spent at sea)
                                                            (1)                               (2)                              (3)
 I[Always VI × supplies owner firm]                      −0.147∗∗∗                        −0.082∗∗∗                         −0.073∗∗∗
                                                          (0.027)                          (0.026)                          (0.023)
 Date FEs                                                   Yes                              Yes                               Yes
 Supplier × Plant FEs                                       Yes                              Yes                               Yes
 N                                                       315,442                           137,274                          159,724
 Notes: One observation is a boat during a fishing trip. Quantity supplied is the amount of fish the boat delivers to the plant per trip. Max.
distance from the plant’s port is maximum distance a specific boat is observed away from port. Max. distance from the plant’s port can only be
measured if the boat leaves from and arrives at the same port. Total time at sea is the amount of time the boat is away from port per trip.
The number of observations varies from one column to the next as GPS variables for a given trip are sometimes missing. In panel A, we
define I[VI×supplies owner firm] to be equal to one if the supplier is (i) currently vertically integrated (ii) currently delivering to its parent
firm. In panel B, we define I[Always VI×supplies owner firm] to be equal to one if the supplier is (i) always owned by a fishmeal firm, and
(ii) currently delivering to its parent firm. Because we include Supplier × Plant FEs, I[VI×supplies owner firm] and I[Always VI×supplies
owner firm] are identified based only on suppliers who change ownership during our sample period. Standard errors clustered at the boat
level are included in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                       36
TABLE 6: O UTPUT QUALITY AND SHARE OF INPUTS FROM VERTICALLY INTEGRATED SUPPLIERS

                                                                        Impact of Share of VI Inputs on Quality
                                                       XXXXXX         XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX                                   XXXXXX
       Dep. var:                                                          High Quality Share of Production

                                                          OLS            OLS              IV: Ind. Boats              IV: Wooden Boats
                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
       Share of inputs from VI suppliers                 0.102∗∗         0.064∗∗        0.213∗∗∗       0.169∗∗         0.160∗∗∗       0.142∗∗
                                                        (0.038)        (0.030)         (0.080)        (0.068)         (0.060)        (0.060)
       Has high technology                                No              Yes            No              Yes            No              Yes
       Month FEs                                          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
       Plant FEs                                          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
       Mean of Dep. Var.                                  0.85           0.85           0.85            0.85           0.85            0.85
       N                                                  2647           2647           2487            2487           2647            2647
       Notes: One observation is a plant in a particular month. High Quality share of production is the share of a firmÕs total production dur-
      ing a fishing season that is reported as high quality “prime” output. Share of inputs from VI suppliers is the share of a firmÕs inputs that
      come from VI suppliers during a season. Has high technology is a dummy variable equal to one if the plant in question has any steam
      drying technologies installed. Columns 3 and 4 instrument for Share of inputs from VI suppliers with the number of independent boats
      present locally (in the plant’s port) in the season in question, excluding those that interact directly with the plant itself. Columns 5 and
      6 instrument for Share of inputs from VI suppliers with the number of wooden boats present locally (in the plant’s port) in the season
      in question, excluding those that interact directly with the plant itself. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. * p < 0.10, **
      p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                          37
                                                      F IGURE 1: I NTERACTIONS BETWEEN MANUFACTURERS AND INTEGRATED AND INDEPENDENT SUPPLIERS


                                                                                                                         All Suppliers
                     (a) Distribution of interactions across firms                                                                                                           (b) Distribution of interactions across plants




                                    1
                                                                                                                                               .4




                                    .8
                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                      .6
                                                                                                                                           .2




                            .4
                          Fraction of trips
                                                                                                                                      Fraction of trips
                                                                                                                                               .1




                                    .2
                                    0
                                                                                                                                               0
                                                  0                 5                10                 15                   20                                0            10              20            30              40               50
                                                           Firms (ordered by frequency of deliveries With supplier)                                                     Plants (ordered by frequency of deliveries with supplier)

                                                                Integrated suppliers             Independent suppliers                                                       Integrated suppliers             Independent suppliers


                                                                                                                      Switchers Only




38
                     (c) Distribution of interactions across firms                                                                                                          (d) Distribution of interactions across plants



                                                                                                                                          .5




                               .8
                                                                                                                                          .4




                                       .6
                                                                                                                                              .3




                           .4
                                                                                                                                    .2




                     Fraction of trips
                                                                                                                                  Fraction of trips




                               .2
                                                                                                                                          .1




                               0
                                                                                                                                          0




                                              0                         5                       10                      15                                 0                   10               20                30               40
                                                  Firms (ordered by frequency of deliveries with supplier when integrated)                                     Plants (ordered by frequency of deliveries with supplier when integrated)

                                                                  When integrated              When independent                                                                When integrated               When independent



     Notes: Figures above show the average fraction of deliveries at each firm and plant for independent and integrated suppliers. In figures (a) and (b), plants or firms are ordered based on the frequency of deliveries
     for each boat x boat owner pair: the plant or firm that receives the highest number of deliveries by the boat in question while owned by the owner in question is ranked one, the next highest ranked two, and so on.
     In figures (c) and (d) plants or firms are ranked based on the frequency of deliveries for each boat while it is integrated. Figures (a) and (b) include all suppliers, while figures (c) and (d) include only switchers: boats
     that were independent at one point and integrated at another point during our sample.
                        F IGURE 2: AVERAGE F ISHMEAL P RICE AND Q UALITY P REMIUM IN P ERU


                                                                       (a)
                        2500




                                                                                                                          30
                        2000




                                                                                                                          20
                 $/MT




                                                                                                                             %
                        1500




                                                                                                                          10
                        1000




                                                                                                                          0

                               2009m7         2011m7               2013m7               2015m7               2017m7

                                          Peru average price                         Peru Quality Premium


Notes: This figure shows the evolution over time of the average fishmeal price in Peru (the average between the price of “Prime” and “FAQ” fishmeal
grades) and the Quality Premium in Peru. Quality premium is equal to Log (High Quality) − Log (Low Quality) where High and Low Quality are the
average prices of “Prime” and “FAQ” fishmeal grades respectively.




                                                                       39
F IGURE 3: C OUNTRIES ’                                       OUTPUT QUALITY AND VERTICAL INTEGRATION IN EXPORT MANUFACTURING
                                                  1




                                                                                       PYF       MOZ                                CHE
                                                                                               KAZ

                                                                                                             AND

                                                                                        SMR VUT          ISL              NOR
                                                                                                       PLW                          FIN
                   Log(unit value) - Country FE




                                                                                          NCL                       MLT
                                                  .5




                                                                                                                HRV
                                                                                        BTN
                                                                                  ARM CUB
                                                                                        RUS     SOM FLK
                                                                       CYP                     SRB
                                                                                             ANT LVA        NRU                 DNK
                                                                 BMU                    AIADZA            SVNIRQ           ESTIRL
                                                                                                              AFG              SVK
                                                                                                                TUN             CZE
                                                              SXM                    GRC
                                                                                        MDG LTU COK    COG NZL   GEO             NIU   AUT            JPN
                                                                                                           MNE  ALB
                                                                                                                SLE  ROU           GBR
                                                                                                MKD ABWMAR
                                                                           GRD JAM UKR MDA               AZE
                                                                                                       MDV
                                                                                                        SHN
                                                                                                      BGRKIRBIH
                                                                                                          AGO MUS
                                                                                                                   GRL     ITA          HUN FRA
                                                                          ATGCYM                                      MSR
                                                                                                                STP AUS
                                                                        URY
                                                                         NFK MNG   BFA
                                                                                    YEM IRN GIB  CHL          PRT
                                                                                                            GAB                                 DEU
                                                                               VCT           ZMBMRT
                                                                                              DMA                     POL         GNQ
                                                                                                                                   IOT     SWE
                                                                          RWA FJI        ZWE PNG ZAF         SLB COM ATF
                                                                         UZB  BRBBOL TUV SYC KGZ ISR CRI ESP            SGP NLD
                                                  0




                                                                               KNA
                                                                                TKLCPV   KWT                                     BRATCD
                                                                      MAC
                                                                        BHS
                                                                      LBN
                                                                            PERTZA
                                                                                PRYKEN BLR  ARGWLF UGATON
                                                               VGB                   DJI     GINCAFERI           TJK
                                                                     MHL BRN                       MLI
                                                                                                 QAT        NERCXR                        PCN
                                                                              LAOCOD  JOR
                                                                                     WSM      GNB
                                                                                            COL
                                                                            NPLSUR        LBR         LKA                 SPM
                                                                                    ARETUR            KOR
                                                                            MWI BLZ
                                                                              TTO SAU CCKNIC
                                                                                           LCA
                                                                                            SEN                   THA                    LBY
                                                                          HKG OMN   NGA
                                                                                      ECU
                                                                                    BHR VEN                 MYSPHL        CAN
                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                   HTI ETH VNM GHA
                                                                          BEN          EGY    SLV       IDN
                                                                                MMRSSD
                                                                                 GUY            IND
                                                  -.5




                                                                           PAN TCA
                                                                             KHM                  BDI
                                                                      PAK         BGDGTM                      TGO DOM
                                                                                                             HND
                                                                                    TKM
                                                                         SYR       GMB
                                                  -1




                                                        -.3                  -.15                        0                         .15                  .3
                                                                           Related party share of imports - Country FE


Notes: In this Figure, the variable plotted on the y-axis is γ̂c from the regression log(unit value)cpt = αpt + γc + εcpt , where log(unit value)cpt is the av-
erage log unit value of products exported from country c, of HS6 code p, in year t to the U.S.; αpt is a product×year fixed effect; and γc is an origin country
fixed effect. This regression is estimated using COMTRADE data from BACI (See Gaulier & Zignago (2010) for a description of the data). The variable
plotted on the x-axis is δ̂c from the regression Related party share of U.S. importscpt = βpt + δc + υcpt , where Related party share of U.S. importscpt is
the share of products exported from country c, of NAICS code p, in year t to the U.S. that are imported by related parties (usually other units of the same
firm (Ruhl, 2015)); βpt is a product×year fixed effect; and δc is an origin country fixed effect. Related party share of U.S. importscpt is constructed using
data from the U.S. Census Bureau. The data is from 2005 to 2014.




                                                                                                    40
Appendix A         Additional Tables and Figures




   TABLE A1: M AIN IMPORTERS OF P ERUVIAN FISHMEAL AND AVERAGE Q UALITY I MPORTED


                                 Total Weight        Average Protein content      Sd(Protein content)
                              (1000 metric tons)

    CHINA                            4266                     66.06                       1.60
    GERMANY                          972                      65.42                       1.62
    JAPAN                            545                      66.12                       1.69
    CHILE                            305                      66.60                       1.51
    VIETNAM                          277                      65.91                       1.59
    TAIWAN                           248                      66.02                       1.71
    UNITED KINGDOM                    147                     65.26                       1.62
    TURKEY                           128                      64.91                       1.52
    INDONESIA                         94                      66.16                       1.64
    SPAIN                             90                      65.44                       1.61
    AUSTRALIA                         85                      66.06                       1.80
    CANADA                            66                      65.76                       1.52
    FRANCE                            55                      65.59                       1.72
    SOUTH KOREA                       24                      66.56                       1.46
    ITALY                             21                      64.97                       1.52
    BULGARIA                          15                      65.42                       1.75
    VENEZUELA                         13                      66.67                       1.64
    PHILIPPINES                       12                      64.92                       1.47
    BELGIUM                           11                      65.08                       1.69
    INDIA                             10                      65.17                       2.03
    Notes: This table reports the top 20 importers of Peruvian fishmeal, the total quantity imported over
   the whole period of our sample, the average quality imported and the standard deviation of the quality
   imported across all transactions.




                                                     41
 TABLE A2: V ERTICAL INTEGRATION AND THE Q UALITY PRICE PREMIUM – F IRST S TAGE


 First stage
                                                                               XXXXXXXXXXX                 XXXXXXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                                                     Upgradable share of production (t-1) × Quality Premium
                                                                                      (1)                           (2)

 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Qty exp. by Chile)] (t-1)              0.331∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.015)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Qty exp. by Denmark)] (t-1)            0.021∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.005)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Qty exp. by Iceland)] (t-1)            0.124∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.005)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Qty exp. by Japan)] (t-1)             −0.046∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.002)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Qty exp. by Norway)] (t-1)            −0.222∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.001)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Qty exp. by Thailand)] (t-1            0.173∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.001)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Chile Price)]                                                         0.663∗∗∗
                                                                                                                  (0.090)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) ×[Log(Denmark Price)]                                                      −2.253∗∗∗
                                                                                                                 (0.558)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1) × [Log(Iceland Price)]                                                       1.276∗∗∗
                                                                                                                  (0.426)
 Upgradable share of production (t-1)                                                Yes                            Yes
 Season FEs                                                                          Yes                            Yes
 Firm FEs                                                                            Yes                            Yes

Notes: Results from the first stage of IV specifications reported in Table 4. One observation is a firm during a production season. Quality
premium is equal to Log (High Quality) − Log (Low Quality) where High and Low Quality are the average price of “Prime” and “FAQ”
fishmeal in the month preceding the current fishing season. Upgradable share of production(t − 1) is the share of a firm’s production
that was of low quality in the previous season. A firm that produces almost only low quality output has more potential to upgrade than a
firm already producing almost only high quality output. In Column 1, the instruments are Upgradable share of production(t − 1) inter-
acted with the quantity exported by the top fishmeal exporting countries (excluding Peru) for which there is a national fishing quota.In
column 2, the instruments are Upgradable share of production(t − 1) interacted with average export prices in other high quality fishmeal
exporting countries for which the data was available. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are included in parentheses. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                    42
                                             TABLE A3: S UPPLIER CHARACTERISTICS


                             Offload weight           Cooling system          Capacity (m3)        Power engine (hp)        Max. Distance from
                           per trip (metric tons)                                                                          the plant’s port (kms)
                             XXXXXXXXXXX              XXXXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXXXX             XXXXXXXXXXX              XXXXXXXXXXX
 Wooden                           41.00                     0.00                 65.73                  215.40                     56.10
                                 (16.24)                   (0.06)               (27.34)                 (94.78)                    (7.74)
 Steel - Independent             104.03                     0.09                219.30                  412.31                     81.15
                                 (40.77)                   (0.28)               (84.35)                (189.82)                   (13.43)
 Steel - Switchers               148.88                     0.25                301.18                  616.30                     92.25
                                  (0.43)                   (0.444)             (129.92)                (328.51)                   (15.37)
 Steel - VI                      181.62                     0.34                382.00                  769.96                     97.29
                                 (68.13)                   (0.47)              (137.11)                (352.52)                   (12.62)

 Notes: Offload weight is the amount fished on a trip. Maximum distance from port is the maximum distance at which a boat is from the port on a
fishing trip. Steel boats are generally bigger, better suited for industrial fishing, and are subject to different regulations. Wooden boats cannot be
owned by fishmeal firms. Independent boats are owned by an individual or a company that is not a fishmeal company. Switchers are boats that
move from VI to Independent or from Independent to VI at some point in our data. VI are boats that remain vertically integrated during the
whole sample of our data.




                                                                         43
TABLE A4: O UTPUT Q UALITY AND S HARE OF I NPUTS FROM V ERTICALLY I NTEGRATED S UPPLIERS -
R OBUSTNESS CHECKS USING A MAJOR FIRM IN THE P ERUVIAN FISHMEAL INDUSTRY.


                                                                  Impact of Share of VI on Quality
                                                     XXXXXX          XXXXXX           XXXXXX                  XXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                                                Protein Content

                                                          OLS: Ind. Boats                           IV: Ind. Boats
                                                        (1)              (2)                  (3)                    (4)
 Share of inputs from VI suppliers                     1.369∗∗          1.338∗∗              1.469∗             1.390
                                                      (0.654)          (0.656)           (0.807)               (0.918)
 Has high technology                                    No               Yes                  No                 Yes
 Month FEs                                              Yes              Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Plant FEs                                              Yes              Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 N                                                     2487             2487                 2647                2647

                                                                               First Stage
                                                  XXXXXXXXX        XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                                       Share of Inputs from VI Suppliers

                                                        (1)              (2)                  (3)                    (4)
 Number of Independent Boats in Port                                                    −0.000                −0.000
                                                                                        (0.000)               (0.000)
 Share of Independent Boats in Port                                                     −0.412∗∗              −0.398∗
                                                                                        (0.200)               (0.207)
 Kleibergen-Paap LM p-value (Under-id)                                                       0.005              0.006
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic (Weak inst)                                                 3.61              3.06
 Anderson-Rubin Wald test p-value                                                             0.24              0.31

Notes: This table presents robustness checks for Table 6 using a major firm’s internal data that allows us to link
export sales to a specific plant. Share of inputs from VI suppliers is the share of a firmÕs inputs that come from VI
suppliers during a season. Has high technology is a dummy variable equal to one if the plant in question has any
steam drying technologies installed. Share of inputs from VI suppliers is instrumented by (a) the number of inde-
pendent boats present in the plant’s port in the season in question, excluding those that interact directly with the
plant itself, and (b) the ratio of the number of boats in (a) to the total number of boats in the plant’s port in that
season that do not interact with the plant itself. Robust standard errors are included in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          44
TABLE A5: O UTPUT Q UALITY      AND   S HARE   OF   I NPUTS   FROM     V ERTICALLY I NTEGRATED S UPPLIERS -
F IRST S TAGE


                                                                             First Stage
                                                              XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX
 Dep. var:                                                       Share of Inputs From VI Suppliers

                                                                 IV: Ind. Boats        IV: Wooden Boats
                                                                (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
 Number of Independent Boats in Port (Leave-Out)              −0.001∗∗∗ −0.001∗∗∗
                                                              (0.000)   (0.000)
 Number of Wooden Boats in Port (Leave-Out)                                          −0.002∗∗∗ −0.002∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.000)   (0.000)
 Kleibergen-Paap LM p-value (Under-id)                         0.011        0.011      0.010      0.010
 Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic (Weak inst)                  23.55        23.73      27.69      27.69
 Anderson-Rubin Wald test p-value                              0.01         0.01       0.01       0.01
 Has high technology                                            No           Yes        No         Yes
 Month FEs                                                      Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
 Plant FEs                                                      Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
 N                                                             2487          2487      2647       2647

Notes: Results from the first stage of IV specifications reported in Table 6. One observation is a plant
in a particular month. Share of inputs from VI suppliers is the share of a firmÕs inputs that come from
VI suppliers during a season. Has high technology is a dummy variable equal to one if the plant in
question has any steam drying technologies installed. Columns 1 and 2 instrument for Share of in-
puts from VI suppliers with the number of independent boats present locally (in the plant’s port) in
the season in question, excluding those that interact directly with the plant itself. Columns 3 and 4
instrument for Share of inputs from VI suppliers with the number of wooden boats present locally (in
the plant’s port) in the season in question, excluding those that interact directly with the plant itself.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                      45
TABLE A6: C OUNTRIES ’ OUTPUT QUALITY AND VERTICAL INTEGRATION IN EXPORT MANUFACTURING


 Dep. var:                                                                                         Log(unit value) - Residuals from HS6×Year FEs and Country FEs
                                                                                                                               XXXXXX
                                                                                                                                  (1)
 Related party share of imports - Residuals from HS6×Year FEs and Country FEs                                                         0.038∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                     (0.007)

 N                                                                                                                                   208 024
 Notes: In this table, the dependent variable is εcpt from the regression log(unit value)cpt = αpt + γc + εcpt , where log(unit value)cpt is the average log unit value of
products exported from country c, of HS6 code p, in year t to the U.S.; αpt is a product×year fixed effect; and γc is an origin country fixed effect. This regression
is estimated using COMTRADE data from BACI (See Gaulier & Zignago (2010) for a description of the data). The independent variable is υcpt from the regression
Related party share of U.S. importscpt = βpt + δc + υcpt , where Related party share of U.S. importscpt is the share of products exported from country c, of NAICS code
p, in year t to the U.S. that are imported by related parties (usually other units of the same firm (Ruhl, 2015)); βpt is a product×year fixed effect; and δc is an origin country
fixed effect. Related party share of U.S. importscpt is constructed using data from the U.S. Census Bureau. Because the product level c (HS6) for the unit value residual is
different from the product level p (NAICS) from the share of related party imports residuals, we compute the value weighted unit value residual at the p (NAICS) level
using a HS6-NAICS conversion table. This regression includes data from 2005 to 2014. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                       46
                                                        F IGURE A1: AVERAGE OUTPUT QUALITY AND FIRM SIZE
                                        66       65.5
                           Average Protein content
                              64.5      65
                                        64
                                        63.5




                                                        6           8             10               12             14
                                                                           Log(Total production)


Notes: Each dot represents one fishmeal firm in our sample. Total production is the total weight of fishmeal the firm produced during our data period
and average protein content is the quantity weighted average protein content of the firm’s fishmeal exports.




                                                                                 47
                                                  F IGURE A2: D ENSITY OF INVENTORIES
                               4
                               3
                            Density
                              21
                               0




                                      -75%          -50%           -25%           0         +25%           +50%           +75%
                                                                              Inventories
                                       kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0373



Notes: Kernel density of estimated inventories. Inventories are defined as the ratio of (Total Production - Total Exports) to Total Production, where Total
Production is a firm’s production during a given production season and Total Exports are the sum of exports that are shipped during the production
season and the period directly following the relevant production season (before the next production season starts).




                                                                               48
     F IGURE A3: E VOLUTION OF THE V ERTICALLY I NTEGRATED SHARE OF INPUTS I NDUSTRY- WIDE
                                             .8              .7
                           Share of inputs from VI suppliers
                                 .4        .5.3
                                             .2     .6




                                                                  2009-1   2009-2   2010-1   2010-2   2011-1   2011-2   2012-1   2012-2   2013-1   2013-2   2014-1   2015-1   2015-2   2016-1   2016-2




Notes: This graph shoes the evolution of the Peruvian fishmeal industry’s share of inputs from integrated suppliers by production season. For every year,
−1 is the first production season in the calendar year, in general from April to July, and −2 is the second production season, in general from November
to January.




                                                                                                                            49
                           F IGURE A4: F ISHMEAL PRICES IN P ERU AND OTHER COUNTRIES
                              2500
                              2000
                          $/MT
                              1500
                              1000




                                     2009m7          2011m7             2013m7             2015m7              2017m7

                                                 Peru average price                        Chile average price
                                                 Denmark average price                     Iceland average price



Notes: This figure shows the evolution of the average fishmeal price in other fishmeal exporting countries. Denmark and Iceland export mostly “Super
Prime” fishmeal grade while Peru exports mostly “Prime” grade fishmeal.




                                                                        50
Appendix B                 Dynamic Theoretical Framework and Relational Contracts

Dynamic theoretical framework
The model presented in the main body of the paper assumes that all transactions are done on the spot mar-
ket. This stylized version of the model results in the upstream party not taking any action when integrated
and the absence of incentives to take a quality-increasing action (a2 = 0). In this version of the model,
we follow closely Baker et al. (2001, 2002) in allowing the downstream party to use relational contracts to
incentivize the quality action.


      We make the same assumptions for Q as before, but add a shock to the alternative use P :

                                                        P = a1 + 
                                                        Q = Q0 − γa1 + δa2

where  is orthogonal to any action taken by the upstream party49 . We assume that  = ¯ with probability
1                                        1
2   and  = −¯ with probability         2   and that  is known by the upstream party at the time of delivery of the
inputs.     50



      As in the main text model, we assume that both P and Q are not contractible. P -the quantity focused
alternative use- is perfectly observable at the time of delivery of the inputs, but Q -the quality surplus- is
only observed to the downstream party with some delay (e.g. once the inputs are processed).51 To incen-
tivize the quality-increasing action, the downstream party can offer a payment contingent on the realization
of the surplus Q to the upstream party. However, since this payment can only be made after the inputs are
delivered, the downstream party can only credibly promise to make this delayed payment through repeated
interactions with the upstream party.52 Note again that at the time of delivery of the inputs, since all parties
know the value of Q0 , and because P = a1 +  is observable, Q has an observable portion (in expectation)
at the time of delivery of the inputs: Q̃ = Q0 − γE(a1 |P ) = Q0 − γP . Hence, a payment on the spot, pro-
portional to Q̃ is still feasible.


      As in Baker et al. (2002), we consider four possible organizational structures:

     1. Spot Outsourcing (Nonintegrated Asset Ownership, Spot Governance Environment)

     2. Relational Outsourcing (Nonintegrated Asset Ownership, Relational Governance Environment)

     3. Spot Employment (Integrated Asset Ownership, Spot Governance Environment)

     4. Relational Employment (Integrated Asset Ownership, Relational Governance Environment)
    49 Wecould also assume uncertainty over the realization of the Q surplus, but it would not change the intuition of the result below.
    50 Asin the main text model, we assume that 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 − α. Also, note again that P could itself be the result of a
bargaining process between the boat and a quantity focused firm.
  51 In our context, fish quality can hardly be assessed when the fish is offloaded at the factory. However, once the fish is processed in

the factory, fishmeal quality can be measured.
  52 In the model, we suppose that this delay is shorter than a full time period, so the surplus Q is observed before the next period

starts and the next transaction occurs. Thus, the downstream party does not discount the payment.




                                                                   51
We write the relational compensation contract as {b(Q)}, where b(Q) is a payment contingent on the obser-
vation of Q53 .


First Best

The first-best actions {a∗1 , a∗2 } maximize the expected value of Q minus the cost of actions c(a1 , a2 ) = 12 a21 +
1 2
2 a2 .   This gives a∗1 = 0 and a∗2 = δ and total surplus:

                                                                                     1
                                           S ∗ = Q(a∗1 , a∗2 ) − c(a∗1 , a∗2 ) = Q0 + δ 2
                                                                                     2

Spot Market

On the Spot Market, the supplier does not take the first best actions. In particular, under both Spot Employ-
ment and Spot Outsourcing a2 = 0, because the downstream firm cannot credibly commit to rewarding the
supplier’s quality-focused actions.


Relational Contracts

Whether the upstream party is integrated with the downstream party or not, if she accepts the relational
contract, she will choose actions a1 and a2 to solve:


                                                                   
                                                max = b Q(a1 , a2 ) − c(a1 , a2 )
                                                a1 ,a2

                                                                                                                      
    It is straightforward to see that the first best can only be achieved if the contract is of the form b Q(a1 , a2 ) =
Q(a1 , a2 ) − t, where t is a transfer independant of the surplus Q. In the remainder of this section, we as-
sume that the relational contract is written in such a way and that under relational employment (when the
downstream party owns the supplier) or under relational outsourcing (when the supplier is independent),
the suppliers take the first best actions {a∗1 , a∗2 } 54 .


    This relational contract is self-enforcing if both parties choose to honor it for all possible realizations of
P . We next explore the feasibility of the first best contract under employment and outsourcing and show
that if the shock to the alternative use P is high enough, the first best contract is only self-enforceable under
Relational Employment. We use superscripts {RE, SE, RO, SO} to indicate Relational Employment, Spot
Employment, Relational Outsourcing and Spot Outsourcing and {U , D, S} to denote the upstream party,
downstream party and overall surplus respectively.


Relational Employment

Since S SE > S SO , 55 if one of the two party reneges, the downstream party will retain ownership and earn
DSE in perpetuity, while the upstream party will earn U SE in perpetuity. The upstream party reneges if
  53 Alternatively, we could consider a more general relational compensation contract of the form {s, b(Q)} as in Baker et al. (2002),

where salary s is paid by downstream to upstream at the beginning of each period and b(Q) is a payment contingent on the realization
of Q. Such an assumption would not change our results below.
  54 In particular, t must be such that t ≤ Q(a∗ , a∗ ) − c(a∗ , a∗ ) = Q + 1 δ 2 so that the downstream party would accept the contract
                                               1 2           1 2         0  2
  55 See the proof in the main text model.




                                                                  52
she refuses to accept the promised payment b(Q). Thus, the upstream party does not renege as long as:

                                                               1      1
                                                         b(Q) + U RE ≥ U SE                                                                 (5)
                                                               r      r

    Similary, the downstream party reneges if she takes the inputs and refuses to pay the bonus to the
upstream party. The downstream party honors the contract as long as:

                                                         1 RE         1
                                                           D  ≥ b(Q) + DSE                                                                  (6)
                                                         r            r

    Summing (5) and (6), and noting that S X = U X + DX , we get the following necessary condition:


                                                                S RE ≥ S SE                                                                 (7)

    (7) is actually sufficient as well as necessary, because a transfer t can always be chosen so that when (7)
is statisfied, (5) and (6) are also satisfied 56 .


    As S RE = S ∗ = Q0 + 21 δ 2 and S SE = S ∗ = Q0 , (7) is satisfied, and so the first best can always be
enforced under Relational Employment.


Relational Outsourcing

Since S SE > S SO , if one of the two party reneges, the upstream party will purchase the ownership right
from the downstream party for some price π, after which the upstream and downstream parties will earn
U SE and DSE , respectively, in perpetuity. If the upstream party reneges on the relational-outsourcing
contract, she negociates to sell the good for the spot-outsourcing price of (1 − α)P + αQ̃, where α is the
supplier’s bargaining coefficient and Q̃ is the observable portion of the surplus Q as in the main text model.
Thus, the upstream party honors the contract as long as:

                                                1                       1
                                          b(Q) + U RO ≥ (1 − α)P + αQ̃ + U SE + π                                                           (8)
                                                r                       r
    The timing of reneging is slightly different for the downstream party. She has no incentives to renege at
the time of delivery of the inputs as Q is unobservable. Instead, the downstream party reneges if she takes
the inputs and refuses to pay the bonus to the upstream party. The downstream party does not renege as
long as:
                                                      1 RE         1
                                                        D  ≥ b(Q) + DSE − π                                                                 (9)
                                                      r            r
    If (8) holds for all P and Q̃, then it must hold for the maximum value of (1 − α)P + αQ̃. Summing (8)
and (9) we get the following necessary condition:

                                              1 RO  1
                                                S  ≥ S SE + max {(1 − α)P + αQ̃}                                                           (10)
                                              r     r
    Evaluated at {a∗1 , a∗2 }, (10) is equivalent to:
                                                                                                            1 r
  56 For   both (5) and (6) to be satisfied and the supplier to accept the contract, it must be that Q0 +   2 1+r
                                                                                                                  δ2   ≤ t ≤ Q0 + 21 δ 2




                                                                      53
                                                            1 2
                                         (1 − αγ − α)¯ ≤      δ − αQ0                                       (11)
                                                            2r
   Thus, if ¯ is high enough, the first best contract cannot be enforced under Relational Outsourcing.


   The intuition for why quality-oriented downstream firms may need to own upstream productive assets
and hire the suppliers operating the assets as employees is as follows. Under any sort of outsourcing, sup-
pliers are free to allocate the inputs produced to their alternative use. As a result, when the value of the
input is high in its alternative use (e.g. if the supplier happens to get more fish or if there is less competi-
tion on a specific day in the quantity-focused sector), quality-oriented firms may be unable to prevent the
suppliers they interact with from breaking their relationship and selling the goods for its alternative use. In
contrast, under Relational Employment, the downstream firm has control over the inputs, and will choose
to allocate them efficiently regardless of the value of the inputs in their alternative use.
   A key testable prediction of this model in our context is that (1) independent suppliers under a relational
contract should not adopt a behavior consistent with delivering higher quality inputs and (2) downstream
firms should not produce higher quality output when they source more of their inputs from non-integrated
suppliers with whom they have a relational contract.


Empirical evidence on relational contracts in the Peruvian fishmeal industry
We now test these predictions. We show results for two different, frequency-of-interacting based observable
proxies for a supplier being engaged in a relational outsourcing contract with a downstream firm: specifi-
cally, (i) that the supplier delivers more than 80 percent of its fish to the same fishmeal firm (approx. the 75th
percentile of the underlying distribution) for two consecutive production seasons, and (ii) that the supplier
delivers to the same firm more than 10 times (approx. the 25th percentile of the underlying distribution) in
a given production season and does so for three seasons in a row. We “turn on” the inferred contract at the
start of the relevant period, not when the “cut-off” used in the proxy is reached.
   In Appendix Table B1, which is analogous to Table 5, we show that relational outsourcing contracts
appear not to be used to incentivize supplier quality-increasing actions in the Peruvian fishmeal industry,
consistent with the dynamic version of our theoretical framework above. The results show that a supplier
supplying a given plant does not deliver fresher fish when engaged in repeated interactions with the firm
in question, relative to more isolated instances of supplying the same plant.
   In Appendix Table B2, which is analogous to Table 6, we relate output quality not only to the share
of inputs coming from integrated suppliers, but also to the share coming from suppliers under relational
outsourcing contracts (as defined by the proxies described above). The estimated coefficients on the share
of inputs coming from integrated suppliers remain positive and highly significant, while the estimated
coefficients on the share coming from suppliers under relational outsourcing contracts are very small and
insignificant. These results indicate that repeated interactions are not used to incentivize the delivery of
high quality inputs in the Peruvian fishmeal sector, as the model above predicts.
   In combination with the results in the body of the paper, the findings in tables 5 and 6 provide support
for the idea that vertical integration enables downstream firms to incentivize specific supplier behaviors—
and consequently the types of output associated with those behaviors—that other organizational structures
do not.


                                                       54
Organizational structure and supplier behavioral response to plant input quality needs
The dynamic model with relational contracts presented above also predicts the following result. When the
return on the quality surplus Q of the quality-increasing action is higher (when δ increases), integrated
suppliers will choose a higher level of the that action (a∗2 = δ increases). We test this prediction below.
    A change in the need for input quality arises when the plant aims to produce fishmeal of the high quality
type (for example because of a change in demand). As in Section 6, we compare periods when the supplier
is integrated with the plant supplied and periods when the supplier is independent from but supplies the
same plant, but now differentially when the downstream plant produces a low or high quality output.
    We first estimate the following equation:

                        Bijt = α + β1 I[VI × supplies owner firm]ijt × I[Low Quality]jt
                                   + β2 I[VI × supplies owner firm]ijt × I[High Quality]jt                                           (12)
                                   + γij × I[High Quality]jt + γij × I[Low Quality]jt + δt + εijt

where I[Low Quality]jt is a dummy equal to 1 when plant j—i.e. the plant supplier i supplies at t—produces
comparatively low quality fishmeal in the month date t falls within (and conversely for I[High Quality]jt ).57
We include Supplier × Plant × Quality level fixed effects (that is, γij × I[High Quality]jt and γij × I[Low Quality]jt
) to focus on the supplier’s differential response to the plant’s input needs when integrated. The other vari-
ables are as defined in equation (4).
    The marginal impact of the behavioral response of a single supplier on the output quality of the plant as
a whole is likely to be limited. We thus interpret the coefficient of interest as the supplier’s response to the
plant’s intention to produce higher quality output.
    The results in Appendix Table B3 suggest that suppliers differentially adapt their quality behavior to the
current needs of the downstream plant they supply when integrated. Column 1 shows that boats tend to
deliver a lower quantity per trip when integrated with the plant supplied, regardless of whether the plant
produces low or high quality at the time.58 However, columns 2 and 3 show that, when integrated, boats
adjust their behavior so as to deliver fresher fish when the plant supplied is producing high quality output.
When integrated, boats fish about seven percent closer to port and spend about six percent less time at
sea, when the plant supplied is producing fishmeal of the high quality type Overall, the evidence confirms
the prediction from the relational model that integrated suppliers will provide more of the quality focused
action when its return to the quality surplus is higher.




  57 We define this dummy variable using our directly observed measure of quality at plant level. The dummy is equal to 1 if the share

of the plant’s production that is of high quality type is higher than the median in our sample.
  58 The estimated decrease in quantity per trip when integrating with the plant being supplied is bigger when the plant is producing

low quality fishmeal. This is surprising in light of our results in sections 7 and 5. A possible explanation is that independent suppliers
face strong incentives to deliver high input quantities when the plant being supplied is attempting to produce high output quantities
(and prioritizing output quality less) and that integrated suppliers do not.


                                                                   55
                      TABLE B1: S UPPLIER B EHAVIOR AND RELATIONAL OUTSOURCING


           Panel A: Relational outsourcing = 80% of offloads to the same firm for 2 consecutive production seasons
                                             XXXXXXXXXXX               XXXXXXXXXXX                   XXXXXXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                               Log(Quantity supplied) Log(Max. distance from                Log(Total time
                                                                        the plant’s port)               spent at sea)
                                             XXXXXXXXXXX               XXXXXXXXXXX                   XXXXXXXXXXX
                                                    (1)                        (2)                           (3)
 I[Relational × supplies relational firm]                   0.010                           0.016∗                           −0.000
                                                           (0.007)                         (0.009)                           (0.006)

 Date FEs                                                     Yes                            Yes                                Yes
 Supplier × Plant FEs                                         Yes                            Yes                                Yes
 N                                                         315,442                         137,278                            159,724
 Panel B: Relational Outsourcing = more than 10 interactions with the same firm for at least 3 consecutive production seasons
                                            XXXXXXXXXXX                 XXXXXXXXXXX                    XXXXXXXXXXX
 Dep. var:                               Log(Quantity supplied) Log(Max. distance from                  Log(Total time
                                                                        the plant’s port)                spent at sea)
                                            XXXXXXXXXXX                 XXXXXXXXXXX                    XXXXXXXXXXX
                                                    (1)                        (2)                            (3)
 I[Relational × supplies relational firm]                 −0.009                            0.026                              0.002
                                                          (0.020)                          (0.022)                            (0.015)

 Date FEs                                                     Yes                            Yes                                Yes
 Supplier × Plant FEs                                         Yes                            Yes                                Yes
 N                                                         315,442                         137,278                            159,724
 Notes: One observation is a boat during a fishing trip. Quantity supplied is the amount of fish the boat delivers to the plant per trip. Max.
distance from the plant’s port is maximum distance a specific boat is observed away from port. Max. distance from the plant’s port can only be
measured if the boat leaves from and arrives at the same port. Total time at sea is the amount of time the boat is away from port per trip. The
number of observations varies from one column to the next as GPS variables for a given trip are sometimes missing. We define I[Relational
×supplies relational firm] to be equal to one if the supplier is (i) currently under a relational contract (ii) currently delivering to the firm it is
under a relational contract with. In Panel A, we define an independent boat as being under a relational contract if the boat delivers more than
80% of its offloads (75th percentile) to the same fishmeal firm for 2 consecutive fishing seasons. In Panel B, we define an independent boat as
being under a relational contract if the boat interacts more than 10 times (25th percentile) with the same firm during a fishing season and so,
for at least 3 consecutive fishing seasons. Because use Boat × Plant FEs, I[Relational ×supplies relational firm] is identified from boats moving
in and out of a relational contract. Standard errors clustered at the boat level are included in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                         56
TABLE B2: O UTPUT         QUALITY AND SHARE OF INPUTS FROM VERTICALLY INTEGRATED SUPPLIERS AND
SUPPLIERS UNDER A RELATIONAL OUTSOURCING CONTRACT



                                                          XXXXXX
                                          Panel A: First definition of relational contracts
                                                          XXXXXX          XXXXXXXX          XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
      Dep. var:                                           High Quality share of prod.           Protein content

                                                                    (1)                 (2)                   (3)                 (4)
      Share of inputs from VI suppliers                           0.343∗∗             0.372∗∗                0.950∗∗            1.039∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.153)             (0.161)               (0.348)             (0.333)
      Share of inputs from relational suppliers                 −0.100              −0.009                −0.159              −0.003
                                                                (0.093)             (0.065)               (0.520)             (0.430)
      High technology share of capacity                             No                  Yes                   No                 Yes
      Season FEs                                                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes
      Firm FEs                                                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes
      Mean of Dep. Var.                                            0.75                0.75                  65.7                65.7
      N                                                            275                 275                   208                 208
                                                         XXXXXX
                                         Panel B: Second definition of relational contracts
                                                         XXXXXX
      Dep. var:                                          High Quality share of prod.                            Protein content

                                                                    (1)                 (2)                   (3)                 (4)
      Share of inputs from VI suppliers                           0.395∗∗             0.395∗∗               0.949∗∗∗            0.997∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.164)             (0.162)               (0.265)             (0.250)
      Share of inputs from relational suppliers                 −0.424∗∗∗           −0.481∗∗∗               0.809               1.076
                                                                (0.141)             (0.131)                (2.015)             (1.812)
      High technology share of capacity                             No                  Yes                   No                 Yes
      Season FEs                                                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes
      Firm FEs                                                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes
      Mean of Dep. Var.                                            0.75                0.75                  65.7                65.7
      N                                                            275                 275                   208                 208
      Notes: One observation is a firm during a production season. Protein content is the quantity weighted average of a measure of
     quality inferred from a database that provides weekly prices by quality. Log(unit price) is the log of the quantity weighted average
     unit price of exports during a season. Share of inputs from VI suppliers is the share of a firm’s (or plant’s) inputs that come from VI
     suppliers during a season. Steel boats tend to be bigger, better suited for industrial fishing, and are subject to different regulations.
     High capacity boats are boats whose hold capacity is in the upper quartile of the distribution. Boats without integrated cooling
     system use ice to keep fish fresh. High technology share of capacity controls for the share of the firm’s total processing capacity (mea-
     sured in metric tons per hour and averaged across all active plants within the firm) that uses steam drying technology. Standard
     errors clustered at the firm level are included in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                          57
     TABLE B3: S UPPLIER B EHAVIOR , V ERTICAL I NTEGRATION AND O UTPUT Q UALITY


                                                                                    Panel A
 Dep. var:                                      Log(Quantity supplied)        Log(Max. distance from           Log(Total time
                                                                                 the plant’s port)              spent at sea)
                                                    XXXXXXXXXXX                  XXXXXXXXXXX                  XXXXXXXXXXX
                                                         (1)                            (2)                         (3)
 I[VI × supplies owner firm]                            −0.133∗∗∗                        0.017                    −0.013
      ×I[Plant producing low quality]                   (0.043)                         (0.047)                   (0.031)
 I[VI × supplies owner firm]                            −0.066∗∗                       −0.067∗∗∗                  −0.042∗∗
      ×I[Plant producing high quality]                  (0.029)                        (0.026)                    (0.019)

 Date FEs                                                   Yes                            Yes                       Yes
 Supplier × Plant × High Quality FEs                        Yes                            Yes                       Yes
 N                                                       314,383                        136,538                    158,918
 p-val - Test: two coefficients equal                      0.00                           0.03                       0.04
 Notes: One observation is a supplier during a fishing trip. This table is similar to Table 5, but with I[VI × supplies owner firm]
interacted with the quality produced by the downstream plant. Quantity supplied is the amount of fish the boat delivers to the
plant per trip. Max. distance from the plant’s port is maximum distance a specific boat is observed away from port. Max. distance
from the plant’s port can only be measured if the boat leaves from and arrives at the same port. Total time at sea is the amount of
time the boat is away from port per trip. I[Plant producing high quality] is a dummy equal to one if the plant the supplier de-
livers to produces only high quality fishmeal. The number of observations varies from one column to the next as GPS variables
for on given trip are sometimes missing. Standard errors clustered at the boat level are included in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                  58
Appendix C                How Demand for Output Quality Affects Vertical Integra-
                          tion
In this section, we develop an alternative strategy to the one presented in section 5 to show that firms choose
to integrate their suppliers when they face increased demand for high quality fishmeal. To do so, we develop
an IV strategy that exploits quality-differentiated firm-specific demand shocks. We find that these shocks
cause firms to increase their Share VI.


C.1     Empirical strategy
The logic behind our instruments for the quality grade of a firm’s exports at a given point in time relies on
two important facts about the Peruvian fishmeal sector. First, there is an exceptionally tight link between
quality grade and export destination. This is apparent in the export transactions data, where some destina-
tion countries (e.g. Chile and Japan) consistently buy higher unit price and protein content fishmeal than
other countries.59 Sales records provided by a large firm drive home this connection. Country names are
frequently used as a shorthand to represent different qualities—the quality column for exports is often sim-
ply filled in with the name of a country (e.g. “Thailand quality”). An increase in demand from high quality
importers should thus increase the quality content of Peruvian fishmeal exports.
    The second important fact about the Peruvian fishmeal sector is that the timing of sales contracts relative
to production is typically such that a firm can integrate or sell suppliers in a given production season in
response to high or low demand from particular importer countries. An industry association informed us
that almost all contracts for a given season’s production are negotiated either before the season starts, or
early in the season.
    In the second stage, we estimate how acquisitions/sales of suppliers and firms’ input mix respond to the
quality grade produced:
                                            VIit = α + β1 Qualityit + γi + δt + εit                                               (13)

We control for firm and production season fixed effects and cluster the standard errors at firm level as in
Section 7.
    To construct our demand shocks, we follow an approach similar to Bastos et al. (2018) (see also Park
et al. (2009); Brambilla et al. (2012)). In the first stage, quality grade produced is instrumented by demand
shocks from specific destinations as follows:

                                        Qualityit = γi + δt + ∑ βj (Ii,t̄ S−i,t ) + εit
                                                                             j    j
                                                                                                                                  (14)
                                                                    j


where j is an export destination country, and Iji,t̄ S−i
                                                      j                                    j
                                                         ,t are our excluded instruments. Ii,t̄ is a dummy variable
                                                                                           j
equal to one if firm i exports to destination j at least once during our analysis period. S−i ,t is the leave-firm-
out share of Peru’s fishmeal exports going to country j in season t, a proxy for the relative demand for firm
i coming from destination j at a given point in time. Changes in j’s demand should matter more for firms
                                                                                                 j          j
that previously exported to j, which we capture in the interaction between S−i,t and Ii,t̄ . A high βj should
  59 See Appendix Table A1 for a list of the main importers of Peruvian fishmeal and the average quality imported. Note that, as for

humans, quantity and quality of feed (the latter here defined by protein content) are highly imperfect substitutes for the animals that
consume fishmeal.


                                                                  59
represent a high quality importer country. We present the results of this specification in columns 3 and 4 of
Appendix Table C1).
                                                                                                j
    In an alternative approach (presented in columns 5 and 5 of Appendix Table C1), we replace S−i ,t by
       j
Quality−i ,t , the leave-firm-out average quality of Peru’s fishmeal exports going to country j in season t. In
that case, a positive and high βj represents a high willingness of Peruvian firms to respond to the higher
demand for quality expressed by other countries. Conversely, a negative βj represents a substitution effect:
if an importer country starts buying higher quality output from other exporters, that same country would
start buying low quality from other firms.


C.2     Results
We find that firms respond to positive shocks to demand for high quality fishmeal by sourcing a higher
share of their inputs from suppliers that have been integrated.60
    The OLS and the second stage IV results are reported in Appendix Table C1. The estimates indicate that
a one percentage point increase in the average protein content demanded—about 20 percent of approx. 63-
68 percent range observed in Peru—induces the firm to source between 4 and 6 percent more of its inputs
from integrated suppliers. As presented in Table 2, most of the variation in the share of inputs sourced from
integrated suppliers comes from acquiring and selling suppliers.
    Our interpretation of the results in Appendix Table C1 is that firms vertically integrate in order to be able to
produce high quality output. A potential alternative is that the liquidity that comes along with greater demand
(rather than the demand for quality itself) may affect firms’ ability to integrate. That is, if firms’ seasonal
revenues are expected to be higher when relative demand for quality is high, they may be better able to
access the capital necessary to vertically integrate, but actually integrate for other reasons than to satisfy the
demand for high quality. We address the concern by including controls for total seasonal sales. This has
little effect on the estimated coefficients.
    In the first stage, we use the 20 countries that import the most fishmeal from Peru (see Appendix Table
A1). Since China represents about 50 percent of total exports, we split China into 4 sub-countries, and we
do so by using the destination port within China of each specific shipment. Our results are very similar if
instead we use the 10 biggest importer countries or we use LASSO regressions to choose the importer coun-
tries whose demand fluctuations most affect quality grade exported.61 The first stage results are reported in
Appendix Table C1 62 .
    Since the existing literature that uses destination country demand shocks for identification often strug-
gles with weak instruments, we compute the Kleibergen-Paap and Anderson-Rubin Wald test statistics.
Comparing the statistics reported in Table 4 to the Stock-Yogo critical values63 , while we do not pass the
  60 The IV coefficients in columns 3 to 6 are bigger than the OLS coefficients in columns 1 and 2. We believe this is in part to be expected

because the relationship between output quality and vertical integration at firm level estimated in Table 3 partly reflects a causal effect
of organizational structure on output quality and partly other mechanisms. If the OLS estimates in that table are biased upwards, we
would expect the OLS estimates here to be biased downwards, as we study the inverse relationship.
  61 LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator) is a regression analysis method that performs both variable selection and

regularization in order to enhance the prediction accuracy and interpretability of the statistical model it produces, penalizing the model
for including more regressors. LASSO selects eight importer countries.
  62 The sign of the coefficients for each instrument in column 3 and 4 are broadly consistent with the relative average quality imported

by each country (See Appendix Table A1). It is more difficult to interpret the sign of the first stage in column 5 and 6 as the sign reflects
the strength of the tie between a specific destinations and Peruvian exporters.
  63 Though Stock-Yogo’s critical values are computed for the homoskedastic case, it is standard practice to compare the Kleibergen-

Paap Wald test statistics to these critical values even when one reports standard errors that allow for heteroskedasticity.



                                                                     60
Kleibergen-Paap under-identification test, we reject the null hypothesis that our instruments are weak (as
the F-statistic surpasses the 10 percent critical value). We also reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on
the excluded instruments are jointly zero when they are included in place of quality itself in the second stage
regression using the Anderson-Rubin Wald test. It is additionally important to note that weak instruments
would bias the IV coefficients downward, i.e., towards the OLS coefficients, rather than upward. See Bastos
et al. (2018) for a lengthier discussion of this issue in the context of “demand pull” instruments.
   The strategic changes in organizational structure in response to changes in the composition of demand
are consistent with the integration→quality relationship shown in Section 7 and confirm the results shown
in section 5 that firms integrate when they face incentives to quality upgrade. We conclude that Peruvian
manufacturing firms are aware of, and act on, their greater ability to produce high quality grade output
when their suppliers have been integrated.




                                                      61
TABLE C1: V ERTICALLY I NTEGRATED S HARE                              OF      I NPUTS        AND        O UTPUT Q UALITY - I NSTRUMENTING
WITH F IRM - SPECIFIC D EMAND S HOCKS

                                                                   XXXXXX      XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX                        XXXXXX
                   Dep. var:                                                       Share of inputs from VI suppliers

                                                                      OLS          OLS         IV          IV           IV           IV
                                                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                   Protein content                                   0.028∗      0.031∗∗     0.060∗       0.061∗       0.039∗       0.042∗
                                                                    (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.034)      (0.033)      (0.023)      (0.024)
                   Log(Sales)                                                   −0.013                  −0.031                    −0.020
                                                                                (0.014)                 (0.019)                   (0.016)
                   Season FEs                                         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                   Firm FEs                                           Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                   Mean of Dep. Var.                                  0.30         0.30       0.30        0.30         0.30         0.30
                   N                                                  192          192        192         192          192          192

                                                                                                 First Stage
                   Dep. var:                                                                  Protein Content

                                                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                   China - HUANGPU                                                          −2.029      −1.152       −5.563∗∗∗ −5.125∗∗
                                                                                            (1.570)     (1.493)      (1.983)   (1.878)
                   China - SHANGHAI                                                          0.380        0.801      −1.705∗∗     −1.843∗∗
                                                                                            (1.066)      (1.159)     (0.792)      (0.771)
                   Germany                                                                  −0.219∗∗∗ −0.214∗∗∗ −0.037∗∗∗ −0.040∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.057)   (0.053)   (0.005)   (0.006)
                   China - other                                                            −1.791∗∗    −1.922∗∗∗ −0.406          −0.155
                                                                                            (0.721)     (0.690)   (0.284)         (0.311)
                   Japan                                                                    −0.175      −0.454       −0.166       −0.207
                                                                                            (0.573)     (0.417)      (0.215)      (0.259)
                   China - DALIAN                                                           −0.168        0.298        0.024        0.008
                                                                                            (0.648)      (0.570)      (0.165)      (0.159)
                   Chile                                                                     0.392∗∗∗     0.405∗∗∗     0.078∗∗∗     0.078∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.139)      (0.126)      (0.022)      (0.022)
                   Vietnam                                                                   0.124        0.111        0.321∗∗∗     0.253∗∗
                                                                                            (0.372)      (0.319)      (0.102)      (0.122)
                   Taiwan                                                                    0.108∗       0.098∗       0.039∗∗∗     0.040∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.057)      (0.054)      (0.005)      (0.004)
                   United Kingdom                                                            0.020        0.010        0.004        0.010
                                                                                            (0.135)      (0.124)      (0.006)      (0.007)
                   Turkey                                                                   −0.004      −0.016       −0.001       −0.002
                                                                                            (0.031)     (0.038)      (0.004)      (0.006)
                   Indonesia                                                                 0.435        0.357        0.191        0.101
                                                                                            (0.261)      (0.225)      (0.158)      (0.087)
                   Spain                                                                     0.310∗       0.295      −0.064       −0.014
                                                                                            (0.177)      (0.192)     (0.127)      (0.146)
                   Australia                                                                 0.048        0.056        0.002        0.000
                                                                                            (0.038)      (0.033)      (0.005)      (0.004)
                   Canada                                                                   −0.135      −0.239         0.015        0.012
                                                                                            (0.292)     (0.268)       (0.104)      (0.093)
                   France                                                                   −0.600∗     −0.498       −0.232       −0.145
                                                                                            (0.336)     (0.302)      (0.161)      (0.090)
                   Greece                                                                    0.000      −0.001         0.002        0.001
                                                                                            (0.011)     (0.012)       (0.003)      (0.003)
                   Korea, Rep                                                                0.021      −0.003         0.007        0.004
                                                                                            (0.021)     (0.021)       (0.005)      (0.005)
                   Italy                                                                    −0.007      −0.003         0.004        0.004
                                                                                            (0.016)     (0.018)       (0.003)      (0.003)
                   Bulgaria                                                                  0.020        0.015        0.001        0.001
                                                                                            (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.003)      (0.003)
                   Firm FEs                                                                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                   Season FEs                                                                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                   Log(Sales)                                                                 No           Yes          No           Yes

                   Kleibergen-Paap LM p-value (Under-id)                                     0.53         0.46         0.53         0.45
                   Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic (Weak inst)                            527.3        504.0        962.6        671.75
                   Anderson-Rubin Wald test p-value                                          0.00         0.00         0.00         0.00

                  Notes: One observation is a firm during a production season. Share of inputs from VI suppliers is the share of a firm’s
                  inputs that come from VI suppliers during a season. Protein content is the quantity weighted average of a measure
                  of quality inferred with a database that provides weekly prices by quality. The instruments are interactions of indica-
                  tors for at least one export in our analysis period to each of the top 20 destination countries with leave-firm-out share
                  of Peru’s fishmeal exports towards the destination in the relevant season (columns 3 and 4) or leave-firm-out average
                  protein content exported towards the destinatiion in the relevant season (columns 5 and 6). Standard errors clustered
                  at the firm level are included in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                              62
