Voter Mobilization and Trust in Electoral Institutions: Evidence from Kenya
Benjamin Marx, Vincent Pons, and Tavneet Suri
NBER Working Paper No. 23946
October 2017, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. O55,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

In a large-scale randomized experiment implemented with Kenya’s Electoral Commission in
2013, text messages intended to mobilize voters boosted electoral participation. However, the
messages also decreased trust in electoral institutions after the election. This decrease was
stronger for individuals on the losing side of the election and in areas that experienced election-
related violence. We hypothesize that the mobilization campaign backfired because the Electoral
Commission promised a transparent and orderly electoral process but failed to deliver on these
expectations. Several potential mechanisms account for the intervention’s unexpected effects,
including a simple model where signaling capacity via mobilization messages can negatively
affect beliefs about the fairness of the election.

Benjamin Marx                                    Tavneet Suri
Sciences Po                                      MIT Sloan School of Management
Department of Economics                          100 Main Street, E62-517
28 Rue des Saints-Peres                          Cambridge, MA 02142
75007 Paris                                      and NBER
France                                           tavneet@mit.edu
benjamin.marx@sciencespo.fr

Vincent Pons
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 289
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vpons@hbs.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/30
           Voter Mobilization and Trust in Electoral Institutions:
                                         Evidence from Kenya∗

                         Benjamin Marx†                Vincent Pons‡              Tavneet Suri§


                                                   September 2020



                                                         Abstract


       In a large-scale randomized experiment implemented with Kenya’s Electoral Commission in 2013, text
       messages intended to mobilize voters boosted electoral participation. However, the messages also de-
       creased trust in electoral institutions after the election. This decrease was stronger for individuals on
       the losing side of the election and in areas that experienced election-related violence. We hypothesize
       that the mobilization campaign backfired because the Electoral Commission promised a transparent
       and orderly electoral process but failed to deliver on these expectations. Several potential mechanisms
       account for the intervention’s unexpected effects, including a simple model where signaling capacity
       via mobilization messages can negatively affect beliefs about the fairness of the election.


    Keywords: Elections, Electoral Institutions, Trust, Field Experiment, Kenya

    JEL Classification: C93, D02, D72, O55




   ∗
       We are grateful to Suleiman Asman, Bonnyface Mwangi, Gayathri Ramani, and Eleanor Wiseman for outstanding re-
search management and assistance in the field, and we thank Diego Aparicio, Layane El Hor, and Shweta Bhogale for ex-
cellent research assistance in Cambridge. We benefited from helpful comments and suggestions from Eli Berman, Esther
Duflo, Horacio Larreguy, Benjamin Olken, as well as seminar audiences at the 2013 APSA Annual Meeting, Brown Univer-
sity, Duke University, the MIT Sloan Centennial, University of Capetown, University of Washington Seattle, Williams College,
Yale University, and the Spring 2016 WGAPE Meeting. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the MIT Sloan
School of Management, the Program on Innovation in Markets and Organizations at MIT Sloan and the J-PAL Governance
Initiative. The experiment was registered at the American Economic Association RCT registry in April 2014, available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/30.
     †
       Sciences Po Department of Economics and CEPR. Email: benjamin.marx@sciencespo.fr.
     ‡
       Harvard Business School and NBER. Email: vpons@hbs.edu.
     §
       MIT Sloan School of Management and NBER. Email: tavneet@mit.edu. Corresponding author: E62-517, 100 Main Street,
Cambridge MA 02142.
1   Introduction
A key challenge faced by democracies is to organize transparent elections that reinforce citizens’ trust in
their electoral system. At the same time, electoral institutions are responsible for ensuring that all citizens
are enfranchised and participate in the democratic process. Voter mobilization in these contexts comes at
a potential risk: mobilized citizens are more likely to observe, and (potentially) to be disappointed with
the shortcomings of election administration. These trade-offs are likely to be most salient in settings with
a newly established or fragile electoral institutions.
    In the long term, voter participation and trust are essential for the consolidation of democracy (Lipset,
1959; Powell, 1982). Trust may also be a fundamental determinant of institutional quality and develop-
ment (Nunn, 2009; Algan and Cahuc, 2013; Acemoglu et al., 2020). As a result, vast resources are being
spent to make elections more transparent and to increase participation in developing countries, includ-
ing a recent emphasis on digital voting and reporting technologies. Previous studies have focused on the
impact of various forms of information provision and monitoring to target clientelism and vote-buying
(Fujiwara and Wantchekon, 2013; Vicente, 2014) or voter fraud (Callen and Long, 2015). However, the
findings from this literature are generally limited to short-run electoral outcomes. There is less evidence
about the impacts of voter mobilization on attitudes towards elections and democracy.
    In this paper, we show that basic information provided via mobile phone can increase electoral par-
ticipation whilst simultaneously affecting attitudes towards the electoral system. These findings were
obtained from a text messaging experiment conducted before the 2013 general elections in Kenya. In the
six days leading up to the election, the Kenyan Electoral Commission (IEBC) sent eleven million SMS to
slightly less than two million registered voters (14% of the electorate) across 12,160 randomly selected
polling stations. The messages gave either basic encouragements to vote, information on the positions
to be voted for on Election Day, or detailed information on the IEBC. Messages were sent to registered
voters who provided their phone number to the IEBC. Unfortunately, the IEBC encountered numerous
technical problems, signalling to the electorate the shortcomings of Kenya’s electoral institutions.
    We use official electoral data and survey data to measure the effects of this SMS campaign on voter
participation, as well as attitudes and trust in institutions. Our estimates show that the text messages had
a positive effect on voter turnout, and no effects on candidate vote shares. While the campaign’s effects
on administrative turnout are small in magnitude (0.3 percentage points, or 0.04 SD), our unusually large
sample size allows us to precisely measure these effects. We then show that the treatments substantially
decreased trust in Kenya’s electoral institutions. Eight months after the election, recipients of the text
messages report lower levels of trust towards the IEBC and lower satisfaction with the functioning of
democracy in Kenya. However, the mobilization campaign did not reduce support for democratic ideals.
The negative effects on trust are stronger for individuals associated with the losing side of the election,
and for voters in constituencies that experienced some election-related violence.
    We explore several mechanisms that could be driving these unexpected effects on attitudes. First,
the SMS campaign could have raised voters’ demands and turned them into “critical democrats” (Nor-
ris, 2011) displaying more skepticism towards their electoral institutions as well as greater engagement
with politics. We show that this explanation is unlikely to hold since, overall, treated voters did not


                                                         1
report higher levels of information about politics after the election. Second, the diminished trust to-
wards the IEBC could be driven by voters who turned out because of the mobilization campaign, and were
disappointed by this voting experience. We test this mechanism by estimating trust and turnout effects
among individuals who voted in previous elections and were therefore highly likely to turn out in 2013.1
Among these voters, the mobilization campaign had no effect on turnout but a negative effect on trust
of the same magnitude as that observed in the entire sample. Thus, “compliers” to the mobilization
experiment are unlikely to be driving the campaign’s negative effects on trust. Third, these effects could
have resulted from increased expectations and disappointment caused by the mobilization campaign.
However, this mechanism is at odds with our heterogeneous results among voters for whom the failures
of election administration were more or less salient. We provide a detailed discussion of these potential
mechanisms in Section 7.
       Our preferred interpretation is that the IEBC’s mobilization campaign sent mixed signals about the
capacity and impartiality of Kenya’s electoral institutions. On the one hand, the campaign reinforced
voters’ perceptions that the main role of Kenya’s Electoral Commission was to guarantee free and fair
elections, while it did not increase knowledge of the IEBC’s other key missions (conduct elections, count
votes, demarcate boundaries, voter registration, and voter education). On the other hand, individuals
who received messages from the IEBC could observe that it had the resources to conduct a mass tex-
ting campaign—conveying a signal of high capacity. We show in a simple model that election failures
observed after receiving a signal of capacity would have led citizens to re-evaluate their belief that the
election was fair. Our empirical results suggest that, overall, the capacity signal trumped other signals,
at the cost of undermining citizens’ beliefs about the impartiality of their electoral institutions. Thus,
mobilization campaigns conveying simple messages face complex trade-offs in contexts where electoral
institutions must still build a reputation of impartiality. Mobilization signals ultimately have the poten-
tial to decrease trust in democratic institutions in fragile democracies.
       Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, we build on a growing literature
exploring the determinants of electoral capacity in developing countries. Previous work in this litera-
ture has emphasized issues of voter registration and voter fraud. For example, Ichino and Schündeln
(2012) and Ascencio and Rueda (2019) study the effects of independent and partisan election observers
in Ghana and Mexico, respectively. Harris et al. (2020) find little evidence that SMS reminders (or civic
education messages) on their own improve voter registration outcomes in Kenya. Neggers (2018) ran-
domizes the identity of polling station observers in India and shows that the religious and caste com-
position of the electoral personnel affects electoral outcomes. Berman et al. (2019) show that decreasing
electoral misconduct improves attitudes towards government institutions in Afghanistan.
       We report the findings from an unusally large policy experiment implemented in collaboration with
Kenya’s newly established electoral commission, the IEBC. Our study was unique not only in terms of
scale, but also for the context in which it took place. The 2013 Kenyan election took place in the midst
of broad institutional change initiated by the 2010 constitutional referendum. The 2013 election was also
the first major election conducted in Kenya since the 2007-08 post-electoral violence, in which hundreds

1
    In the control group, 97% of citizens who voted in the 2007 election and the 2010 referendum also voted in 2013.


                                                                 2
of thousands of individuals were displaced and thousands lost their lives. This setting allows us to
study how a new electoral institution establishes its credibility in fragile settings. This also speaks to the
literature on elections conducted in post-conflict or transitional societies (Lyons, 2004; Finkel et al., 2012;
Driscoll and Hidalgo, 2014; Arriola et al., 2017). There is little rigorous evidence on the work done by
electoral commissions in these contexts, despite the prominent role that these institutions aim to play in
fostering peace and reconciliation. This paper fills this gap by showing the tradeoffs faced by the IEBC
in consolidating the democratic process in Kenya.
       Beyond the direct influence of institutions on the electoral process, trust and satisfaction with these
institutions also matter for the functioning of democracy (Linz and Stepan, 1996; Diamond, 1999). The
literature distinguishes between general support for democratic ideals and satisfaction with the way
democracy works in a particular society. While support for democracy is relatively high and stable over
time (Klingemann, 1999), satisfaction with democracy and trust in institutions are in general much lower,
both in older and newer democracies (Norris, 2011; Doorenspleet, 2012). Yet these attitudes matter for the
quality and stability of democracy. Trust and political efficacy have been associated with higher electoral
participation (Blais and Rubenson, 2013; Gerber et al., 2013) and system stability (Lipset, 1959; Powell,
1982). Conversely, dissatisfaction with the democratic process (especially among losers of elections) can
lead to violent forms of protests (Nadeau and Blais, 1993).2 In this literature, we relate in particular
to studies that show that improving election administration can increase satisfaction with democracy
(Berman et al., 2019) by improving citizens’ confidence that their vote was actually counted (Atkeson
and Saunders, 2007) and their assessment of government performance (Dahlberg et al., 2015).
       Finally, a large experimental literature (starting with the seminal study of Gerber and Green (2000))
shows that information can affect electoral outcomes and enfranchise underrepresented groups of citi-
zens (Braconnier et al., 2017). Several of these studies focus on developing countries (Wantchekon, 2003;
Fujiwara and Wantchekon, 2013; Vicente, 2014). These studies generally report experimental effects on
short-term electoral outcomes, such as voter turnout and candidate vote shares. We make three con-
tributions to this literature. First, beyond immediate effects of our intervention on turnout, we look
at a different outcome—the evolution of attitudes towards electoral institutions after the election has
taken place. Second, we highlight the potential trade-off between building up expectations about the
democratic process (via increased mobilization of voters) and increasing the probability of disappoint-
ing these expectations and disenfranchising losers. Third, building on Dale and Strauss (2009), Malhotra
et al. (2011), and Bhatti et al. (2017), we provide evidence about the effectiveness of text messages as a
medium to convey information in a developing country.3
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on electoral
institutions in Kenya. We describe our experimental design in section 3 and our data in section 4. Sec-
tion 5 presents our empirical framework and Section 6 our main findings. Section 7 explores potential
mechanisms and Section 8 concludes.
2
    Mattes and Bratton (2007) provide a review of the determinants of institutional trust and satisfaction with democracy.
3
    In addition, we assess the extent to which information conveyed by text messages disseminates, since we varied the fraction
    of phone holders that received the message. Existing evidence on the impact of SMS on electoral participation is mixed: initial
    studies in the GOTV literature highlighted the importance of face-to-face interactions, but subsequent research (Aker et al.,
    2017) found that text messages could be effective.


                                                                  3
2     Background
2.1     The IEBC

The 2013 Kenyan election took place in a context of broad institutional change initiated by the 2010
constitutional referendum. The new Constitution established an Independent Electoral and Boundaries
Commission (IEBC) in lieu of the defunct ECK, which was disbanded in the aftermath of the divisive and
controversial 2007 election. From the outset, establishing a reputation of credibility and impartiality was
a major challenge for the IEBC. Appendix Figure C.1 shows that support for the previous Commission
was more than halved between 2005 and 2008, and that satisfaction with democracy in Kenya did not
improve in that timeframe, in contrast to other countries in the Afrobarometer sample.
      The 2013 elections were considered “the first real test of Kenya’s new Constitution and new electoral
framework” (EU Observation Mission, 2013). For the first time, Kenyan voters were asked to vote for six
different positions on the same day: President, Member of Parliament, Ward Representative, Governor,
Senator, and Women’s Representative. A key step taken by the IEBC to reduce electoral fraud in these
elections was the purchase of Biometric Voter Registration (BVR) kits and Electronic Voter Identification
(EVI) machines to mitigate identification issues in the voter register. These devices were designed to
make sure that every individual in the new IEBC register could be uniquely identified from their fin-
gerprints and photographs. The system would process the biometrics electronically and match every
person turning up at the polls to a registered voter in its database. In addition, the IEBC relied on an
Electronic Transmission of Results System (ETRS) that would make available online, in real time, the
polling station-level results, allowing the public to monitor the tallying of votes across the country.


2.2     The 2013 Election

Eight candidates contested the 2013 presidential election, two of which were considered frontrunners:
the incumbent Deputy Prime Minister, Uhuru Kenyatta (a Kikuyu), and the sitting Prime Minister, Raila
Odinga (a Luo), who had narrowly lost the 2007 election. Voters from the Kikuyu and Luo ethnic groups
(often referred to in Kenya as tribes) were expected to support their respective candidates; and estimates
based on exit polls suggest this was indeed the case (Ferree et al., 2014). In addition, each candidate
built a coalition with one other major tribe through their choice of running mate. Kenyatta formed a
ticket with a Kalenjin (William Ruto) under the banner of the Jubillee Alliance, while Odinga formed a
coalition with a Kamba (Kalonzo Musyoka), called the Coalition for Reforms and Democracy (CORD).
      Five days after the election, Kenyatta was declared the winner of the presidential ballot with 50.07%
of the vote. Odinga, who garnered 43.7% of the vote, filed a petition with the Kenyan Supreme Court
to contest the outcome of the election. The petition claimed that the ballot should be declared null and
void due to the failures of the BVR kits and of the electronic tallying system. The case was denied on
March 30, 2013, which triggered localized outbursts of violence (Raleigh et al., 2010).
      The IEBC encountered major difficulties in organizing the ballot. First, “the Electronic Voter Identi-
fication Devices (EVIDs) were not working or not used in about half the polling stations observed” (EU
Observation Mission (2013), 1) because there were insufficient generators and extension cords to power


                                                      4
the devices required for identification. As a result, in many polling stations IEBC officials had to identify
voters and to count ballots manually. Second, the Electronic Transmission of Results System “stalled, for
a number of technical reasons” (ibid, 31) and “eventually delivered just less than half of polling station
results, much later than originally envisaged. (...) The failure to operate [the technology] successfully
led to delays and ignited suspicion about the IEBC’s management of the elections” (ibid, 2). Finally, “the
processing of official results lacked the necessary transparency” (ibid, 2) as a result of the various prob-
lems encountered. For example, a controversy arose from the fact “a programming error had caused
entries for rejected votes to be multiplied by eight” (ibid, 32).
      In the assessment of the election observers, “following Election Day, trust in the IEBC was in a pre-
carious state, after the failure of electoral technology and the lack of transparency during the tallying
process, both of which left it open to rumours and speculation” (ibid, 29). There was significant media
coverage of the IEBC’s errors in the aftermath of the election.4 In several instances, local IEBC officials
were physically assaulted, and IEBC premises were attacked (Raleigh et al., 2010).


3     Experimental Design
3.1     Design

In partnership with the IEBC, we designed a text messaging intervention to promote public interest and
knowledge about the election, and to raise voter turnout.5 For the IEBC, the intervention addressed two
main goals. First, anticipating that the electoral results would be contested if the election was perceived
to not be free and fair, the Commission wanted to increase the confidence of the public in the electoral
outcome. Second, in view of its recent creation, the IEBC wanted to explore different ways to establish
itself as a capable and neutral institution. This justified exploring variations in the content of the text
messages.
      The experiment was conducted by SMS between February 27 and March 4, 2013. The experimental
sample was composed of cell phone holders who 1) had registered to vote during the 2012 countrywide
biometric registration drive, 2) had a Safaricom cell phone number, and 3) had provided this phone
number to the IEBC during registration. Safaricom is the dominant telecom operator in Kenya, with
more than 20 million subscribers and a market share of approximately 80% in 2013. Randomization was
conducted at the polling station level and stratified by county. Our sampling frame was composed of
all polling stations where the fraction of registered voters with a Safaricom cell phone number exceeded
25%. This represented 12,160 polling stations across the country out of 24,560 stations set up for the
election. In total, 8,073,144 individuals were registered to vote across the polling stations in our study
sample. Among these, 4,908,975 voters (61%) provided their (Safaricom) phone number to the IEBC.


4
  We conducted a Lexis Nexis search of one of the two main Kenyan newspapers, the Nation. In the period between the election
  and the Supreme Court ruling that settled it, the Nation had a total of 1,233 articles on Lexis Nexis, of which 136 (11%) were
  about the IEBC, and 473 (38%) were about the election. Many of these articles focused on the failures described above.
5
  The experiment is listed in the American Economic Association’s registry for randomized controlled trials. See https://
  www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/30.


                                                               5
      Our intervention involved two levels of experimental variation. First, each of the 12,160 polling sta-
tions was randomly allocated to either one of four groups: one control group and three treatment groups
defined by the content of the messages they received. We later refer to the three treatment groups as T1,
T2 and T3, respectively. Second, we randomly varied the fraction of treated voters within each polling
station. Appendix Table A.1 provides the exact number of polling stations contained in each group and
Appendix Table A.2 shows the content of all text messages, which were sent in English. We verified
that the randomization produced balanced groups—randomization balance checks are discussed in Ap-
pendix B and shown in Appendix Tables B.1 through B.6.
      In the first treatment group (T1), registered voters received reminders about the election as well as
general encouragements to vote. For example, the first message sent in this group mentioned: “It is your
duty to vote. Please make sure you vote in the March 4 General Election.” Other basic encouragements
and reminders in this group included “You have a duty to vote for good leaders (...) and “Remember the
General Election is next Monday (...).”
      In the second group (T2), messages provided information on each position to be voted for on Election
Day, i.e. they described the responsibilities involved with each position excluding the President (MP,
Senator, Governor, Ward Representative and Women’s Representative), and encouraged recipients to
vote for each of the six positions. For example, the role of a senator was described in the following
manner: “Your senator will help determine how many resources your county receives from the central
government. Vote for a competent candidate on March 4.”
      In the third group (T3), messages highlighted the transparency and neutrality of the IEBC, its suc-
cessful record in organizing by-elections, its efforts to create a reliable voter register via biometrics, and
its efforts to conduct a peaceful election. For example, the first message sent in this group stated: “Free
and fair Elections are important for democracy. The IEBC is committed to strengthening the democracy.
Vote on March 4.”
      The second level of randomization varied the fraction of voters treated within each polling station.
For each treatment, a polling station was either allocated to a group where every Safaricom phone num-
ber in the polling station would receive our text messages (in the remainder of the paper, we refer to
these treatment cells as “100% treatment”); or where only half of these phone numbers would receive
the text messages (hereafter referred to as “50% treatment” cells). The objective of this randomization
was to test for the presence of spillovers in the diffusion of information contained in our text messages.
Importantly, even in the “100% treatment” cells, not all voters were treated: voters who did not have a
Safaricom cell phone number or did not provide it to the IEBC did not receive text messages.


3.2     Implementation

The text messages were broadcast via Safaricom’s mass texting technology. Phone numbers in our treat-
ment groups received a total of six messages—one per day over the six last days prior to Election Day.
Safaricom reported to us the rate of delivery of the text messages, by day and by treatment cell (deliv-
ery implies that the SMS was successfully transmitted to the client’s device, not necessarily that it was
read). When a text message was not successfully delivered on the first attempt, Safaricom would keep


                                                      6
attempting to deliver the message as many times as needed until the close of business on that day. We
report these delivery rates in Appendix Figure C.2. The success rate of the text messages was slightly
over 70% on the first day of the experiment, and approximately 90% in the following five days.6


4     Data
4.1     Administrative Data

To measure the impact of our text messages on participation, we first use official electoral results. The
IEBC reported for each polling booth the number of registered voters, the number of votes cast, the
number of spoilt, rejected, objected, and disputed ballots, the number of valid votes, and the vote tally
for each presidential candidate. Unfortunately, we were not able to obtain similar data for the other five
ballots.
      The data from the presidential ballot was made available online in the form of scanned images—a
sample image of a typical polling sheet is shown in Appendix Figure A.1. Since all the results were hand-
written, we relied on a U.S.-based software company to process and digitize the data from these scanned
images. The final dataset contains official results from 11,257 polling stations across all provinces of
Kenya, out of the original 12,160 in our sample. This attrition (7%) comes from 903 polling stations for
which the IEBC did not make scanned polling sheets publicly available after the election. The top panel
of Appendix Table C.1 presents summary statistics from the electoral data. Note that turnout for the
presidential ballot was generally high, averaging 88% of registered voters based on votes cast.


4.2     Survey Data

We conducted an endline phone survey drawing a random subset of individuals from the
IEBC/Safaricom Database in November-December 2013—approximately eight months after the elec-
tion. The survey targeted a total of 14,400 individuals across 7,200 randomly selected polling stations.
The survey sample was drawn as follows. First, we randomly drew 1,800 polling stations from each
treatment group (totalling 5,400 stations) and 1,800 stations from the control group. Second, two phone
numbers to call were drawn randomly from each polling station. In total, 7,400 of all phone numbers
sampled (51%) across 5,389 polling stations were successfully reached and surveyed. The numbers of
sampled polling stations and survey respondents in each group are described in Appendix Table A.1.
      In our main analysis, we focus on voter participation as well as two sets of political attitudes.7 The
first includes questions related to trust and satisfaction with democracy specifically in Kenya, and the
second includes questions related to democratic principles more generally. The bottom panel of Ap-
pendix Table C.1 presents summary statistics from the survey data, and the complete endline survey is
available as an Appendix.8 To alleviate concerns about experimenter demand effects, the survey did not

6
  Individual delivery data was not stored by Safaricom.
7
  We did not collect data on individual vote choice as this was deemed too politically sensitive, but we measure effects on
  aggregate vote shares based on the administrative data.
8
  In addition, Appendix Table C.2 compares average characteristics in our polling station sample and our endline survey with


                                                             7
reference the experiment conducted by the IEBC, nor did it specifically ask about the messages sent as
part of the experiment.


4.3    Election Violence Data

We use geocoded data from the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED) to measure the
intensity of election-related violence during the 2013 electoral period. We aggregated the ACLED data
in two steps. First, we coded all election-related violent events recorded in Kenya between February 27,
2013 (the beginning of our intervention) and November 10, 2013 (the beginning of our endline survey).
We define as “election-related” any event for which the ACLED description contains one or several fol-
lowing words: IEBC, polling center, polling station, tallying centre, election, candidate, CORD, Jubilee,
TNA, Kenyatta, Odinga.9 Second, we plotted these events on the 2013 constituency map of Kenya, and
we aggregated the number of violent events by constituency. Overall, 10.4% of constituencies in our
sample experienced some election-related violence over the period considered. We show the spatial
distribution of these constituencies in Appendix Figure C.3.


5     Empirical Framework
This section describes the specifications we use to estimate average effects of the mobilization campaign
(section 5.1), as well as heterogenous effects (5.2) and spillover effects (section 5.3).


5.1    Main Analysis

Our estimation strategies leverage the different levels of randomization in our experimental design.
First, we measure treatment effects in polling stations in the 100% cells (all phone numbers were con-
tacted) and polling stations in the 50% cells (half of phone numbers contacted) using the following spec-
ification:
                                          yij = α + βTj100% + γTj50% + δl + εij                                               (1)

where yij is an outcome measured at the level of individual i in polling station j assigned to any treat-
ment group (Tj ). The δl are fixed effects for the strata used in the randomization. In the administrative



  country-level averages measured in the 2009 census. Column (1) reports averages from the 2009 census averaged across con-
  stituencies. Column (2) reports averages of the same variables, where the data is at the constituency-level and weighted by
  the number of polling stations in our intervention sample. Our 12,160 polling stations are spread across 204 of the coun-
  try’s 210 constituencies. Column (3) report averages of the same variable collected in our endline phone survey (averaged
  by constituency). In total, 7,400 respondents answered the survey across 198 constituencies. Overall, there are few differ-
  ences between our SMS campaign sample and countrywide characteristics measured in 2009. On the other hand, our survey
  respondents tend to be younger, more educated, and own more assets and amenities relative to the average census respondent.
9
  We systematically reviewed all events in the ACLED database to ensure these classifications were appropriate. After this
  review, we included 5 additional election-related events where none of the above terms appeared: namely one event in which
  a former MP was attacked by the supporters of an opponent, one event in which a campaign staff member for a local MP-elect
  was killed, one instance of an armed group attacking villagers for political revenge, and two instances of politically motivated
  attacks committed by an unknown group.


                                                                8
data, we look at electoral outcomes at the level of polling station j—the corresponding equation is iden-
tical to equation (1) but has no i subscript. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered
at the level of polling station j throughout the analysis. We also report Romano-Wolf p-values to adjust
for multiple testing. The multiple testing p-values are computed for every outcome in a given family of
outcomes (i.e. across all dependent variables within each table).
      We then estimate a specification including three dummies for assigment to one of the three main
treatment groups (k = 3) described in section 3.1:
                                                      X
                                          yij = α +       βk Tjk + δl + εij                             (2)
                                                      k


where Tjk = 1 if polling station j was assigned to treatment group k. Here each of the T1, T2, and T3
groups pool the 100% and 50% treatment cells. In Appendix Tables C.6 and C.7, we also show a version
of equation (2) that includes six dummies for assignment to one of the six treatment cells, including both
the T1/T2/T3 dimension and the 100%/50% treatment dimension.


5.2     Heterogeneity Analysis

We test whether treatment effects vary with whether individuals were affiliated with the winning or the
losing side of the election:

                  yij = α + β1 Tj + β2 wini + β3 losei + β4 Tj × wini + β5 Tj × losei + δl + εij        (3)

where Tj denotes assignment to any treatment group at the level of polling station j, wini denotes
whether the individual belongs to the tribe of the winning coalition in the presidential ballot (Kikuyus
and Kalenjins) and losei denotes belonging to the tribe of the losing coalitions (Luos and Kambas). In
Appendix Tables C.10 through C.12, we also run an alternative version of equation (3) where we look
at the tribes of the top two presidential candidates, the Kikuyus and the Luos. The main coefficients of
interest are the coefficients on the interactions, β4 and β5 .
      Finally, to test for heterogeneous treatment effects based on the intensity of local election-related
violence, we use the following specification:

                               yijc = α + β1 Tjc + β2 Vc + β3 Tjc × Vc + δl + εijc                      (4)

where Tjc denotes assignment to any treatment group, Vc denotes election-related violence measured at
the level of constituency c, and the other variables are defined as before. We have aggregated treatments
for simplicity of presentation—in Appendix Tables C.12 and C.13, we show full specifications interacted
with any treatment in a 100% cell and any treatment in a 50% cell. In this specification, we cluster
standard errors at the constituency level since the variation in violence is measured at that level. The
coefficient of interest is the coefficient on the interaction, β3 .




                                                          9
5.3     Spillovers

In the Appendix, we also study whether the intervention generated spillovers from recipients of the text
messages towards other individuals voting in the same polling station. In this case, we run a specification
of the form:
                                                         yij = α + β1 T reatij + β2 Spilloverij + δl + εij                      (5)

where T reatij denotes individual treatment status (individual i in polling station j was treated) and
Spilloverij denotes spillover status (individual i was not treated inside polling station j that was treated).
This specification leverages the individual randomization inside the 50% treatment cells. Other terms
are defined as in equation (1), and standard errors are clustered by polling station j.


6      Results
In this section, we show that our text messages were received (section 6.1) and increased participation in
the 2013 election (section 6.2). However, the text messages also decreased trust towards Kenya’s electoral
institutions (section 6.3), especially for voters on the losing side of the election and in constituencies that
experienced violence (section 6.4).


                                                Figure 1: Treatment Effects on Turnout and Trust
                                         .1        .05
                               Treatment Effect (SD)
                             -.1    -.05    0
                                         -.15




                                                         Encouragement             Positions Info              IEBC Info

                                                            Official Turnout: Votes Cast     Official Turnout: Valid Votes
                                                            Self-Reported Turnout            Trust IEBC
                                                            Elections were fair              Satisfied Democracy Kenya



    Note: This figure reports average treatment effects of the SMS campaign estimated from equation (2). The corresponding
    coefficients are reported in Appendix Table C.3. Official turnout is measured as the fraction of registered voters who cast
    either a vote or a valid vote in the administrative data at the polling station level. All other estimates are computed using
    the survey data. All dependent variables are standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the control group.
    The bars indicate 90% confidence intervals. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station.


      Figure 1 summarizes the key insights from this section: the intervention increased voter turnout at
the cost of diminished trust towards electoral institutions. The corresponding coefficients, estimated

                                                                                     10
from equation (2), are reported in Appendix Table C.3. Text messages increased administrative turnout
by approximately 0.03 SD and self-reported turnout by 0.05 SD in the first treatment group. Treatment
effects are slightly smaller in magnitude and fall short of statistical significance in T2 and T3. On the
other hand, the messages negatively affected various measures of trust in electoral institutions, such as
trust in the IEBC, beliefs as to whether the election was fair, and satisfaction with democracy in Kenya.


6.1     The Text Messages Were Received

In Table 1, we provide evidence that treated individuals remembered the SMS campaign. In columns (1)
and (2), we show that treated individuals were 4 to 5 percentage points more likely to report receiving
a text message (with a control mean of 76% – recall that both treated and control individuals received
messages from the IEBC, especially during the registration period). Column (2) shows this holds across
all three treatment groups. In columns (3) and (4) we report treatment effects on the number of SMS
survey respondents reported receiving from the IEBC. This is set to zero for individuals who did not
report receiving any text message. Overall, individuals reported receiving between a half and one more
text message (a 15% to 30% increase) than the control. In columns (5) and (6), we show that treated
individuals were 4 to 6 percentage points more likely to remember the content of the SMS they received.
      The survey also elicited what individuals remembered about the messages. We test whether respon-
dents described the SMS as mentioning some form of encouragement to vote in columns (7)-(8). We find
positive, statistically significant effects of the intervention on all these outcomes. Across the board, there
is evidence that the respondents remembered and discussed the messages, in spite of the high number
of messages received in the control group.
      Table 2 shows the extent to which the mobilization campaign affected voters’ perception of the IEBC.
All dependent variables in this table are constructed based on the same open-ended question contained
in our endline survey instrument, which asked: “What are the main missions of the IEBC?”. We then
construct indicators equal to one if the respondent stated that the IEBC is responsible for: conducting or
supervising elections (columns 1-2), counting votes and announcing winners (columns 3-4), demarcating
electoral boundaries (columns 5-6), voter registration (columns 7-8), voter education (columns 9-10), and
ensuring the election was free, fair and peaceful (columns 11-12). Responses are not mutually exclusive
as respondents could provide up to four answers. Appendix Table A.4 provides the list of keywords
and phrases used to construct these categories. Table 2 shows that the mobilization campaign reinforced
voters’ perceptions that the main role of Kenya’s Electoral Commission was to guarantee free and fair
elections, while it did not increase knowledge of the IEBC’s other key missions (conduct elections, count
votes, voter registration, and voter education). As a result, voters who would perceive the election to
not be free and fair may ultimately hold the IEBC responsible—a result we discuss in section 6.3.


6.2     The Text Messages Boosted Turnout

In Table 3, we report treatment effects on turnout in the 2013 elections. Columns (1)-(4) present results
using the administrative data and columns (5)-(8) using the survey data. We report coefficients from



                                                     11
equations (1) and (2), which estimate the average treatment effects across all 100% cells and all 50%
cells, and treatment effects across the three groups (T1, T2, and T3), respectively. Appendix Table C.4
reports treatment effects on self-reported turnout for each of the six ballots organized in 2013, while
Appendix Table C.5 report treatment effects of the SMS campaign on candidate vote shares for the top
two candidates in the presidential election. Finally, Appendix Table C.6 reports treatment effects across
all 6 treatment cells (T1/T2/T3 and the 100%/50% dimension).

Administrative Data. In columns (1) through (4) of Table 3, we use two different measures of turnout:
the first is based on the number of votes cast, and the second on the number of valid votes. Results
using either measure are similar. We find that the dummy for any treatment in 100% cells has a positive,
significant effect on turnout of about 0.3 percentage points (about a 0.5% effect). This effect is robust to
adjusting for multiple testing, with a Romano-Wolf p-value of 0.04. Treatment in 50% cells has no signifi-
cant effect on turnout. Looking at the three treatment groups separately, we find that the Encouragement
group dummy (T1) has a significant effect on turnout, also of 0.3 percentage points (the Romano-Wolf
p-value is 0.08). The coefficients on the other two treatment dummies (T2 and T3) are positive but fall
short of statistical significance.

Survey Data. In columns (5)-(8), we report treatment effects on turnout among our survey respondents.
In addition to asking respondents whether they voted in the 2013 election (columns 5 and 6), we also
asked them if they voted for each of the six ballots conducted on Election Day. We use this to create a
measure of whether a respondent voted for all six positions (columns 7 and 8). In columns (5) and (7),
we find a positive, statistically significant effect of any treatment in the 100% cells on turnout, of about
2 percentage points. This effect is robust to adjusting for multiple testing. The effect of any treatment in
the 50% cells is positive but not statistically significant.
       In columns (6) and (8), we find significant effects of T1 and T2 on participation, with magnitudes
larger than those in columns (1)-(4). In addition, the mean participation in the control group is slightly
larger than turnout in the administrative data (93% versus 88%). We are not concerned by these differ-
ences, for the following reasons. First, as shown in Figure 1, standardized effect sizes in each group are
of similar magnitude across the administrative and the self-reported data. For example, text messages
increased administrative turnout by approximately 0.03 SD and self-reported turnout by 0.05 SD in T1.
Second, the phone survey is limited to individuals with phones (as was the intervention itself), while the
administrative data covers all individuals in a polling station. The average fraction of Safaricom phone
numbers in the register is 56%, which implies that in the absence of any spillovers we would expect
the effects in the survey data to be about 1.8 times larger than those in the administrative data for this
reason alone. In addition, phone owners may have a different propensity to vote than others, explaining
the difference in our mean participation measures. Third, there is attrition in the survey. Attrition is
likely higher among people who use their phone less or whose phone number was misreported during
registration, i.e. people that were less likely to be mobilized by the SMS campaign.10

10
     Appendix Table C.17 shows Lee bounds on this effect. Combining these two mechanisms, we find that our treatment effect on
     administrative turnout is not statistically different from the lower Lee bound of the treatment effect on self-reported turnout.


                                                                  12
Vote Shares. In Appendix Table C.5, we report impacts on the vote shares of the top two candidates
in the election, who together garnered 94% of all valid votes in the country. As in Table 3, we report
estimates from equations (1) and (2), but here we weight these specifications by the number of voters in
each polling station so that they roughly replicate the overall results of the election. Overall, although
the treatments affected turnout, they had no significant effects on vote shares.


6.3     The Text Messages Reduced Trust in Kenya’s Electoral Institutions

Table 4 reports treatment effects on trust in electoral institutions and satisfaction with democracy in
Kenya. In columns (1)-(2), we look at trust in the IEBC. Across the 100% cells, treatment reduced trust
in the IEBC by four percentage points, a 5% drop relative to the control group (column 1). This effect
(unlike others in this table) is robust to adjusting for multiple testing, with a Romano-Wolf p-value of
0.01. All three coefficients in column (2) are negative, although the coefficient on T3 is not statistically
different from zero.
      In columns (3) and (4), we report results for trust in the Supreme Court, which settled the result of
the presidential ballot after the main opposition candidate filed a petition against the IEBC. We find neg-
ative effects of the treatments on trust in the Supreme Court, but none of the coefficients are statistically
different from zero. In columns (5) and (6), we report impacts of the treatment on whether the survey
respondent considered that the 2013 election was fair and transparent. We find negative, significant ef-
fects across the 100% groups of about two percentage points (column 5). In columns (7) and (8), where
we ask whether the 2013 Supreme Court ruling that settled the election was fair, all but one coefficient
are negative, but none of the coefficients are significantly different from zero.
      In columns (9) and (10), we report effects on a dummy variable for individuals responding “very
satisfied” to the question: “Overall, how satisfied are you with the way democracy works in Kenya?”
We find a negative, significant treatment effect on this variable. This holds across the 100% groups, 50%
groups (column 9), in T1 and in T2 (column 10). The coefficient on T3 is also negative but not significant
(note again that the coefficients across treatments are not significantly different from each other). The
magnitude of these effects is sizeable: individuals in the 100% groups were 2.6 percentage points less
likely to report being very satisfied with Kenyan democracy. Relative to a control mean of 32%, this
corresponds to a 8% decrease.
      Finally, in columns (11) and (12), we report treatment effects on a standardized index (denoted “in-
dex”) of each of the previous five outcomes. We follow the procedure in Kling et al. (2007). We find that
the 100% treatment decreases the standardized index of these outcomes (significant at the 1% level; see
column 11). These effects are driven by treatments T1 and T2: the decrease in trust in both these groups
is significant at 5%, while the effect is smaller in magnitude and non-significant in T3 (column 12).
      These results suggest that text message recipients were on average more likely to mistrust Kenyan
electoral institutions after the election. The sign of these effects is opposite to what we anticipated at
the onset of the campaign. This is true particularly for trust in the IEBC, which the intervention was
intended to reinforce: the messages were designed to enhance the transparency of the election and to
improve the reputation of the Electoral Commission. The backlash in voters’ attitudes that we observe


                                                     13
instead may have resulted from the fact that the IEBC did not deliver on its promise of a transparent
and orderly election. The model presented in Section D rationalizes these results by showing how this
observed failure may have interacted with text messages to generate a negative update of voters’ beliefs
on fairness.

Spillovers. Appendix Table C.8 looks at spillover effects of the intervention on turnout and trust. In this
table, we estimate spillovers in two specifications. First, as described in equation (5), we create a dummy
variable for treated individuals within treated polling stations, and another dummy for non-treated
individuals within treated polling stations. The latter estimates average spillover effects of the cam-
paign. The estimates from this specification are reported in odd-numbered columns. In even-numbered
columns, we estimate a slightly different model including separate indicators for the 100% and the 50%
group, as well as the individual spillover indicator. Both specifications deliver similar results.
      Column (1) through (4) of Appendix Table C.8 show that the intervention had no spillover effects
on (self-reported) participation. Non-treated individuals within treated polling stations were not more
likely to turn out than individuals in the control group. The evidence from columns 5 through 8, which
look at 3 measures of trust (the same measures as in Figure 1) is more mixed. There is some evidence of
negative spillovers in columns (5)-(6) and (9)-(10).
      It is possible that the campaign had limited spillovers on turnout, but more substantial spillovers
on attitudes. Only a few days elapsed between the SMS campaign and the date at which voters would
decide whether or not to participate. In contrast to mobilization effects, the negative impacts on trust
in electoral institutions could have spread over a longer period of time (between the mobilization cam-
paign and the endline survey, which took place 8 months later), with treated and non-treated individuals
exchanging ideas about this topic after the outcome of the election became known.
      To further explore this hypothesis, Appendix Table C.9 estimates treatment effects of the SMS cam-
paign on the extent to which voters discussed text messages with each other and also lost trust in the
IEBC. Overall, the decline in trust towards electoral institutions seems driven by individuals who dis-
cussed election-related messages received as part of the mobilization campaign. The campaign increased
the likelihood that individuals both discussed election-related messages and lost trust in the IEBC (col-
umn 2) or that they both discussed the messages and lost trust towards their electoral institutions overall
(column 4). However, there was no negative impact on trust when individuals did not also discuss mes-
sages with others (columns 3 and 5). This suggests that conversations and interactions about the text
messages contributed to the decline in trust towards electoral institutions, and that the SMS campaign
affected political attitudes beyond the original recipients of the text messages.


6.4     Heterogeneity Analysis

Exposure to the various shortcomings of election administration was not uniform across the Kenyan
electorate. If the negative effect we observe on trust came from a backlash caused by the failures of
the electoral process, one would expect this effect to be larger among voters for whom the failure was
most salient: in particular, voters on the losing side of the election, and those voting in locations that


                                                       14
experienced election-related violence.


6.4.1      Heterogeneous Effects on Winners and Losers

To explore the first of these predictions, we exploit proxy variation capturing political preferences of
individuals in our sample. Specifically, in Table 5 we look at heterogeneity in our treatment effects by
whether the individual was on the winning or the losing side of the election. We use tribes to proxy for
winners and losers. Exploiting this dimension of heterogeneity is reasonable given the high prevalence
of ethnic voting in Kenya: as members of specific tribes typically align with specific candidates, tribes
can be used to predict whether an individual was likely on the winning or the losing side of the election.
In the 2013 election, Ferree et al. (2014) estimated using exit polls that 83% of Kikuyu voters (and 74%
of Kalenjin voters) sided with the Kikuyu candidate, and that 94% of Luo voters (and 63% of Kambas)
voted for the Luo candidate.
       In Table 5, we use political coalitions formed for the 2013 election. Specifically, we code Kikuyu and
Kalenjin voters as being part of the winning coalition (the Jubilee Alliance) and Luo and Kamba voters
as being part of the losing coalition (CORD). In Appendix Table C.10, we also look at Kikuyu voters and
Luo voters separately from all other tribes to proxy for winners and losers. The bottom panel of Table
5 reports the F-statistic on the test that the treatment coefficient for the winners is not different from
the treatment coefficient for the losers. In all columns we control for the interactions of treatment with
education and wealth to make sure that our results are not driven by education and wealth differences
across tribes. In Appendix Table C.11, we show that these results are unchanged when we do not control
for education and wealth and their interactions with the treatment dummy. Appendix Table C.12 further
shows heterogeneity with treatment in the 100% groups and the 50% groups.
       Column (1) of Table 5 looks at heterogeneous impacts on trust in the IEBC. Trust in the IEBC is
reduced for treated individuals who are neither in the winning nor the losing coalition, though this
effect falls short of statistical significance. Trust is reduced further for voters on the losing side, but the
interaction is positive (parly offsetting the main effect) for those on the winning side. We can reject (at
1%) that the effects for losers and winners are identical: tribes from the losing coalition are more likely
to lose trust in the IEBC.11 Note that the main effects of being on the winning or the losing coalition
are large and significant—members of the losing coalition are substantially less likely to trust the IEBC,
whereas members of the winning coalition are more likely to do so.
       In column (2), we report results for trust in the Supreme Court. The interaction coefficients have the
expected sign, and the interaction with being in the losing coalition is significant at 5%. We can again
reject that the treatment impact on winners and losers is identical. The same holds for the impacts on
whether individuals thought the election was fair and transparent (column 3), where we can also reject
that the impact on winners and losers is identical. In column (4), we show heterogeneous effects on
whether the Supreme Court’s ruling on the election was considered fair. Members of the losing coalition
were less likely to consider this was the case, and the difference between effects on losers and winners is
again statistically significant. Overall, across columns (1)-(4), we reject the null that treatment effects are
11
     These effects are not driven by differential effects on turnout across tribes (results available upon request).


                                                                   15
the same for winners and losers of the election.
       In column (5), we look at heterogeneous impacts on whether the respondent is very satisfied with
how democracy works in Kenya. Here the relevant interactions are not different from zero, and we
cannot reject that treatment effects for the winning and losing coalitions are the same. Finally in column
(6), we report effects on a standardized index of all previous five outcomes (computed as above). The
interaction of treatment with being in the losing coalition yields a negative, significant effect.


6.4.2      Heterogeneity with Election Violence

We then test for heterogeneity in our treatment effects by a measure of election-related violence, con-
structed from the ACLED data as described in section 4. Specifically, we interact our treatment variable
with a binary variable indicating whether any violent events were recorded in the constituency. In Ap-
pendix Table C.13, we find no evidence that our treatment effects on electoral outcomes differed by the
intensity of local violence. The coefficient on the interaction of treatment with violence is a precisely
estimated zero when the dependent variable is turnout (columns 1-2) or vote shares (columns 3-4), both
measured in the administrative data. This coefficient is negative, but not statistically different from zero,
when the outcome is self-reported turnout (columns 5-6).12
       In Table 6, however, we find evidence that the impacts on trust are heterogeneous across our measure
of violence (column (1)). The coefficient on the interaction of interest is negative, statistically significant,
and large in magnitude (7 percentage points, or 9% of the control group mean). This suggests that
individuals exposed to both election-related violence in their constituency and to our SMS treatment
were significantly more likely to update their beliefs on the IEBC negatively. In columns (2) and (3),
the coefficient on the interaction of interest is negative but not statistically significant. Finally, there is
no evidence for the same kind of heterogeneity in columns (4) and (5), where we look at individuals’
perceptions of the Supreme Court ruling, and at satisfaction with democracy in Kenya (in column (5),
the main effect of any treatment remains negative and significant). In column (6), we report treatment
effects on the same standardized index used in columns (11)-(12) of Table 4. The effect of the interaction
of any treatment with violence on this index is negative, but not statistically significant.


7       Mechanisms
The evidence presented so far suggests that the intervention succeeded in boosting participation, but
failed to improve the reputation of Kenya’s electoral institutions. In this section, we explore four poten-
tial mechanisms that could have led to these unexpected effects on attitudes. First, the SMS campaign
coud have turned voters into “critical democrats” displaying more skepticism towards their electoral in-
stitutions as well as greater engagement with politics (section 7.1). Second, the diminished trust towards
the IEBC could be driven by voters who turned out because of the mobilization campaign, and were dis-
appointed by this voting experience (section 7.2). Third, these effects could have resulted from increased
expectations caused by the mobilization campaign, followed by disappointment (section 7.3). Fourth,
12
     We also show violence interacted with treatment in the 100% groups and the 50% groups in Appendix Table C.13.


                                                              16
the intervention may inadvertently have sent mixed signals about Kenya’s electoral institutions—our
preferred interpretation (section 7.4). We address each of these explanations in turn.


7.1    “Critical Democrats”

The negative effects we found on attitudes may have been compensated by increased information or
changes in preferences towards democracy more generally, to the extent that the SMS campaign suc-
ceeded in creating a group of “informed citizens”. To test for this, in Table 7 we look at different mea-
sures of political knowledge and support for democratic ideals. The survey questionnaire collected
objective measures of information about practical details of the election, offices elected on that day, as
well as details of local politics. In addition, we asked whether respondents felt well-informed about the
election overall, and whether they agreed with statements describing the fundamental characteristics of
democracy.
      Columns 1 through 4 of Table 7 look at treatment impacts on political information. In columns 1-
2, the dependent variable is whether respondent answered yes to: “Overall do you feel you were well
informed about the election?” We use this as a measure of subjective information about the election. In
columns 3-4, the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if respondents correctly answered a series
of questions on the election and national politics.13 We use this as a measure of subjective information
about politics. We largely do not find effects on these measures of information, suggesting that the
campaign did not incentivize participants to seek more information about politics.14
      The remaining columns of Table 7 look at support for democratic ideals as they pertain to Kenyan
politics.15 In columns 5-6, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents who
agree with the statement: “Democracy is preferable to any other kind of government.” In columns 7-8,
the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents who agree with the statement: “We
should choose our leaders through regular, open and honest elections.” In columns 9-10, the dependent
variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents who agree with the statement: “All people should
be permitted to vote”. Across all outcomes, we largely find small and statistically insignificant results—
reassuringly, while the mobilization campaign decreased trust in Kenya’s electoral institutions, it did not
reduce support for democratic ideals generally. Overall, Table 7 suggests the effects we found in earlier
tables pertain to satisfaction with specific institutions (the IEBC and, to some extent, the Supreme Court),
but not to general support for the democratic ideal as an organizing principle of Kenyan society.




13
   These questions asked about the month and the day of the 2013 election, the role of a Women’s Representative, the name of
   the party of the President, and the name of the Ugandan President.
14
   In addition, the survey included questions on how often the respondent listens to the radio, watches TV and reads the
   newspaper. The text messages had no effects on these outcomes (results available on request), implying that the texts did not
   create a set of more engaged citizens based on this metric.
15
   The statements were prefaced with the question: Do you agree or disagree with the following statements regarding politics
   in Kenya?


                                                              17
7.2     Effects of Participation on Trust

Alternative interpretations could explain the negative effect of the text messages on attitudes. First, the
campaign could have affected trust through electoral participation: voters who received the messages
were more likely to vote and, as a result, to observe the multiple failures of voting systems. Individuals
who voted as a result of receiving the messages may also have paid more attention to election-related
news, including those covering implementation failures and instances of election-related violence. In
light of the relative magnitudes of our effects on trust and turnout, this participation channel seems
unlikely to fully explain our results: the decrease in trust in the IEBC is 1.5 percentage points (117%)
larger than the increase in turnout.
      Nonetheless, we investigate this hypothesis more formally in Table 8, where we show the effects on
trust are not entirely driven by those individuals that were induced to vote by the text messages. We
report the average effects of any treatment, assigned either at the polling station level (panel a) or at
the individual level (b). Columns 1 and 2 of this table reports our baseline estimates—the reduced form
effects of the messages on participation and trust towards the IEBC. In columns 3 and 4, we run the
same regression in column 1 but we restrict the sample to respondents who reported to have voted in
the 2007 election. These individuals are not, rigorously speaking, “always takers” but they would likely
have voted in the absence of any treatment: 96.4% of 2007 voters in the control group also voted in 2013.
The effect of the text messages is again unchanged in this specification. We reproduce similar tests in
columns 5-6, where we look at voters who voted in the 2010 constitutional referendumn, and columns
7-8, where we look at voters who voted in both 2007 and 2010.
      Overall, Table 8 suggests that the SMS campaign did not increase turnout among likely voters, but
it did reduce trust towards the IEBC among this group—by a magnitude similar to that of the effect
measured in the full sample. Because of this, the campaign’s negative impacts on attitudes are unlikely
to be solely driven by the “compliers” who were induced to vote by the campaign. Negative trust effects
may have spread towards the “always-takers”, as well as individuals who did not themselves vote.


7.3     Voter Disappointment

Another alternative interpretation is a simple model of voter disappointment. In this model, each voter
forms expectations about the quality of the electoral administration, q̃i . On the day of the election, she
receives a signal about the election’s actual quality, qi . The difference between voters’ expectations and
actual observation, (qi − q̃i ), determines their level of satisfaction or disappointment and affects their
answer to the survey questions on trust. For example, the text messages raise people’s expectations by
some δ, to q̃i + δ and, thus, decrease their satisfaction by the same δ: upon observing the same degree
of electoral failure, voters who received a message are more likely to hold a negative view of electoral
institutions. Having set relatively higher expectations, treated voters are relatively more disappointed.
      We cannot formally rule out that this interpretation contributed to the negative effect we observe on
trust in the IEBC, but note that according to this interpretation, the intervention did not affect people’s
actual level of trust. In other words, this interpretation amounts to assuming that voters answer a slightly



                                                     18
different question (the extent to which the IEBC’s action matched their expectations) than the one they
are asked (their level of trust towards the IEBC). In addition, in this interpretation stated in its simplest
form, the size of the effect is entirely determined by the extent to which the messages raise people’s prior
(δ), irrespective of the realized quality. For instance, even if the election is a success, we should still expect
people who received a message to be relatively less positively surprised, and, thus, to report a lower level
of satisfaction. Thus absent additional assumptions (e.g. regarding some asymmetry between voters’
reaction to good or bad news), this interpretation cannot explain our heterogeneous results by the extent
to which the election is a success or a failure (and voters observe it).


7.4     Mixed Signals of Capacity and Fairness

As we documented in section 2, the 2013 Kenyan election was widely perceived to have been a failure
because of a variety of implementation problems. A majority of Kenyan citizens had the opportunity to
witness this failure – either because they were directly confronted with problems at the polling station, or
because they were dissatisfied with the electoral outcome, or both. Under these circumstances, recipients
of the text messages could have negatively updated their beliefs about the fairness of the election if they
interpreted the campaign as a signal of high institutional capacity; while they would have updated
positively if they understood the campaign of a signal of honesty and transparency.
      In Appendix D, we provide a simple theoretical framework to explain our empirical results. We pro-
vide this framework as a way to understand and interpret our empirical results, since the effects on trust
were negative rather than positive (as was expected during the design of the experiment)—we wrote this
model after conducting the main analysis, and the experiment was not specifically designed to test its
core predictions. The model highlights how communication efforts by the electoral administration can
backfire if the administration (in our case, the IEBC) fails to organize a successful election. A successful
election has two ingredients in the model: institutional capacity (the level of “resources” allocated to
the organization of the election, broadly defined) and institutional fairness or impartiality (the extent to
which the final official results correspond to the choice of voters). If voters interpret messages from the
IEBC as a signal of high capacity, i.e., a signal that enough resources were devoted to the organization
of the election, then they are more likely to conclude, upon observing electoral turmoil, that the election
was unfair or rigged. However, if messages are interpreted as a signal of fairness, then they will draw
the opposite conclusion.
      Our results are consistent with the former mechanism (highlighted in Proposition 1)—whether these
beliefs are measured in terms of trust in the IEBC, satisfaction with the way democracy works in Kenya,
or the perception that the election was fair. This result is intuitive: recipients of the messages were
more likely to update their beliefs on the capacity of the electoral commission (because they observed
the IEBC had the resources to conduct a mass texting campaign) than on the fairness of the commission
or the election, which would require more than the simple information communicated in the messages.
Note, however, that the negative treatment effects on trust is particularly pronounced in groups T1 and
T2 which did not emphasize the IEBC’s commitment to conduct a free and fair election. Treatments T1
and T2 only conveyed information about institutional capacity: the messages sent to these groups do


                                                       19
not make any claim about the fairness of the election; but in and of themselves they send a signal of high
resources to conduct the election. Instead, treatment T3 repeatedly mentions the IEBC’s commitment
to fair elections: it is the only treatment which conveys both a signal of resources and of fairness (see
Table 2 for the details of messages sent to each group). Consistent with our model, we find suggestive
(though not statistically significant) evidence that the negative effect on trust is mainly driven by T1 and
T2.16 Finally, the results of our heterogeneity analysis are consistent with the predictions of the model:
the magnitude of the decrease in trust towards the IEBC increases with exposure to election-related
violence, and with being on the losing side of the election.


8       Conclusion
This paper evaluates the impact of information disseminated by the Kenyan Electoral Commission in an
effort to increase voter participation and trust in a set of new electoral institutions. Shortly before the
election, the IEBC sent eleven million text messages to approximately two million registered voters—
14% of the Kenyan electorate. The messages provided either basic encouragements to vote, information
on the positions to be voted for, or information on the IEBC itself. We measure treatment effects using
official electoral results as well as survey data collected several months after the information campaign.
       The intervention increased voter turnout by 0.3 percentage points overall in treated polling stations,
in administrative data which includes individuals who did not themselves receive text messages. The
self-reported increase in turnout among treated individuals is approximately two percentage points.
However, the intervention also decreased trust in the Electoral Commission and institutions that were
similarly involved in the electoral process.
       While this outcome was certainly unexpected, should we also deem it undesirable? Decreased trust
in the Electoral Commission was associated with decreased satisfaction with how democracy works
in Kenya, but it did not undermine support for democratic principles: citizens who received the text
messages remained equally likely to find democracy preferable to any other kind of government, to
agree that leaders should be chosen through regular, open, and honest elections, and to disapprove of
the use of violence in politics. A possible interpretation is that the information campaign contributed to
the emergence of critical dissatisfied democrats (Norris, 2011). We do not find much empirical support
for this interpretation: eight months after the election, citizens are neither more informed nor more
engaged in the treatment groups than in the control group. The simple model we provide suggests
another interpretation. If voters interpreted the IEBC’s SMS campaign as a signal of high institutional
capacity, then under plausible assumptions, witnessing electoral failure could have led them to believe
that the election was unfair or rigged, or that the IEBC was corrupt. Our results suggest treated voters
interpreted the campaign in this way.
       The decrease in trust towards the Electoral Commission and the larger effects we find among losers
of the election are a cause for concern. In the long run, systematic differences in institutional trust be-

16
     Looking at the last column of Table 4 (which compares effects across groups on a trust index), a test of the null that the effect
     of T3 differs from the average effect of T1 and T2 yields a p-value of 0.17.


                                                                   20
tween different ethnic groups could make it harder to build consensus around important reforms. In
addition, growing dissatisfaction with the functioning of democracy among repeated losers may result
in social unrest, if the losers feel they do not have any other option to have their voices heard. Overall,
this implies that mobilizing voters comes at a risk when the quality and the transparency of the election
cannot be guaranteed. Failure by the electoral administration to deliver such an election may dramati-
cally reinforce distrust in institutions. These results may hold validity beyond the context of this study:
across emerging and developing countries, elections are often used as a tool to foster peaceful political
transitions and regime stability. Our results show that in young democracies, voter mobilization is a
complex, and potentially perilous task.




                                                    21
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ali Cheema, Asim I. Khwaja, and James A. Robinson, “Trust in State and Nonstate
  Actors: Evidence from Dispute Resolution in Pakistan,” Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (8),
  3090–3147.
Aker, Jenny C., Paul Collier, and Pedro C. Vicente, “Is Information Power? Using Cell Phones During
 an Election in Mozambique,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2017, 99 (2), 185–200.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, “Trust and Growth,” Annual Review of Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 521–549.
Anderson, Christopher J., André Blais, Shaun Bowler, Todd Donovan, and Ola Listhaug, Losers’ Con-
 sent, New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Arriola, Leonardo R., Aila M. Matanock, Manuela Travaglianti, and Justine M. Davis, “Civic Educa-
  tion in Violent Elections: Evidence from the Cote d’Ivoire’s 2015 Election,” Working Paper, 2017.
Ascencio, Sergio J. and Miguel R. Rueda, “Partisan Poll Watchers and Electoral Manipulation,” Ameri-
 can Political Science Review, 2019, 113 (3), 727–742.
Atkeson, Lonna Rae and Kyle L. Saunders, “The Effect of Election Administration on Voter Confidence:
  A Local Matter?,” PS: Political Science & Politics, 10 2007, 4, 655–660.
Berman, Eli, Michael Callen, Clark Gibson, James D. Long, and Arman Rezaee, “Election Fairness
  and Government Legitimacy in Afghanistan,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2019, 168,
  292–317.
Bhatti, Yosef, Jens Olav Dahlgaard, Jonas Hedegaard Hansen, and Kasper M. Hansen, “Moving the
  campaign from the front door to the front pocket: field experimental evidence on the effect of phrasing
  and timing of text messages on voter turnout,” Journal of Elections, Public Opinion, and Parties, 2017, 27
  (3), 291–310.
Blais, André and Daniel Rubenson, “The Source of Turnout Declines: New Values or New Contexts?,”
  Comparative Political Studies, 2013, 46 (1), 95–117.
Braconnier, Céline, Jean-Yes Dormagen, and Vincent Pons, “Voter Registration Costs and Disenfran-
  chisement: Experimental Evidence from France,” American Political Science Review, 2017, 111 (3),
  584–604.
Callen, Michael and James D Long, “Institutional Corruption and Election Fraud: Evidence from a
  Field Experiment in Afghanistan†,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1), 354–381.
Dahlberg, Stefan, Jonas Linde, and Soren Holmberg, “Democratic Discontent in Old and New Democ-
 racies: Assessing the Importance of Democratic Input and Governmental Output,” Political Studies,
 2015, 63 (S1), 18–37.
Dale, Allison and Aaron Strauss, “Don’t Forget to Vote: Text Message Reminders as a Mobilization
 Tool,” American Journal of Political Science, 2009, 53 (4), 787–804.
Diamond, Larry, Developing Democracy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999.
Doorenspleet, Renske, “Critical citizens, democratic support and satisfaction in African democracies,”
 International Political Science Review, 2012, 33 (3), 279–300.
Driscoll, Jesse and Daniel F. Hidalgo, “Intended and unintended consequences of democracy promo-
 tion assistance to Georgia after the Rose Revolution,” Research & Politics, 2014, 1 (1), 1–13.
EU Observation Mission, “Kenya General Elections 2013: Final Report,” Technical Report 2013.
Ferree, Karen E, Clark C Gibson, and James D Long, “Voting behavior and electoral irregularities in
  Kenya’s 2013 Election,” Journal of Eastern African Studies, 2014, 8 (1), 153–172.

                                                    22
Finkel, Steven E., Jeremy Horowitz, and Reynaldo T. Rojo-Mendoza, “Civic Education and Democratic
  Backsliding in the Wake of Kenya’s Post-2007 Election Violence,” The Journal of Politics, 2012, 74 (1),
  52–65.
Fujiwara, Thomas and Leonard Wantchekon, “Can Informed Public Deliberation Overcome Clien-
  telism? Experimental Evidence from Benin,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October
  2013, 5 (4), 241–55.
Gerber, Alan S. and Donald P. Green, “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and Direct Mail on
 Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment,” The American Political Science Review, 2000, 94 (3), 653–663.
  , Gregory A. Huber, David Doherty, Conor M. Dowling, and Seth J. Hill, “Do Perceptions of Ballot
  Secrecy Influence Turnout? Results from a Field Experiment,” American Journal of Political Science, 2013,
  57 (3), 537–551.
Harris, J. Andrew, Catherine Kamindo, and Peter Van der Windt, “Electoral Administration in Fledging
 Democracies: Experimental Evidence from Kenya,” forthcoming Journal of Politics, 2020.
Ichino, Nahomi and Matthias Schündeln, “Deterring or Displacing Electoral Irregularities? Spillover
  Effects of Observers in a Randomized Field Experiment in Ghana,” The Journal of Politics, 2012, 74 (01),
  292–307.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
  Effects,” Econometrica, 2007, 75 (1), 83–119.
Klingemann, Hans-Dieter, “Mapping Political Support in the 1990s: A Global Analysis,” in P. Norris,
  ed., Critical Citizens. Global Support for Democratic Governance, New York, NY: Oxford University Press,
  1999.
Linz, Juan and Alfred Stepan, Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation, Baltimore: Johns Hop-
  kins University Press, 1996.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics, Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1959.
Lyons, Terrence, “Post-conflict elections and the process of demilitarizing politics: the role of electoral
  administration,” Democratization, 2004, 11 (3), 36–62.
Malhotra, N, M R Michelson, T Rogers, and A A Valenzuela, “Text Messages as Mobilization Tools:
 The Conditional Effect of Habitual Voting and Election Salience,” American Politics Research, 2011, 39
 (4), 664–681.
Mattes, Robert and Michael Bratton, “Learning about Democracy in Africa: Awareness, Performance,
 and Experience,” American Journal of Political Science, 2007, 51 (1), 192–217.
Nadeau, Richard and André Blais, “Accepting the Election Outcome: The Effect of Participation on
 Losers’ Consent,” British Journal of Political Science, 1993, 23 (4), 553–563.
Neggers, Yusuf, “Enfranchising Your Own? Experimental Evidence on Bureaucrat Diversity and Elec-
 tion Bias in India,” American Economic Review, June 2018, 108 (6), 1288–1321.
Norris, Pippa, Democratic Deficit: Critical Citizens Revisited, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
 2011.
Nunn, Nathan, “The Importance of History for Economic Development,” Annual Review of Economics,
 2009, 1 (1), 65–92.
Powell, G. Bingham, Contemporary Democracies, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982.
Raleigh, Clionadh, Andrew Linke, Havard Hegre, and Joakim Karlsen, “Introducing ACLED – Armed
  Conflict Location and Event Data,” Journal of Peace Research, 2010, 47 (5), 651–660.


                                                    23
Vicente, Pedro C., “Is Vote Buying Effective? Evidence from a Field Experiment in West Africa,” Eco-
  nomic Journal, 2014, 124, F356–F387.
Wantchekon, Leonard, “Clientelism and Voting Behavior: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Benin,”
 World Politics, 2003, 55 (3), 399–422.




                                                24
     Tables


                                                   Table 1: Recollection of SMS Received, Survey Data
                                                      Received SMS        Received from IEBC       Remember Content        Mentioned Turnout
                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                          Any 100% Treatment       0.050∗∗∗               0.944∗∗∗                 0.057∗∗∗                0.052∗∗∗
                                                    [0.012]                [0.175]                 [0.014]                 [0.014]
                          Any 50% Treatment        0.036∗∗∗               0.340∗∗                  0.038∗∗∗                 0.016
                                                    [0.013]               [0.162]                   [0.014]                [0.013]
                          Encouragement                        0.042∗∗∗               0.565∗∗∗                 0.048∗∗∗                0.045∗∗∗
                                                                [0.014]                [0.183]                  [0.015]                 [0.015]
                          Positions Info                       0.036∗∗∗               0.755∗∗∗                 0.044∗∗∗                  0.024
                                                                [0.014]                [0.189]                  [0.015]                 [0.015]
                          IEBC Info                            0.050∗∗∗               0.594∗∗∗                 0.051∗∗∗                0.034∗∗
                                                                [0.013]                [0.185]                  [0.015]                [0.015]
25




                          Control Mean               0.759      0.759      3.371        3.371       0.658       0.658       0.221       0.221
                          100% Romano-Wolf           0.00                   0.00                     0.00                    0.00
                          50% Romano-Wolf            0.01                   0.09                     0.01                    0.25
                          T1 Romano-Wolf                        0.00                    0.00                     0.00                    0.00
                          T2 Romano-Wolf                        0.02                    0.00                     0.01                    0.11
                          T3 Romano-Wolf                        0.00                    0.01                     0.00                    0.03
                          R-squared                   .02        .02         .02         .02          .02         .02         .01         .01
                          Observations               7324       7324        5879        5879         7400        7400        6608        6608

      Notes: This table reports treatment effects on the respondents’ recollection of the SMS campaign in endline survey data. Odd-numbered columns report estimates
      from equation (1). Even-numbered columns report estimates from equation (2). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In columns 1-2, the dependent
      variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Did you receive any text messages related to the election after getting registered
      and before the election?” In columns 3-4, the dependent variable is the number of text messages respondents report receiving from the IEBC. In columns 5-6,
      the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you remember what these messages were about?”, in reference
      to messages received from the IEBC. In columns 7-8, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents mentioning that the text messages mentioned
      voter turnout. The bottom panel reports the p-value from a Romano-Wolf multiple testing correction with 500 bootstrap replications across all outcomes in this
      table. In columns 3-4, there are fewer observations due to a malfunction in the electronic survey instrument. The Lee bounds on the Any 100% treatment dummy
      are [0.666 1.084].
      * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                                                                Table 2: Knowledge of the IEBC
                                   Conduct Elections      Count Votes         Boundaries        Voter Registration   Voter Education     Free & Fair Elections
                                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)      (10)       (11)       (12)
           Any 100% Treatment      -0.009                0.006               0.010               0.008                0.008              0.028∗∗∗
                                   [0.014]              [0.011]             [0.012]             [0.013]              [0.010]             [0.008]
           Any 50% Treatment       -0.013                0.006               0.016               -0.003               0.008              0.018∗∗
                                   [0.014]              [0.011]             [0.012]             [0.013]              [0.010]             [0.008]
           Encouragement                       -0.011              0.021               0.002               0.009                -0.005              0.025∗∗∗
                                              [0.015]             [0.013]             [0.013]             [0.014]              [0.010]               [0.009]
           Positions Info                      -0.025              -0.003              0.020               0.002                0.018               0.024∗∗∗
                                              [0.015]             [0.012]             [0.014]             [0.014]              [0.011]               [0.009]
           IEBC Info                           0.002               0.001               0.017               -0.003               0.011                0.021∗∗
                                              [0.015]             [0.012]             [0.014]             [0.014]              [0.011]               [0.009]
           Control Mean             0.705      0.705     0.159     0.159    0.218     0.218     0.221     0.221      0.115     0.115      0.065       0.065
           100% Romano-Wolf         0.95                  0.95               0.95                0.95                 0.95                 0.00
           50% Romano-Wolf           0.81                 0.81               0.83                0.81                 0.65                 0.16
           T1 Romano-Wolf                      0.89                0.34                0.89                0.89                 0.89                  0.06
26




           T2 Romano-Wolf                      0.40                0.96                0.96                0.40                 0.40                  0.06
           T3 Romano-Wolf                      0.99                0.99                0.99                0.77                 0.71                  0.14
           R-squared                 .01        .01       .02       .02       .01       .01       .02       .02        .01       .01       .01         .01
           Observations             7400       7400      7400      7400      7400      7400      7400      7400       7400      7400      7400        7400

     Notes: This table reports treatment effects on respondents’ perceptions of the missions of the IEBC. Odd-numbered columns report estimates from equation
     (1). Even-numbered columns report estimates from equation (2). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In all columns, the dependent variable is a
     dummy variable for respondents stating the IEBC is responsible for: conducting or supervising elections (columns 1-2), counting votes and announcing winners
     (columns 3-4), demarcating boundaries (columns 5-6), voter registration (columns 7-8), voter education (columns 9-10), and ensuring the election was free and
     fair (columns 11-12) in response to the question: “What are the main missions of the IEBC?”. See Appendix Table A.4 for a detailed list of the words used
     to construct these categories. The bottom panel reports the p-value from a Romano-Wolf multiple testing correction with 500 bootstrap replications across all
     outcomes examined in this table.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                                                                Table 3: Effects on Voter Turnout
                                                                   Administrative Data                           Survey Data
                                                           (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                            Votes Cast           Valid Votes         Voted in 2013      Voted all positions
                               Any 100% Treatment        0.003∗∗               0.003∗∗             0.020∗∗∗             0.025∗∗∗
                                                         [0.001]               [0.001]              [0.007]              [0.008]
                               Any 50% Treatment          0.000                 0.000               0.007                 0.008
                                                         [0.001]               [0.001]             [0.007]               [0.008]
                               Encouragement                         0.003∗              0.003∗               0.014∗                 0.018∗∗
                                                                     [0.001]             [0.002]              [0.008]                [0.009]
                               Positions Info                         0.001               0.001               0.015∗                 0.017∗∗
                                                                     [0.002]             [0.002]              [0.008]                [0.009]
                               IEBC Info                              0.001               0.000                0.011                  0.014
                                                                     [0.002]             [0.002]              [0.008]                [0.009]
                               Control Mean               0.877      0.877     0.869     0.869      0.934      0.934      0.917       0.917
                               100% Romano-Wolf           0.03                  0.03                 0.00                  0.00
27




                               50% Romano-Wolf            0.99                  0.99                 0.36                  0.36
                               T1 Romano-Wolf                         0.06                0.06                 0.06                   0.04
                               T2 Romano-Wolf                         0.51                0.49                 0.06                   0.06
                               T3 Romano-Wolf                         0.77                0.89                 0.16                   0.14
                               R-squared                   .48         .48      .49       .49        .02        .02        .02         .02
                               Observations               11254      11254     11255     11255      7341       7341       7254        7254

     Notes: This table reports treatment effects on voter turnout measured in the administrative data (columns 1-4) or self-reported in the survey data (columns 5-8).
     Odd-numbered columns report estimates from equation (1). Even-numbered columns report estimates from equation (2). All regressions include strata fixed
     effects. In columns 1-2, the dependent variable is the fraction of registered voters per polling station who cast a vote. In columns 3-4, the dependent variable is
     the fraction of registered voters who cast a valid vote. In columns 5-6, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents answering Yes to the
     question: “Did you vote in the 2013 elections?”. In columns 7-8, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents reporting that they cast a
     vote in each of the six ballots organized in March 2013. The bottom panel reports the p-value from a Romano-Wolf multiple testing correction with 500 bootstrap
     replications across the two measures of turnout in either the administrative data (columns 1-4) or the survey data (columns 5-8).
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                                                Table 4: Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions
                                       Trust IEBC             Trust SCK           Fair Election     Fair SCK Ruling      Satisf Democracy                Index
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)        (11)           (12)
        Any 100% Treatment         -0.037∗∗∗                -0.019              -0.021∗             -0.012               -0.026∗                -0.052∗∗
                                    [0.012]                [0.013]              [0.013]             [0.013]              [0.014]                 [0.021]
        Any 50% Treatment          -0.020∗                  -0.009               0.004              -0.004               -0.024∗                -0.023
                                   [0.012]                 [0.013]              [0.013]             [0.013]              [0.014]                [0.021]
        Encouragement                          -0.042∗∗∗               -0.016              -0.011               -0.009               -0.028∗                -0.048∗∗
                                                [0.013]               [0.015]             [0.014]              [0.014]               [0.015]                 [0.024]
        Positions Info                          -0.022∗                -0.014              -0.014               -0.020              -0.030∗∗                -0.048∗∗
                                                [0.013]               [0.014]             [0.014]              [0.014]               [0.015]                 [0.023]
        IEBC Info                                -0.021                -0.011              -0.000               0.005                 -0.017                 -0.017
                                                [0.013]               [0.015]             [0.014]              [0.014]               [0.015]                 [0.023]
        Control Mean                0.800        0.800      0.721     0.721      0.715     0.715     0.688      0.688     0.320      0.320       -0.000      -0.000
        100% Romano-Wolf            0.01                     0.28                 0.20                0.35                 0.20
        50% Romano-Wolf             0.28                     0.84                 0.93                0.93                 0.28
28




        T1 Romano-Wolf                           0.01                  0.52                0.65                 0.65                  0.20
        T2 Romano-Wolf                           0.25                  0.50                0.50                 0.36                  0.17
        T3 Romano-Wolf                           0.37                  0.77                0.96                 0.90                  0.67
        R-squared                     .1          .1          .07       .07       .16       .16       .15        .15        .04        .04        .16          .16
        Observations                 7327        7327        7227      7227      7287      7287      7204       7204       7309       7309       7034         7034

     Notes: This table reports treatment effects on trust in electoral institutions. Odd-numbered columns report estimates from equation (1). Even-numbered columns
     report estimates from equation (2). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In columns 1-2, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents
     answering Yes to the question: “Do you trust the IEBC?”. In columns 3-4, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the
     question: “Do you trust the Supreme Court of Kenya?”. In columns 5-6, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the
     question: “Do you think the elections were fair and transparent?”. In columns 7-8, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes
     to the question: “Do you think the ruling of the Supreme Court on the election was fair?” In columns 9-10, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for
     respondents answering ‘Very Satisfied’ to the question: “Overall, how satisfied are you with how democracy works in Kenya?” In columns 11-12, we report
     effects on an index of all previous 5 outcomes computed as in Kling et al. (2007). See Appendix Table A.3 for a detailed description of all variables. The bottom
     panel reports the p-value from a Romano-Wolf multiple testing correction with 500 bootstrap replications across all outcomes examined in this table (excluding
     the index in columns 11-12).
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                                    Table 5: Winners and Losers: Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions
                                                                  Heterogeneity by Electoral Coalitions

                                                     Trust IEBC     Trust SCK     Fair Election    Fair SCK Ruling      Satisf Democracy        Index
                                                         (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)                   (5)              (6)
                          Any Treatment*Win             0.012          0.002          0.001               -0.018               -0.015            0.001
                                                       [0.022]        [0.027]        [0.024]             [0.025]              [0.032]           [0.041]
                          Any Treatment*Lose           -0.055∗       -0.070∗∗        -0.075∗∗          -0.094∗∗∗               0.005           -0.128∗∗∗
                                                       [0.029]        [0.030]         [0.031]           [0.031]               [0.029]           [0.050]

                          Winning Coalition           0.127∗∗∗       0.137∗∗∗        0.187∗∗∗           0.224∗∗∗              0.104∗∗∗         0.354∗∗∗
                                                       [0.024]        [0.030]         [0.027]            [0.028]               [0.033]          [0.046]
                          Losing Coalition            -0.063∗∗        -0.033        -0.086∗∗∗           -0.081∗∗              -0.041           -0.131∗∗
                                                       [0.031]        [0.033]        [0.033]             [0.034]              [0.031]           [0.054]
                          Any Treatment                 -0.035         0.026         0.067∗               0.065               -0.057             0.031
                                                       [0.034]        [0.039]        [0.038]             [0.040]              [0.041]           [0.064]
29




                          Win = Lose F-stat            6.85***        5.90**         7.64***             7.27***                0.35            8.31***
                          Win = Lose p-val              0.01           0.02           0.01                0.01                  0.55             0.00

                          Control Mean                  0.801          0.722          0.714              0.687                 0.322            -0.001
                          R-squared                      .12            .08            .18                .18                   .06               .2
                          Observations                  7137           7043           7101               7019                  7119              6859

     Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (3). All regressions include strata fixed effects. ‘Win’ equals one for all respondents whose self-reported tribe formed
     a coalition around the winning candidate (the Kikuyus and Kalenjins) in the 2013 Presidential election. ‘Lose’ equals one for all respondents from tribes that formed
     a coalition around the losing candidate (the Luos and Kambas). In column 1, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents answering Yes to
     the question: “Do you trust the IEBC?”. In column 2, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you trust the
     Supreme Court of Kenya?”. In column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you think the elections
     were fair and transparent?”. In column 4, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you think the ruling of
     the Supreme Court on the election was fair?” In column 5, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering ‘Very Satisfied’ to the question:
     “Overall, how satisfied are you with how democracy works in Kenya?” In column 6, we report effects on an index of all previous 5 outcomes computed as in Kling
     et al. (2007). We also report the F-stat and corresponding p-value from a test of equality of the two interaction terms in the top panel: Any Treatment*Win = Any
     Treatment*Lose.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                                     Table 6: Election Violence: Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions
                                                                   Heterogeneity by Election Violence

                                                      Trust IEBC     Trust SCK    Fair Election    Fair SCK Ruling     Satisf Democracy       Index
                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)                   (5)            (6)
                         Any Treatment*Violence         -0.068∗∗       -0.045         -0.029             0.007               -0.000          -0.082
                                                        [0.029]        [0.035]        [0.035]           [0.037]              [0.042]         [0.058]
                         Any Treatment                  -0.021∗        -0.008         -0.004            -0.008               -0.024∗         -0.027
                                                        [0.011]        [0.012]        [0.011]           [0.013]              [0.013]         [0.020]
                         Violence                        0.026          -0.016         -0.036           -0.075∗∗             -0.030          -0.044
                                                        [0.030]        [0.040]        [0.031]            [0.037]             [0.037]         [0.059]
                         Control Mean                    0.800         0.721           0.715             0.688                0.320           -0.000
                         R-squared                         .1           .07             .16               .15                  .04              .16
                         Observations                    7327          7227            7287              7204                 7309             7034

     Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (4). All regressions include strata fixed effects. Violence is a dummy variable equal to 1 if any election-related
     violence occurred in the constituency (see section 4 for details). In column 1, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents answering Yes to
30




     the question: “Do you trust the IEBC?”. In column 2, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you trust the
     Supreme Court of Kenya?”. In column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you think the elections
     were fair and transparent?”. In column 4, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you think the ruling of
     the Supreme Court on the election was fair?” In column 5, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering ‘Very Satisfied’ to the question:
     “Overall, how satisfied are you with how democracy works in Kenya?” In column 6, we report effects on an index of all previous 5 outcomes computed as in Kling
     et al. (2007).
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by constituency in brackets.
                                         Table 7: Null Effects on Information and Support for Democracy
                                     Informed, Subjective     Informed, Objective      Democracy Preferable       Open Elections      All Permitted to Vote
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)       (8)       (9)         (10)
           Any 100% Treatment         0.010                    0.004                    0.004                      0.002               0.004
                                     [0.010]                  [0.007]                  [0.009]                    [0.005]             [0.008]
           Any 50% Treatment          0.008                    0.006                   -0.001                      0.003              -0.006
                                     [0.010]                  [0.007]                  [0.009]                    [0.005]             [0.008]
           Encouragement                           0.005                    0.010                    0.005                   0.004                 -0.000
                                                  [0.011]                  [0.008]                  [0.010]                 [0.005]                [0.009]
           Positions Info                          0.010                    0.003                   -0.003                   -0.001                -0.004
                                                  [0.011]                  [0.008]                  [0.010]                 [0.005]                [0.009]
           IEBC Info                               0.011                    0.003                    0.002                   0.003                  0.002
                                                  [0.011]                  [0.008]                  [0.010]                 [0.005]                [0.009]
           Control Mean               0.865       0.865        0.114       0.114        0.898        0.898         0.972    0.972     0.918        0.918
           100% Romano-Wolf           0.86                      0.96                     0.96                       0.96               0.96
           50% Romano-Wolf            0.92                      0.92                     0.92                       0.92               0.92
31




           T1 Romano-Wolf                          0.95                     0.67                     0.95                    0.89                   0.99
           T2 Romano-Wolf                          0.89                     0.99                     0.99                    0.99                   0.99
           T3 Romano-Wolf                          0.84                     0.99                     0.99                    0.96                   0.99
           R-squared                   .02          .02         .01         .01          .02          .02           .01       .01       .01          .01
           Observations               7369         7369        14400       14400        7321         7321          7359      7359      7371         7371

     Notes: This table reports treatment effects on political information and support for democracy. Odd-numbered columns report estimates from equation (1). Even-
     numbered columns report estimates from equation (2). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In columns 1-2, the dependent variable is whether respondent
     answered yes to: “Overall do you feel you were well informed about the election?” We use this as a measure of subjective information about the election. In
     columns 3-4, the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if respondents correctly answered questions on: the month and the day of the election, the role of
     a Women’s Representative, the name of the party of the President, and the name of the Ugandan President. We use this as a measure of objective information
     about politics. In columns 5-6, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents who agree with the statement: “Democracy is preferable to
     any other kind of government.” In columns 7-8, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents who agree with the statement: “We should
     choose our leaders through regular, open and honest elections.” In columns 9-10, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents who agree
     with the statement: “All people should be permitted to vote”. See Appendix Table A.3 for a detailed description of all variables. The bottom panel reports the
     p-value from a Romano-Wolf multiple testing correction with 500 bootstrap replications across the two measures of turnout in either the administrative data
     (columns 1-4) or the survey data (columns 5-8).
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                                          Table 8: Did the Decrease in Trust Come from Increased Turnout?
                                                           Full Sample              2007 voters             2010 voters          2007 & 2010 voters
                                                         (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)
                                                       Turnout       Trust      Turnout        Trust    Turnout        Trust     Turnout      Trust

                                                                                    (a) Polling station-level Treatment

                            Treatment (any)             0.012∗     -0.029∗∗∗      0.003      -0.027∗∗     0.007       -0.027∗∗    0.003      -0.025∗
                                                        (0.007)     (0.011)      (0.006)      (0.012)    (0.006)       (0.012)   (0.006)     (0.013)
                                                                                           (b) Individual Treatment
32




                            Individual treatment       0.014∗∗∗    -0.027∗∗∗      0.001       -0.020∗     0.006       -0.022∗∗    -0.000     -0.021∗
                                                        (0.005)     (0.009)      (0.005)      (0.011)    (0.005)       (0.011)   (0.005)     (0.011)

                            R2                          0.03         0.10        0.02          0.11       0.03         0.11       0.02         0.12
                            Control Mean                0.934        0.802       0.964         0.803      0.958        0.805      0.967       0.804
                            Observations                7308         7295        5365          5341       5491         5469       4744        4725

     Notes: This table reports average treatment effects of the SMS campaign on participation and trust in the IEBC measured in the survey data. All regressions
     control for age and include strata fixed effects. Panel (a) reports effects of treatment at the polling station level and panel (b) reports individual treatment effects
     (respondents in a treated polling station who themselves received text messages).
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
Online Appendix

A Experimental Design and Data Construction                                                                                                                   35

B Randomization Checks                                                                                                                                        40

C Additional Empirical Results                                                                                                                                47
  Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                               47
  Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                              49

D Model                                                                                                                                                       67

E Endline Survey Questionnaire                                                                                                                                73

List of Figures
   1     Treatment Effects on Turnout and Trust . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
   A.1   Sample Polling Sheet in 2013 Election . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   35
   C.1   Trust in Kenya’s Electoral Institutions . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   47
   C.2   Success Rates of SMS Broadcast . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   47
   C.3   ACLED Election-Related Violence By Constituency              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   48

List of Tables
   1     Recollection of SMS Received, Survey Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25
   2     Knowledge of the IEBC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   26
   3     Effects on Voter Turnout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
   4     Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
   5     Winners and Losers: Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions . .                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   29
   6     Election Violence: Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions . . .                                   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   30
   7     Null Effects on Information and Support for Democracy . . . . . . . . .                                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   31
   8     Did the Decrease in Trust Come from Increased Turnout? . . . . . . . . .                                     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
   A.1   Sample Size by Treatment Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   36
   A.2   Content of the Text Messages by Treatment Group . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   37
   A.3   Description of Political Attitude Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   38
   A.4   Missions of the IEBC (Table 2): Keywords and Phrases . . . . . . . . . . .                                   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   39
   B.1   Randomization Checks, Administrative Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   41
   B.2   Randomization Checks, Survey Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   42
   B.3   Randomization Checks, Heterogeneity Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   43
   B.4   Randomization Balance across all treatment cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   44
   B.5   Randomization Balance across all treatment cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   45
   B.6   Randomization Balance across all treatment cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   46
   C.1   Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   49
   C.2   Descriptive Statistics in the SMS Campaign Sample and Survey Sample                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   50
   C.3   Standardized Treatment Effects on Turnout and Trust . . . . . . . . . . .                                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   51
   C.4   Effects on Turnout by Position (Survey Data), Additional Results . . . .                                     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   52
   C.5   Effects on Candidate Vote Shares . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   53
   C.6   Effects on Turnout across All Treatment Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   54

                                                         33
C.7    Effects on Trust across All Treatment Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           55
C.8    Spillovers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
C.9    Analysis of Spillovers on Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        57
C.10   Winners and Losers: Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . .              58
C.11   Effects on Satisfaction with Democracy in Kenya by Tribe, Not Controlling for Other In-
       teractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
C.12   Effects on Trust: Heterogeneity with Winners and Losers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              60
C.13   Election Violence and Turnout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        61
C.13   Effects on Trust: Heterogeneity with Election Violence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             62
C.14   Heterogeneous Effects on Support for Democratic Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               63
C.15   Heterogeneous Effects on Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           64
C.16   Effects on All Other Attitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       65
C.17   Survey Attrition: Lee Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         66




                                                       34
A   Experimental Design and Data Construction


                 Figure A.1: Sample Polling Sheet in 2013 Election




                                        35
                          Table A.1: Sample Size by Treatment Group


   Group         Polling Stations in   Polling Stations in   Respondents in   Polling Stations in   Respondents in
                    Experiment          Survey Sample        Survey Sample     Survey Sample        Survey Sample
                                             (Target)           (Target)           (Actual)            (Actual)

Encouragement          2,016                 1,800               3,600              1,325               1,852

Positions Info         2,035                 1,800               3,600              1,359               1,875

  IEBC Info            2,023                 1,800               3,600              1,357               1,848

   Control             6,086                 1,800               3,600              1,348               1,825

    Total              12,160                7,200               14,400             5,389               7,400




                                                     36
                                       Table A.2: Content of the Text Messages by Treatment Group


     Group   Content                                                                                                                      Date

       1     It is your duty to vote. Please make sure you vote in the March 4 General Election                                           Feb 27
       1     You have a duty to vote for good leaders for your country. Please vote on March 4                                            Feb 28
       1     Don’t just complain about leaders, do something. Make sure you vote for good leaders on March 4                              March 1
       1     A good citizen helps promote democracy in his country by participating in the elections. Please vote on March 4              March 2
       1     Remember the General Election is next Monday, on March 4. Please make sure you vote                                          March 3
       1     Make sure you have your original ID or passport when you go to the polling station on March 4                                March 4



       2     Vote for all 6 ballots on March 4: Governor, County Assembly Ward Rep, Member of Parliament, Women Rep, Senator, President   Feb 27
       2     Your governor will manage funds on your behalf. Choose the right person for this important job. Vote wisely on March 4       Feb 28
       2     Your senator will help determine how many resources your county receives from the central government. Vote for               March 1
             a competent candidate on March 4
       2     Your member of National Assembly will be responsible for making laws for Kenya. Vote for a true nationalist on March 4       March 2
       2     Every voter, male or female, votes for the Women’s Rep on March 4. She will represent your county at the National Assembly   March 3
37




       2     Your Ward Rep ensures that your interests are represented at the County Assembly. Vote for an accessible leader on March 4   March 4



       3     Free and fair Elections are important for democracy. The IEBC is committed to strengthening the democracy. Vote on March 4   Feb 27
       3     Credible elections require a peaceful environment. The IEBC is committed to free and fair elections; please keep the peace   Feb 28
       3     Elections are organized by the IEBC, an independent body created by the new Constitution to ensure free and fair elections   March 1
       3     Show your confidence in the IEBC by voting in the election next Monday, March 4th 2013                                       March 2
       3     The IEBC has managed 12 successful by-elections and the Constitutional referendum. Help us make this election a success      March 3
       3     As part of its mission, the IEBC has established a clean voter register. You are in the register. Now, go and vote           March 4
                       Table A.3: Description of Political Attitude Variables

Question                                                  Response Options
How do you feel about the outcome of the last elec-       1=Very satisfied, 2=Satisfied, 3=Indifferent, 4=Dis-
tions?                                                    satisfied, 5=Very dissatisfied
Do you agree or disagree with the following state-
ments regarding politics in Kenya:
Politics and government sometimes seem so com-            1=Strongly agree, 2=Agree, 3=Neither agree nor dis-
plicated that you can’t really understand what is go-     agree, 4=Disagree, 5=Strongly disagree
ing on.
The world is run by few people in power, and there        1=Strongly agree, 2=Agree, 3=Neither agree nor dis-
is not much that someone like me can do about it.         agree, 4=Disagree, 5=Strongly disagree
We should choose our leaders in this country              1=Strongly agree, 2=Agree, 3=Neither agree nor dis-
through regular, open and honest elections.               agree, 4=Disagree, 5=Strongly disagree
Which of the following statements is closest to your      1=Democracy is preferable to any other kind of
own opinion?                                              government, 2=In some circumstances, a non-
                                                          democratic government can be preferable, 3=For
                                                          someone like me, it doesn’t matter what govern-
                                                          ment we have
Overall how satisfied are you with how democracy          1=Very satisfied, 2=Fairly satisfied, 3=Not very sat-
works in Kenya?                                           isfied, 4=Not at all satisfied, 5=Kenya is not a
                                                          democracy
For each of the following pairs of statements, tell
me which of the two is closest to your view about
Kenyan politics:
1: The use of violence is never justified in politics.    2: In this country it is sometimes necessary to use
                                                          violence in support of a just cause.
1: As citizens we should be more active in question-      2: In our country these days we should show more
ing the actions of our leaders.                           respect for authority.
1: All people should be permitted to vote, even if        2: Only those who are sufficiently well educated
they do not fully understand all the issues in an elec-   should be allowed to choose our leaders.
tion.
1: Women can be good politicians and should be en-        2: Women should stay at home to take care of their
couraged to stand in elections.                           children.
1: In our country, it is normal to pay a bribe to a       2: It is wrong to pay a bribe to any government offi-
government official to encourage them.                    cial.
Generally speaking, would you say that most peo-          1=Most people can be trusted, 2=Need to be careful
ple can be trusted or that you need to be very careful
in dealing with people?
In general, can you trust members of your tribe?          1=Yes, 2=No
In general, can you trust members in other tribes?        1=Yes, 2=No
Do you trust the IEBC, the electoral commission of        1=Yes, 2=No
Kenya?
Do you trust the Supreme court?                           1=Yes, 2=No
Do you trust the police?                                  1=Yes, 2=No
Do you think the elections this year were fair and        1=Yes, 2=No
transparent?
In general, in your life, are you very happy, some- 1=Very happy, 2=Somewhat happy, 3=Not happy
what happy or not happy?                           38
                                        Table A.4: Missions of the IEBC (Table 2): Keywords and Phrases


            Mission             Keywords

       Conduct Elections        conduct+election, control+election, carry out+election, coordinate+election, supervise+election, organise+election
                                manage+election, oversee+election, prepare+election, preside+election, run+election, in charge+election,
                                deal with+election, materials, ballot papers, ballot boxes


          Count Votes           count, tally, calculate, announce+winner, declare+winner, annouce+result, declare+result, announce+election


          Boundaries            boundary, boundari, demarcate, demarcating


        Voter Education         voter education, educate, education, teach, assist, guide, kufundisha (teach)
39




       Voter Registration       voter registration, register, registr, regestration


     Free and Fair Elections    free, fair, integrity, independence, independent, transparent, transparency, trustworthy, unbiased, peace, safety, security,
                                no rigging, no stealing, prevent rigging, prevent election rigging, anti corruption, no corruption, prevent corruption,
                                guard against corruption during voting, fight corruption, check on corruption, amani (peace)


     Notes: This table lists all the keywords, phrases, and roots used to construct the mission categories used in Table 2. The ‘+’ sign denotes instances where we
     require both terms to be included in the respondent’s answer to the question: “What are the main missions of the IEBC?”.
B    Randomization Checks
This appendix shows that the experimental randomization produced balanced samples. Table B.1 re-
ports these results for the administrative data. We report balance checks for all the data we have access
to from the IEBC, i.e. the number of registered voters per polling station, the number and fraction of
registered voters who submitted their phone number, and the number of streams per polling station. In
addition, we check attrition across treatment cells: as was mentioned above, some of the polling sheets
could not be processed or were returned empty, resulting in the fact that we do not observe outcomes
for 7% of polling stations in the administrative data.
    In columns (1) and (2) of Table B.1, we test whether the missing data is correlated with treatment
status. We report two specifications, one with two treatment dummies for the 100% and 50% treatment
cells (pooling together T1, T2 and T3), and one with the three main treatment groups. In column (2), the
IEBC information group has a marginally significant coefficient, but the p-value of the test of joint sig-
nificance across all three treatment coefficients does not allow us to reject that these coefficients are zero.
In columns (3) through (10), we show balance for the polling station-level covariates described above.
Of the 12 coefficients tested across these specifications, none are statistically different from zero. At the
bottom of the table, we also report the p-value on the joint F-test for all treatment group coefficients.
Across all four outcomes we cannot reject that these coefficients are jointly zero.
    In Table B.2, we report balance checks for the survey data. In columns (1) and (2) we show that survey
attrition is balanced across treatment groups. In columns (3) through (14), since we did not collect any
baseline data, we look at time-invariant variables collected at endline, such as the gender, age, and years
of education of respondents, whether they reported voting in the 2007 election, whether they reported
voting in the 2010 constitutional referendum, and whether they reported having registered to vote for the
2013 election (registration ended before the beginning of our experiment). Across the 12 specifications
and 30 coefficients, only one coefficient is significantly different from zero. At the bottom of the table we
report the p-value of the F-test that the treatment coefficients are jointly zero. We cannot reject this for 11
of the 12 regressions (one is rejected at 10%).
    We report balance checks for the variables we use in the heterogeneity analysis in Table B.3. These
variables are a dummy variable indicating the incidence of election-related violence in the constituency
(columns (1)-(2)), and dummy variables indicating whether the respondent belongs to one of the fol-
lowing tribes: Luos (columns (3)-(4)), Kikuyus (columns (5)-(6)), tribes in the winning electoral coalition
(columns (7)-(8)), and tribes in the losing coalition (columns (9)-(10)). Two out of the 25 coefficients
appear significant at the 10% level.
    Finally, we report balance checks across all sub-cells (including 100% and 50% cells) in Tables B.4
through B.6. We present these estimates for the administrative data (with the same variables as in Table
B.1) in B.4, for the survey data (with the same variables as in Table B.2) in Table B.5, and for the hetero-
geneity variables (with the same variables as in Table B.3) in Table B.6. These checks suggest that the
randomization produced balanced samples across all the sub-cells, except perhaps for ACLED violence
(Table B.6).



                                                      40
                                   Table B.1: Randomization Checks, Administrative Data

                                 Data Missing        # Registered Voters           # Phones              % Phones              # Streams
                                  (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)         (10)
     Any 100% Treatment          0.005                 5.487                    1.541                 -0.007                0.010
                                [0.005]              [17.910]                 [12.660]                [0.007]              [0.021]
     Any 50% Treatment           0.005                 6.615                    4.485                 -0.003                0.009
                                [0.005]              [17.460]                 [12.320]                [0.007]              [0.020]
     Encouragement                         0.008                  16.018                   14.109                -0.002                  0.015
                                          [0.006]                [22.701]                 [15.888]               [0.009]                [0.026]
     Positions Info                       -0.003                  10.374                    4.376                -0.009                  0.010
                                          [0.006]                [19.348]                 [13.930]               [0.007]                [0.023]
     IEBC Info                            0.011∗                  -8.326                   -9.412                -0.004                  0.003
                                          [0.006]                [19.365]                 [13.544]               [0.009]                [0.023]
     F-test p-value              0.49       0.16       0.91        0.77         0.94        0.63       0.63       0.61       0.87        0.94
     Control Mean                0.07       0.07      685.99      689.06       402.21      403.70      0.56       0.56       1.40        1.40
41




     R-squared                   .14        .14        .43         .43          .42         .42        .06        .06        .43         .43
     Observations               12160      12160      11257       11257        12160       12160      12160      12160      11191       11191
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust Standard errors reported in brackets. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
           In each column we report the p-value of a F-test of joint significance of all the treatment dummies in each regression.
           Registered voters denotes the number of registered voters per polling station.
           # Phones denotes the number of registered voters with a valid Safaricom phone number per polling station.
           % Phones denotes the fraction of registered voters with a valid Safaricom phone number per polling station.
           # Streams denotes the number of polling booths per polling station.
                                                       Table B.2: Randomization Checks, Survey Data


                                 Non-Response             Gender                    Age            Years of Educ         Voted 2007          Voted 2010        Registered 2013
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)           (6)      (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)     (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)
     Any 100% Treatment         -0.006               -0.009                 0.553                 -0.178               0.010                0.011              -0.000
                                [0.011]              [0.015]               [0.371]                [0.142]             [0.013]              [0.013]             [0.003]
     Any 50% Treatment           -0.013              -0.003                 0.596                 -0.142               0.020                0.012              -0.003
                                [0.011]              [0.015]               [0.374]                [0.143]             [0.013]              [0.013]             [0.003]
     Encouragement                         -0.008               -0.025                0.714∗                 -0.104               0.008               0.023               0.000
                                           [0.012]              [0.016]               [0.410]               [0.156]              [0.015]             [0.014]             [0.003]
     Positions Info                        -0.014                0.017                 0.532                -0.127                0.016               0.005              -0.005
                                           [0.012]              [0.016]               [0.412]               [0.157]              [0.015]             [0.014]             [0.003]
     IEBC Info                             -0.006               -0.010                 0.478                -0.249                0.020               0.007               0.000
                                           [0.012]              [0.016]               [0.408]               [0.155]              [0.015]             [0.014]             [0.003]
     F-test p-value              0.49       0.69       0.81      0.07       0.22          0.34     0.43      0.46      0.32       0.52      0.60      0.40      0.57      0.43
     Control Mean                0.49       0.49       0.61      0.61       35.89         35.89    9.06      9.06      0.73       0.73      0.75      0.75      0.99      0.99
42




     R-squared                   .02        .02         .02       .02        .02           .02      .01       .01       .01        .01       .02       .02       .01       .01
     Observations               14400      14400       7399      7399       7365          7365     7364      7364      7332       7332      7261      7261      7339      7339
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by polling station. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
           In each column we report the p-value of a F-test of joint significance of all the treatment dummies in each regression.
                             Table B.3: Randomization Checks, Heterogeneity Variables

                                    Violence                 Luos             Kikuyus               Winners                  Losers
                                  (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)     (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)
     Any 100% Treatment         0.017                -0.009               -0.000                0.002                 0.001
                               [0.011]               [0.007]              [0.005]              [0.008]               [0.008]
     Any 50% Treatment          0.015                -0.003               -0.003                0.006                -0.007
                               [0.011]               [0.007]              [0.006]              [0.008]               [0.008]
     Encouragement                        0.022∗                 -0.007               -0.003               -0.003                 -0.005
                                          [0.012]               [0.008]              [0.006]              [0.009]                [0.009]
     Positions Info                        0.020                -0.012                0.003               -0.003                  0.003
                                          [0.013]               [0.008]              [0.006]              [0.009]                [0.009]
     IEBC Info                             0.005                 0.001               -0.004               0.016∗                  -0.007
                                          [0.011]               [0.008]              [0.006]              [0.009]                [0.009]
     F-test p-value              0.28      0.13       0.41       0.34      0.83       0.62      0.78       0.11       0.55        0.62
     Control Mean                0.10      0.10       0.19       0.19      0.13       0.13      0.29       0.29       0.31        0.31
43




     R-squared                    .26       .26        .64        .64       .71        .71       .67        .67        .7          .7
     Observations                7327      7327       7356       7356      7356       7356      7356       7356       7356        7356
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by constituency (the level at which violence is measured) in
           columns (1)-(2) and by polling station in columns (3)-(10). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In each column
           we report the p-value of a F-test of joint significance of all the treatment dummies in each regression.
                   Table B.4: Randomization Balance across all treatment cells

                                Data Missing      # Registered Voters      # Phones     % Phones      # Streams
                                      (1)                   (2)               (3)           (4)           (5)
     Encouragement, 100%             0.014                10.823              8.616        -0.008        0.006
                                    [0.009]              [31.812]           [22.363]      [0.009]       [0.036]
     Encouragement, 50%              0.003                21.164             19.614        0.005         0.024
                                    [0.008]              [29.341]           [20.313]      [0.013]       [0.034]
     Positions Info, 100%            -0.005               10.966             -1.935        -0.011        0.020
                                    [0.008]              [24.880]           [17.182]      [0.008]       [0.031]
     Positions Info, 50%             -0.002                9.781             10.680        -0.007       -0.000
                                    [0.008]              [26.203]           [19.579]      [0.008]       [0.031]
     IEBC Info, 100%                 0.007                -5.385             -2.023        -0.001        0.003
                                    [0.008]              [26.246]           [18.919]      [0.013]       [0.032]
     IEBC Info, 50%                 0.015∗                -11.285            -16.779       -0.007        0.002
                                    [0.009]              [24.851]           [16.698]      [0.010]       [0.028]
44




     F-test p-value                   0.37                 0.97               0.83         0.83          0.99
     Control Mean                    0.074               689.059            403.699       0.561         1.400
     R-squared                         .14                  .43                .42          .06           .43
     Observations                    12160                11257              12160        12160         11191
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust Standard errors reported in brackets.
            All regressions include strata fixed effects.
            In each column we report the p-value of a test of joint significance of all the treatment dummies.
            Registered voters denotes the number of registered voters per polling station.
            # Phones denotes the number of registered voters with a valid phone number per polling station.
            % Phones denotes the fraction of registered voters with a valid phone number per polling station.
            # Streams denotes the number of polling booths per polling station.
                                  Table B.5: Randomization Balance across all treatment cells

                                 Non-Response         Gender       Age      Years of Educ      Voted 2007      Voted 2010      Registered 2013
                                        (1)             (2)         (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)                  (7)
     Encouragement, 100%               0.004           -0.023     0.551          -0.020            -0.006         0.018              0.002
                                      [0.015]         [0.020]    [0.497]        [0.188]           [0.019]        [0.017]            [0.004]
     Encouragement, 50%                -0.019          -0.027    0.870∗         -0.183             0.022          0.027             -0.002
                                      [0.015]         [0.020]    [0.513]        [0.192]           [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.004]
     Positions Info, 100%              -0.023          0.003      0.532          -0.315            0.017          0.012              -0.004
                                      [0.014]         [0.019]    [0.497]        [0.193]           [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.004]
     Positions Info, 50%               -0.005          0.031      0.531          0.068             0.015          -0.002             -0.006
                                      [0.015]         [0.020]    [0.520]        [0.193]           [0.018]        [0.018]            [0.004]
     IEBC Info, 100%                   0.002           -0.008     0.577          -0.190            0.017          0.002              0.001
                                      [0.014]         [0.020]    [0.509]        [0.187]           [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.004]
     IEBC Info, 50%                    -0.014          -0.011     0.382          -0.306            0.023          0.011              -0.001
                                      [0.014]         [0.020]    [0.495]        [0.192]           [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.004]
45




     F-test p-value                     0.50            0.19       0.72           0.39             0.66            0.70              0.65
     Control Mean                      0.493           0.612      35.894         9.061            0.726           0.751              0.991
     R-squared                           .02             .02        .02            .01             .01             .02                .01
     Observations                      14400           7399        7365          7364             7332            7261               7339
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by polling station. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
           In each column we report the p-value of a F-test of joint significance of all the treatment dummies in each regression.
       Table B.6: Randomization Balance across all treatment cells

                                  Violence      Luos     Kikuyus       Winners     Losers
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
     Encouragement, 100%            0.016       -0.012      0.002        -0.005     0.003
                                   [0.013]     [0.010]     [0.008]      [0.011]    [0.011]
     Encouragement, 50%            0.028∗       -0.002     -0.008        -0.001     -0.013
                                   [0.015]     [0.010]     [0.007]      [0.011]    [0.010]
     Positions Info, 100%           0.006       -0.015      0.001        -0.004     0.004
                                   [0.012]     [0.010]     [0.007]      [0.012]    [0.011]
     Positions Info, 50%          0.035∗∗       -0.008      0.005        -0.001     0.003
                                  [0.016]      [0.009]     [0.008]      [0.011]    [0.011]
     IEBC Info, 100%              0.029∗∗       -0.000      -0.003       0.014      -0.005
                                  [0.013]      [0.010]     [0.007]      [0.011]    [0.011]
     IEBC Info, 50%                 -0.018      0.002       -0.005      0.019∗     -0.010
                                   [0.013]     [0.010]     [0.008]      [0.011]    [0.011]
46




     F-test p-value                  0.05       0.63        0.76         0.40        0.70
     Control Mean                   0.100      0.186       0.125        0.290       0.309
     R-squared                       .26        .64         .71          .67          .7
     Observations                   7327       7356        7356         7356        7356
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by constituency
           (the level at which violence is measured) in col. (1) and by polling station
           in col. (2)-(5). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In each column
           we report the p-value of a F-test of joint significance of all the treatment
           dummies in each regression.
C     Additional Empirical Results

Figures

                              Figure C.1: Trust in Kenya’s Electoral Institutions




Note: Figures computed using rounds 2, 3 and 4 of the Afrobarometer conducted in Kenya in 2003, 2005, and 2008, respectively.



                                   Figure C.2: Success Rates of SMS Broadcast




Note: Figure computed and provided by Safaricom. The mass broadcast of text messages was scheduled to begin every day
at 10am during the campaign. Safaricom experienced technical difficulties on the first day of the campaign due to “the system
doing a reconciliation of the numbers of persons who opted out”, according to the information communicated to us. As a result of
this reconciliation, the first messages were sent at 11am on February 27, instead of the scheduled time of 10am. This led to a
slightly lower delivery rate on the first day of the campaign.




                                                                 47
                 Figure C.3: ACLED Election-Related Violence By Constituency




Source: Armed Conflict Location and Event Data (ACLED). We coded all election-related events recorded by
ACLED between February 27, 2013 and November 10, 2013 (see text for details).


                                                  48
Tables

                                              Table C.1: Summary Statistics
                                                                 Mean                  SD                     N
              Registered voters                                   689.1              1002.2               11257
              Votes cast                                          587.4              818.0                11257
              Turnout, cast votes                                  .878               .082                11254
              Valid votes                                         581.9              810.7                11257
              Turnout, valid votes                                 .870               .083                11255
              Non-valid votes                                       6.9               21.1                12160
              Non-valid votes, fraction                            .011               .014                11257
              Election-related violence                            .105               .306                12160
              Kenyatta vote                                        .510               .389                11252
              Odinga vote                                          .435               .362                11253
                                                                 Mean                  SD                     N
              Age, years                                          36.3                 12.5               7365
              Gender (1=Male)                                     .606                 .489               7399
              Years of education                                   8.9                  4.7               7364
              Kikuyu                                              .176                 .380               7356
              Luo                                                 .117                 .321               7356
              Winning coalition                                   .293                 .455               7356
              Losing coalition                                    .299                 .458               7356
              Voted in elections                                  .944                 .229               7341
              Voted for all six positions                         .930                 .255               7254
              Received election-related SMS                       .793                 .405               7324
              Total SMS received from IEBC                         3.9                  5.0               5879
              Remember SMS content                                .695                 .460               7400
              Texts encouraged turnout                            .246                 .431               6608
              Mentioned texts to others                           .704                 .457               6103
              Others mentioned texts                              .687                 .464               7196
              Trust the IEBC                                      .781                 .414               7327
              Trust the Supreme Court (SCK)                       .711                 .453               7227
              Elections were fair                                 .712                 .453               7287
              SCK decision on election fair                       .684                 .465               7204
              Satisfied with democracy                            .303                 .459               7309
              Democracy preferable                                .900                 .300               7321
              Elect through open elections                        .975                 .157               7359
              Actively question leaders                           .834                 .372               7364
              All allowed to vote                                 .918                 .275               7371
              Violence never justified                            .930                 .256               7320
              Month of election correct                           .824                 .381               6712
              Day of election correct                             .785                 .411               5475
              Role of Women Rep correct                           .473                 .499               6595
              Party of President correct                          .926                 .262               6652
              Ugandan President correct                           .963                 .188               6442
              Well informed about election                        .872                 .334               7369
Note: The Kenyatta and Odinga vote shares are weighted by the number of votes cast in each polling station.




                                                                   49
     Table C.2: Descriptive Statistics in the SMS Campaign Sample and Survey Sample
                                              Census 2009       SMS Campaign Sample    Survey Sample
                                                  (1)                  (2)                  (3)

               Age                               43.29                 43.59                35.47
                                                 (3.36)                (3.17)               (3.62)

               Years of schooling                 6.42                  6.99                10.26
                                                 (2.34)                (1.45)               (1.66)

               Own radio                          0.714                0.759                 0.843
                                                 (0.160)              (0.093)               (0.124)

               Own TV                             0.216                0.226                 0.455
                                                 (0.160)              (0.138)               (0.186)

               Piped water                        0.046                0.044                 0.236
                                                 (0.061)              (0.055)               (0.181)

               Electric light                     0.146                0.139                 0.329
                                                 (0.187)              (0.139)               (0.224)

               Iron roof                          0.701                0.783                 0.846
                                                 (0.259)              (0.176)               (0.138)

               Cement floor                       0.328                0.353                 0.505
                                                 (0.205)              (0.353 )              (0.181)

               Constituencies                     210                  204                   198
               Polling Stations/Individuals                           12,160                7,400

Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Column (1) reports average country-level characteristics from the 2009 KNBS
census averaged across constituencies. Column (2) reports averages of the same variables, where the data is at the
constituency-level and weighted by the number of polling stations in our experimental sample. Column (3) reports aver-
ages of the same variable collected in our endline phone survey (averaged by constituency).




                                                           50
                  Table C.3: Standardized Treatment Effects on Turnout and Trust

                    Votes Cast      Valid Votes     Self-Reported      Trust IEBC       Fair Elections   Satisf Democracy
                         (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)                  (6)
                               ∗               ∗                ∗                 ∗∗∗
Encouragement          0.034          0.033             0.056           -0.105             -0.024              -0.059∗
                       [0.018]        [0.018]           [0.031]          [0.033]           [0.031]             [0.032]
Positions Info          0.014          0.016            0.060∗           -0.056∗           -0.031              -0.064∗∗
                       [0.019]        [0.019]           [0.032]          [0.032]           [0.031]              [0.032]
IEBC Info               0.007          0.002             0.043            -0.053            -0.001               -0.036
                       [0.019]        [0.019]           [0.032]          [0.032]           [0.031]              [0.032]
R2                      0.48            0.49             0.02             0.10              0.16                 0.04
Observations           11254           11255             7341             7327              7287                 7309


Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (2). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In column 1, the depen-
dent variable is the fraction of registered voters per polling station who cast a vote. In column 2, the dependent variable is
the fraction of registered voters who cast a valid vote. In column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey
respondents answering Yes to the question: “Did you vote in the 2013 elections?”. In column 4, the dependent variable
is a dummy variable for survey respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you trust the IEBC?”. In columns 5,
the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you think the elections
were fair and transparent?”. In column 6, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering ‘Very
Satisfied’ to the question: “Overall, how satisfied are you with how democracy works in Kenya?” All dependent variables
are standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the control group.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                             51
                                 Table C.4: Effects on Turnout by Position (Survey Data), Additional Results

                                     President                  MP                 Senator             Governor           Women’s Rep            Ward Rep
                                    (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)
        Any 100% Treatment       0.019∗∗∗             0.020∗∗∗                 0.020∗∗∗             0.022∗∗∗             0.021∗∗∗             0.023∗∗∗
                                  [0.007]              [0.007]                 [0.007]              [0.007]              [0.008]              [0.008]
        Any 50% Treatment          0.008                0.007                   0.005                0.007                0.007                0.008
                                  [0.007]              [0.008]                 [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]
        Encouragement                       0.014∗                   0.014∗               0.016∗               0.016∗∗              0.016∗               0.017∗∗
                                            [0.008]                  [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]
        Positions Info                      0.015∗                   0.014∗                0.011               0.014∗                0.013               0.016∗
                                            [0.008]                  [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]
        IEBC Info                            0.012                    0.012                0.010                0.011                0.013                0.013
                                            [0.008]                  [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.008]              [0.009]              [0.009]
        Control Mean               0.932     0.932      0.928        0.928      0.928     0.928      0.928     0.928      0.924     0.924      0.923     0.923
        R-squared                   .02       .02        .02          .02        .02       .02        .02       .02        .02       .02        .02       .02
52




        Observations               7307      7307       7300         7300       7304      7304       7302      7302       7303      7303       7297      7297

     Notes: This table reports treatment effects on self-reported turnout in the survey data. Odd-numbered columns report estimates from equation (1). Even-
     numbered columns report estimates from equation (2). All regressions include strata fixed effects. The dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one
     if the respondent reported casting a vote for the position of: President (columns 1-2), Member of Parliament (columns 3-4), Senator (columns 5-6), Governor
     (columns 7-8), Women’s Representative (columns 9-10) and Ward Representative (columns 11-12).
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                               Table C.5: Effects on Candidate Vote Shares
                                                                Administrative Data
                                                     (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)
                                                   Kenyatta      Kenyatta   Odinga      Odinga
                         Any 100% Treatment          0.002                    -0.001
                                                    [0.003]                  [0.003]
                         Any 50% Treatment           0.002                    -0.004
                                                    [0.003]                  [0.003]
                         Encouragement                             0.000                 0.000
                                                                  [0.004]               [0.004]
                         Positions Info                            0.005                 -0.006
                                                                  [0.004]               [0.004]
                         IEBC Info                                 -0.000                -0.001
                                                                  [0.004]               [0.004]
                         Control Mean                0.493        0.493       0.451      0.451
                         R-squared                    .87          .87         .87        .87
                         Observations                11252        11252       11253      11253

Notes: This table reports treatment effects on candidate vote shares measured in the administrative data. Odd-numbered
columns report estimates from equation (1). Even-numbered columns report estimates from equation (2). All regressions
include strata fixed effects. In columns 1-2, the dependent variable is the fraction of valid votes cast in favor of Uhuru
Kenyatta (winner of the election). In columns 3-4, the dependent variable is the fraction of valid votes cast in favor of
Raila Odinga, the main challenger. The control mean of each dependent variable is weighted by the number of registered
voters in each polling station.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                           53
                     Table C.6: Effects on Turnout across All Treatment Groups
                                                    Administrative Data          Survey Data
                                                      (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)
                        Encouragement, 100%         0.005∗∗        0.005∗∗    0.024∗∗∗   0.029∗∗∗
                                                    [0.002]        [0.002]     [0.009]    [0.010]
                        Encouragement, 50%           0.001          0.001      0.005       0.009
                                                    [0.002]        [0.002]    [0.010]     [0.011]
                        Positions Info, 100%         0.002          0.003      0.013       0.015
                                                    [0.002]        [0.002]    [0.009]     [0.011]
                        Positions Info, 50%         -0.000          0.000     0.017∗      0.019∗
                                                    [0.002]        [0.002]    [0.009]     [0.011]
                        IEBC Info, 100%              0.002          0.001     0.023∗∗    0.031∗∗∗
                                                    [0.002]        [0.002]    [0.009]     [0.010]
                        IEBC Info, 50%              -0.001         -0.001     -0.001      -0.002
                                                    [0.002]        [0.002]    [0.010]     [0.011]
                        Control Mean                 0.877         0.869       0.934       0.917
                        R-squared                     .48           .49         .02         .02
                        Observations                 11254         11255       7341        7254

Notes: This table reports the coefficients from a modified version of equation (2) that includes six dummies for assignment
to one of the six treatment cells, including both the T1/T2/T3 dimension and the 100%/50% treatment dimension. The
dependent variables are defined as in Table 3. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                              54
                       Table C.7: Effects on Trust across All Treatment Groups

                            Trust IEBC     Trust SCK     Fair Election   Fair SCK Ruling      Satisf Democracy        Index
                                (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)                   (5)             (6)
Encouragement, 100%          -0.058∗∗∗       -0.025         -0.028              -0.017              -0.020          -0.068∗∗
                              [0.017]        [0.018]        [0.018]            [0.018]              [0.019]          [0.030]
Encouragement, 50%            -0.027∗        -0.008          0.006              -0.002              -0.035∗∗          -0.029
                              [0.016]        [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.018]               [0.018]         [0.028]
Positions Info, 100%           -0.020         -0.011         -0.025             -0.018             -0.050∗∗∗        -0.058∗∗
                              [0.016]        [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.018]              [0.018]          [0.028]
Positions Info, 50%            -0.024         -0.017         -0.003             -0.023               -0.009           -0.037
                              [0.016]        [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.018]              [0.019]          [0.029]
IEBC Info, 100%               -0.034∗∗       -0.020         -0.011              -0.002              -0.007           -0.030
                               [0.016]       [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.018]              [0.019]          [0.028]
IEBC Info, 50%                 -0.008         -0.002         0.009              0.012                -0.026           -0.004
                              [0.016]        [0.018]        [0.017]            [0.018]              [0.018]          [0.028]
Control Mean                   0.800         0.721           0.715              0.688                0.320            -0.000
R-squared                        .1           .07             .16                .15                  .04               .16
Observations                   7327          7227            7287               7204                 7309              7034

Notes: This table reports the coefficients from a modified version of equation (2) that includes six dummies for assignment
to one of the six treatment cells, including both the T1/T2/T3 dimension and the 100%/50% treatment dimension. The
dependent variables are defined as in Table 4. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                            55
                                                                         Table C.8: Spillovers
                                             Voted in 2013       Voted for All Positions         Trust IEBC           Fair Election      Satisf Democracy
                                             (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)
             Individual treatment          0.016∗∗               0.021∗∗∗                   -0.033∗∗∗                 -0.017             -0.024∗
                                           [0.007]                [0.008]                    [0.011]                 [0.012]             [0.013]
             Treatment, 100% Groups                  0.020∗∗∗                 0.025∗∗∗                  -0.037∗∗∗              -0.021∗              -0.026∗
                                                      [0.007]                  [0.008]                   [0.012]               [0.013]              [0.014]
             Treatment, 50% Groups                     0.009                    0.012                    -0.026∗               -0.009                -0.020
                                                      [0.009]                  [0.010]                   [0.014]               [0.015]              [0.016]
             Spillover                      0.004      0.004      0.005         0.005        -0.015       -0.015      0.017     0.017    -0.027∗    -0.027∗
                                           [0.009]    [0.009]    [0.010]       [0.010]       [0.014]      [0.014]    [0.015]   [0.015]   [0.016]    [0.016]
             Control Mean                   0.936      0.936      0.919         0.919         0.796       0.796      0.725      0.725     0.309      0.309
             R-squared                       .02        .02        .02           .02            .1          .1        .16        .16       .04        .04
             Test 100%=50% p-val                        0.17                     0.12                      0.39                  0.37                 0.69
             Observations                   7341       7341       7254          7254          7327        7327        7287      7287      7309       7309
56




     Notes: Odd-numbered columns report estimates from equation (5). Even-numbered columns report estimates from a similar specification where we replace the
     T reatij indicator with two variables denoting assignment to the 100% treatment group or the 50% treatment group. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
     In columns 1-2, the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the respondent reports having voted. In columns 3-4, the dependent variable is a dummy
     indicating whether the respondent reports having voted for all six positions. Across columns 5-10, the dependent variable is a dummy for the following survey
     answers: in columns 5-6, Yes to: “Do you trust the IEBC?”; in columns 7-8, Yes to: “Do you think the elections were fair and transparent?”; and in columns 9-10,
     Very satisfied to: “Overall, how satisfied are you with how democracy works in Kenya?”.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
                                                           Table C.9: Analysis of Spillovers on Trust
                                            Discussed SMS       Discussed SMS       Did not discuss SMS       Discussed SMS       Did not discuss SMS
                                             with others        No Trust IEBC         No Trust IEBC           Trust Index < 0       Trust Index < 0
                                                   (1)                 (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)
                  Any 100% Treatment             0.028∗∗             0.027∗∗                 0.004                 0.030∗                -0.010
                                                 [0.013]             [0.013]                [0.006]                [0.016]               [0.008]
                  Any 50% Treatment               0.013               0.007                  0.008                  0.012                -0.001
                                                 [0.013]             [0.013]                [0.006]                [0.016]               [0.008]
                  Control Mean                    0.822               0.179                  0.028                 0.335                  0.065
                  R-squared                        .01                 .09                    .01                   .12                    .02
                  Observations                    6015                5977                   5977                  5770                   5770

     Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (1). All regressions include strata fixed effects. All dependent variables are constructed from the survey data.
     In column 1, we look at a dummy variable equal to 1 is the respondents mention that they discussed election-related text messages with others, or that text
     messages were mentioned to them. In column 2, the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent discussed SMS with others (the same
     variable as that in column 1) and does not trust the IEBC. In column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent did not discuss
     SMS with others and does not trust the IEBC. In column 4, the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent discussed SMS with others
57




     and the trust index used in columns 11-12 of Table 4 is less than 0. In column 5, the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent did not
     discuss SMS with others and the trust index used in columns 11-12 of Table 4 is less than 0.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
      Table C.10: Winners and Losers: Effects on Trust in Kenyan Electoral Institutions

                            Trust IEBC     Trust SCK     Fair Election   Fair SCK Ruling     Satisf Democracy        Index
                                 (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)                  (5)              (6)
Any Treatment*Kikuyu            0.030         0.001          0.001             -0.015               -0.040           -0.008
                               [0.020]       [0.026]        [0.021]           [0.023]              [0.035]          [0.037]
Any Treatment*Luo               -0.048      -0.081∗∗         -0.056          -0.117∗∗∗             -0.056          -0.168∗∗
                               [0.040]       [0.041]        [0.041]           [0.041]              [0.035]          [0.067]

Kikuyu                        0.127∗∗∗      0.160∗∗∗       0.192∗∗∗           0.206∗∗∗             0.126∗∗∗        0.366∗∗∗
                               [0.024]       [0.029]        [0.025]            [0.026]              [0.036]         [0.044]
Luo                           -0.154∗∗∗     -0.152∗∗∗      -0.228∗∗∗         -0.229∗∗∗             -0.022          -0.348∗∗∗
                               [0.045]       [0.046]        [0.046]           [0.046]              [0.039]          [0.075]
Any Treatment                  -0.057∗        0.007          0.042             0.037               -0.046            -0.004
                               [0.033]       [0.038]        [0.037]           [0.038]              [0.039]          [0.060]

Kikuyu = Luo F-stat             3.67*         3.50*            1.86            5.68**                0.14           5.38**
Kikuyu = Luo p-val              0.06          0.06             0.17             0.02                 0.71            0.02

Control Mean                    0.801         0.722          0.714             0.687                0.322           -0.001
R-squared                        .12           .09            .18               .17                  .06              .2
Observations                    7137          7043           7101              7019                 7119             6859

Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (3). All regressions include strata fixed effects. ‘Kikuyu’ equals one
for Kikuyu survey respondents. ‘Luo’ equals one for Luo survey respondents. In column 1, the dependent variable is
a dummy variable for survey respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you trust the IEBC?”. In column 2, the
dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you trust the Supreme Court
of Kenya?”. In column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering Yes to the question:
“Do you think the elections were fair and transparent?”. In column 4, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for
respondents answering Yes to the question: “Do you think the ruling of the Supreme Court on the election was fair?”
In column 5, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for respondents answering ‘Very Satisfied’ to the question:
“Overall, how satisfied are you with how democracy works in Kenya?” In column 6, we report effects on an index of all
previous 5 outcomes computed as in Kling et al. (2007). We also report the F-stat and corresponding p-value from a test
of equality of the two interaction terms in the top panel: Any Treatment*Kikuyu = Any Treatment*Luo.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                          58
            Table C.11: Effects on Satisfaction with Democracy in Kenya by Tribe, Not Controlling for Other Interactions
                                                  Voted             Trust IEBC             Trust SCK             Fair Election        Satisf Democracy
                                            (1)           (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)
              Any Treatment*Kikuyu        -0.014                  0.021                 -0.002                  0.003                  -0.056
                                          [0.015]                [0.019]                [0.025]                [0.020]                [0.035]
              Any Treatment*Luo           -0.009                  -0.049               -0.085∗∗                 -0.054                 -0.055
                                          [0.016]                [0.040]                [0.041]                [0.040]                [0.035]
              Any Treatment*Win                      -0.020                  0.009                  0.003                   0.002                -0.024
                                                     [0.016]                [0.021]                [0.027]                 [0.023]               [0.031]
              Any Treatment*Lose                     -0.025                 -0.056∗                -0.071∗∗               -0.074∗∗               -0.004
                                                     [0.016]                [0.028]                 [0.030]                [0.031]               [0.029]
              Kikuyu                       0.011                0.129∗∗∗               0.163∗∗∗               0.186∗∗∗                0.123∗∗∗
                                          [0.018]                [0.023]                [0.028]                [0.024]                 [0.036]
              Luo                         0.036∗                -0.168∗∗∗              -0.158∗∗∗              -0.236∗∗∗                -0.033
                                          [0.021]                [0.044]                [0.046]                [0.045]                [0.038]
              Winning Coalition                       0.024                 0.121∗∗∗               0.132∗∗∗               0.182∗∗∗               0.091∗∗∗
59




                                                     [0.019]                 [0.024]                [0.029]                [0.026]                [0.033]
              Losing Coalition                       0.043∗∗                -0.074∗∗               -0.039                 -0.093∗∗∗              -0.045
                                                     [0.017]                 [0.031]               [0.033]                 [0.033]               [0.030]
              Any Treatment               0.017∗     0.026∗∗    -0.024∗     -0.013      -0.002      0.007      -0.000       0.014      -0.007     -0.016
                                          [0.009]    [0.012]    [0.013]     [0.018]     [0.015]    [0.020]     [0.015]     [0.019]    [0.015]    [0.019]
              Control Mean                 0.935      0.935      0.800       0.800      0.721       0.721      0.714        0.714      0.320      0.320
              Win = Lose F-stat            0.07       0.10       3.13*       6.44**     3.66*       6.47**     2.08        7.78***     0.00       0.38
              Win = Lose p-val             0.80       0.75       0.08         0.01      0.06         0.01      0.15         0.01       0.98       0.53
              R-squared                     .02        .02        .11          .11       .09          .08       .18          .18        .04        .04
              Observations                 7304       7304       7289         7289      7192         7192      7251         7251       7271       7271

     Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (3). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In odd-numbered columns, ‘Kikuyu’ equals one for Kikuyu
     survey respondents and ‘Luo’ equals one for Luo survey respondents. In even-numbered columns, winning/losing coalitions are defined as in Table 5. All
     dependent variables are defined as in columns 1-5 of Table C.10. We also report the F-stat and corresponding p-value from a test of equality of the two
     interaction terms: Any Treatment*Kikuyu = Any Treatment*Luo (odd-numbered columns) and Any Treatment*Winning Coalition = Any Treatment*Losing
     Coalition (even-numbered columns).
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.
               Table C.12: Effects on Trust: Heterogeneity with Winners and Losers

                              Trust IEBC             Trust SCK             Fair Election        Fair SCK Ruling        Satisf Democracy
                             (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)
Any Treat 100%*Kikuyu      0.056∗∗                0.020                  0.025                   0.009                  0.003
                           [0.022]               [0.029]                [0.023]                 [0.025]                [0.039]
Any Treat 50%*Kikuyu        0.005                -0.017                  -0.023                  -0.038                -0.081∗∗
                           [0.022]               [0.029]                [0.024]                 [0.026]                 [0.039]
Any Treat 100%*Luo          -0.020               -0.037                  -0.013                -0.099∗∗                -0.087∗∗
                           [0.045]               [0.046]                [0.045]                 [0.046]                 [0.038]
Any Treat 50%*Luo          -0.077∗              -0.128∗∗∗               -0.098∗∗               -0.136∗∗∗                -0.024
                           [0.046]               [0.047]                 [0.046]                [0.047]                [0.040]
Any Treat 100%*Win                    0.041∗                  0.027                  0.031                   0.014                 0.038
                                      [0.024]                [0.031]                [0.026]                 [0.028]               [0.035]
Any Treat 50%*Win                     -0.016                 -0.022                 -0.027                 -0.048∗                -0.066∗
                                      [0.024]                [0.031]                [0.026]                [0.028]                [0.035]
Any Treat 100%*Lose                   -0.047                 -0.043                 -0.053                 -0.085∗∗                -0.009
                                      [0.032]                [0.034]                [0.035]                 [0.035]               [0.032]
Any Treat 50%*Lose                    -0.063∗               -0.096∗∗∗              -0.095∗∗∗               -0.103∗∗∗               0.020
                                      [0.032]                [0.034]                [0.035]                 [0.035]               [0.032]
Any 100% Treatment         -0.082∗∗   -0.064∗     0.006       0.016      -0.012      0.004       0.021       0.044     -0.079∗    -0.093∗∗
                            [0.037]   [0.039]    [0.042]     [0.044]    [0.041]     [0.043]     [0.042]     [0.044]    [0.043]     [0.045]
Any 50% Treatment           -0.031    -0.006      0.008       0.035     0.097∗∗    0.128∗∗∗      0.053     0.087∗∗      -0.011     -0.020
                           [0.037]    [0.038]    [0.042]     [0.044]    [0.041]     [0.042]     [0.042]    [0.044]     [0.044]    [0.046]
Control Mean                0.801      0.801     0.722       0.722       0.714       0.714      0.687        0.687      0.322      0.322
Win = Lose F-stat           2.74*     9.43***    1.34        4.43**      0.69       7.52***     5.15**      9.98***     3.22*      1.72
Win = Lose p-val            0.10       0.00      0.25         0.04       0.41        0.01        0.02        0.00       0.07       0.19
R-squared                    .12        .12       .09          .09        .18         .18         .17         .18        .06        .06
Observations                7137       7137      7043         7043       7101        7101        7019        7019       7119       7119

Notes: This table reports estimates from a modified version of equation (3) where we interact proxy for winners/losers
separately with two indicators for individuals in the 100% group and those in the 50% group. All regressions include
strata fixed effects and controls for education and wealth as well as the interactions of these variables with any treatment.
The main effects for Kikuyu, Luo, Winning Coalition and Losing Coalition are included in the regressions but not reported
for space reasons. All dependent variables are defined as in columns 1-5 of Table C.10. We also report the F-stat and corre-
sponding p-value from a test of equality of the two interaction terms: Any Treatment*Kikuyu = Any Treatment*Luo (odd-
numbered columns) and Any Treatment*Winning Coalition = Any Treatment*Losing Coalition (even-numbered columns).
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                               60
                                   Table C.13: Election Violence and Turnout
                                           Heterogeneity by Election Violence

                                 Cast Votes    Valid Votes    Kenyatta (%)     Odinga (%)      Voted in 2013    Voted All
                                     (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
   Any Treatment*Violence           0.002          0.002           -0.004          0.006            -0.024         -0.037
                                   [0.006]        [0.006]          [0.008]        [0.008]          [0.037]        [0.035]
   Any Treatment                    0.001          0.001            0.002          -0.003         0.016∗∗        0.021∗∗∗
                                   [0.001]        [0.001]          [0.003]        [0.003]         [0.007]         [0.007]
   Violence                       -0.017∗∗       -0.016∗∗          -0.015          0.014           -0.012          0.000
                                   [0.008]        [0.008]          [0.022]        [0.021]          [0.032]        [0.030]
   Control Mean                    0.877          0.869            0.458           0.481           0.934           0.917
   R-squared                        .48            .49              .87             .87             .02             .02
   Observations                    11254          11255            11252           11253           7341            7254

Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (4). All regressions include strata fixed effects. In column 1, the dependent
variable is the fraction of registered voters per polling station who cast a vote. In column 2, the dependent variable is the
fraction of registered voters who cast a valid vote. In column 3, the dependent variable is the fraction of valid votes cast in
favor of Uhuru Kenyatta (winner of the election). In column 4, the dependent variable is the fraction of valid votes cast in
favor of Raila Odinga, the main challenger. In column 5, the dependent variable is a dummy variable for survey respondents
answering Yes to the question: “Did you vote in the 2013 elections?”. In column 6, the dependent variable is a dummy variable
for survey respondents reporting that they cast a vote in each of the six ballots organized in March 2013.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                              61
                Table C.13: Effects on Trust: Heterogeneity with Election Violence

                                    Trust IEBC    Trust SCK      Fair Election   Fair SCK Ruling     Satisf Democracy
                                        (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)                  (5)
Any 100% Treatment*Violence           -0.078∗∗      -0.049          -0.037             -0.008              -0.010
                                       [0.032]      [0.034]         [0.030]           [0.039]              [0.047]
Any 50% Treatment*Violence             -0.057        -0.040          -0.022            0.022                0.009
                                      [0.040]       [0.047]         [0.046]           [0.048]              [0.043]
Any 100% Treatment                    -0.028∗∗      -0.013          -0.016             -0.010              -0.024
                                       [0.013]      [0.013]         [0.012]           [0.014]              [0.016]
Any 50% Treatment                      -0.014        -0.004          0.007             -0.006              -0.024∗
                                      [0.012]       [0.015]         [0.013]           [0.014]              [0.014]
Violence                               0.026         -0.016          -0.036          -0.075∗∗              -0.030
                                      [0.030]       [0.040]         [0.031]           [0.037]              [0.037]
Control Mean                           0.800         0.721          0.715              0.688                0.320
R-squared                                .1           .07            .16                .15                  .04
Observations                           7327          7227           7287               7204                 7309

Notes: This table reports estimates from a modified version of equation (4) where we interact exposure to violence sepa-
rately with two indicators for individuals in the 100% group and those in the 50% group. All regressions include strata
fixed effects. All dependent variables are defined as in columns 1-5 of Table 4.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets.




                                                            62
                                     Table C.14: Heterogeneous Effects on Support for Democratic Principles


                                   Democracy Preferable         Open Elections       Actively Question Leaders        All Permitted to Vote      Violence Never OK
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)              (6)              (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                                                                                                               ∗∗
     Any Treatment*Violence         -0.022                      0.006                 0.020                           -0.047                      -0.024
                                   [0.026]                     [0.014]               [0.029]                           [0.022]                   [0.015]
     Any Treatment*Kikuyu                         0.013                    0.011                      -0.001                         -0.005                    -0.017
                                                 [0.023]                  [0.011]                    [0.027]                        [0.019]                   [0.016]
     Any Treatment*Luo                            0.024                    -0.011                     -0.037                         -0.022                    -0.031
                                                 [0.024]                  [0.015]                    [0.031]                        [0.026]                   [0.021]
     Violence                       0.020                      -0.001                 0.008                           0.048∗∗∗                    0.025
                                   [0.022]                     [0.013]               [0.029]                           [0.017]                   [0.020]
     Kikuyu                                       -0.026                   -0.011                     -0.017                         0.030                     0.024
                                                 [0.025]                  [0.013]                    [0.028]                        [0.020]                   [0.017]
     Luo                                          0.016                    -0.016                     0.043                          -0.009                    -0.018
                                                 [0.028]                  [0.016]                    [0.035]                        [0.029]                   [0.024]
63




     Any Treatment                  0.004         0.028         0.001    -0.034∗∗     0.000          0.064∗             0.004       -0.032       -0.008       -0.025
                                   [0.008]       [0.027]       [0.005]    [0.015]    [0.011]         [0.035]           [0.008]      [0.021]      [0.007]      [0.023]
     Control Mean                   0.898         0.898         0.972      0.972      0.831           0.830             0.918        0.918       0.938        0.938
     Win = Lose F-stat                            0.15                     1.57                       0.93                           0.29                     0.37
     Win = Lose p-val                             0.70                     0.21                       0.33                           0.59                     0.54
     Observations                   7321          7129          7359       7165       7364            7168              7371         7175         7320        7130
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
            Standard errors are clustered by constituency in odd-numbered columns and by polling station in even-numbered columns.
            In col. (1)-(2), the dependent variable is whether respondent answered that democracy is preferable to any other kind of government.
            In col. (3)-(4), the dependent variable is whether respondent agreed with: We should choose our leaders through regular, open and honest elections.
            In col. (5)-(6), the dependent variable is whether respondent sided with: As citizens we should be more active in questioning actions of our leaders.
            In col. (7)-(8), the dependent variable is whether respondent sided with: All people should be permitted to vote. See Appendix Table A.3 for full statement.
            In col. (9)-(10), the dependent variable is whether respondent sided with: The use of violence is never justified in politics.
                                                     Table C.15: Heterogeneous Effects on Information

                                   Correct Month         Correct Day        Women Role Correct         Party Correct       Museveni Correct        Well Informed
                                     (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)
                                                                                    ∗
     Any Treatment*Violence         0.008              -0.024               -0.075                     0.019               -0.005                 0.004
                                   [0.035]             [0.043]              [0.041]                   [0.021]              [0.023]               [0.030]
     Any Treatment*Kikuyu                     0.010               0.018                   -0.013                 0.000                 0.003                 -0.008
                                             [0.028]             [0.033]                 [0.040]                [0.014]               [0.014]                [0.024]
     Any Treatment*Luo                        0.008               0.052                   -0.029                 0.015                 -0.005                -0.048∗∗
                                             [0.032]             [0.042]                 [0.045]                [0.028]               [0.015]                 [0.024]
     Violence                      -0.017               0.039                0.030                     0.002                0.004                 0.004
                                   [0.036]             [0.031]              [0.035]                   [0.016]              [0.021]               [0.025]
     Kikuyu                                   0.043               0.013                   0.012                 0.026∗                 -0.007                 0.015
                                             [0.029]             [0.035]                 [0.041]                [0.016]               [0.014]                [0.025]
     Luo                                      0.042               0.045                   0.071                  -0.015                0.001                  0.042
                                             [0.036]             [0.045]                 [0.049]                [0.029]               [0.014]                [0.028]
64




     Any Treatment                  0.005     0.027    -0.016    -0.040      -0.002       0.024       -0.008    -0.044∗     0.006     -0.017      0.008       0.005
                                   [0.012]   [0.038]   [0.014]   [0.044]    [0.014]      [0.046]      [0.008]   [0.026]    [0.005]    [0.020]    [0.009]     [0.032]
     Control Mean                  0.820      0.820     0.800     0.797      0.481        0.478        0.930     0.930     0.960       0.959      0.865       0.868
     Kikuyu = Luo p-val                       0.95                0.49                    0.78                   0.61                  0.65                   0.19
     R-squared                       .01       .02       .01       .02        .02          .05          .02       .04        .03        .04         .02        .04
     Observations                   6712      6535      5475      5324       6595         6428         6652      6471       6442       6264        7369       7171
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
           Standard errors are clustered by constituency in odd-numbered columns and by polling station in even-numbered columns.
           In col. (1)-(2), the dependent variable is whether respondent could correctly name the month of the election.
           In col. (3)-(4), the dependent variable is whether respondent could correctly name the day of the election.
           In col. (5)-(6), the dependent variable is whether respondent could correctly describe the role of the Women’s Rep.
           In col. (7)-(8), the dependent variable is whether respondent could correctly name the party of President.
           In col. (9)-(10), the dependent variable is whether respondent could correctly name the President of Uganda (Museveni).
           In col. (11)-(12), the dependent variable is whether respondent answered yes to: Overall do you feel you were well informed about the election?
                                                         Table C.16: Effects on All Other Attitudes


                          Trust Police     Trust Own Tribe      Trust Others      Not Run by Few       Complicated          Women          Bribery Normal         Happy?
                          (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)      (14)      (15)       (16)
     Any 100% Treat       0.00             -0.00                -0.02             -0.02                 0.00             -0.00             -0.00               -0.02
                         [0.02]            [0.02]               [0.02]            [0.01]               [0.01]            [0.01]            [0.01]              [0.02]
     Any 50% Treat       -0.01              0.01                -0.01              0.00                 0.00              0.00             -0.00               -0.01
                         [0.02]            [0.02]               [0.02]            [0.01]               [0.01]            [0.01]            [0.01]              [0.02]
     Encouragement                -0.01               0.01               -0.01              -0.01                0.01             -0.00              -0.00                 -0.03
                                  [0.02]             [0.02]              [0.02]             [0.01]              [0.01]            [0.01]             [0.01]                [0.02]
     Positions Info               -0.00              -0.00               -0.02              -0.00               -0.00             -0.00              -0.01                 -0.01
                                  [0.02]             [0.02]              [0.02]             [0.01]              [0.01]            [0.01]             [0.01]                [0.02]
     IEBC Info                     0.00              -0.00               -0.00              -0.02                0.01              0.00               0.00                 -0.01
                                  [0.02]             [0.02]              [0.02]             [0.01]              [0.01]            [0.01]             [0.01]                [0.02]
     Control Mean        0.47     0.47     0.53       0.53      0.49     0.49     0.25       0.25      0.80     0.80     0.96     0.96     0.10      0.10       0.51       0.51
     R-squared            .01      .01      .01        .01       .01      .01      .01        .01       .01      .01      .01      .01      .01       .01        .02        .02
65




     Observations        7349     7349     7362       7362      7358     7358     7344       7344      7349     7349     7368     7368     7360      7360       7341       7341
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by polling station in brackets. All regressions include strata fixed effects.
           In col. (1)-(2), the dep var is whether respondent answered yes to: Do you trust the police?
           In col. (3)-(4), the dep var is whether respondent answered yes to: In general, can you trust members of your tribe?
           In col. (5)-(6), the dep var is whether respondent answered yes to: In general, can you trust members of other tribes?
           In col. (7)-(8), the dep var is whether respondent agreed with: The world is run by a few people in power. See Appendix Table 1 for full statement.
           In col. (9)-(10), the dep var is whether respondent agreed with: Politics and government sometimes seem complicated. See Appendix Table 1 for full statement.
           In col. (11)-(12), the dep var is whether respondent sided with: Women can be good politicians and should be encouraged to stand in elections.
           In col. (13)-(14), the dep var is whether respondent sided with: In our country, it is normal to pay a bribe. See Appendix Table 1 for full statement.
           In col. (15)-(16), the dep var is whether respondent answered very happy to: In general, in your life are you very happy, somewhat happy or unhappy?
                                                     Table C.17: Survey Attrition: Lee Bounds

                                Voted 2013             Trust IEBC             Trust SCK          Fair Election     Fair SCK Ruling      Satisf Democracy
                                (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)      (10)       (11)       (12)
                                 T      T,100%        T        T,100%         T      T,100%       T      T,100%        T     T,100%        T       T,100%

     Lower bound              0.013∗    0.019∗∗   -0.030∗∗∗   -0.037∗∗∗    -0.017    -0.020    -0.009    -0.019    -0.008     -0.010    -0.038∗∗   -0.034∗
                              [0.007]   [0.008]    [0.011]     [0.013]     [0.012]   [0.013]   [0.013]   [0.015]   [0.013]    [0.017]    [0.016]   [0.017]
     Upper bound              0.030∗    0.029∗     -0.013      -0.027      -0.003    -0.012     0.007    -0.013     0.003     -0.008     -0.017    -0.020
                              [0.016]   [0.016]    [0.016]     [0.017]     [0.016]   [0.017]   [0.016]   [0.016]   [0.016]    [0.019]    [0.014]   [0.014]
     Lower CI                 0.001      0.006      -0.048      -0.059     -0.038    -0.043    -0.031     -0.046    -0.030    -0.043     -0.065    -0.063
     Upper CI                 0.058      0.056      0.014       0.002      0.024      0.018    0.033       0.016    0.031      0.029      0.006    0.003
     Control Mean             0.934      0.934      0.800       0.800      0.721      0.721    0.715       0.715    0.688      0.688      0.320    0.320
     Proportion Trimmed       0.018      0.009      0.016       0.010      0.015      0.008    0.016       0.006    0.011      0.003      0.021    0.013
     Observations             14400      9000       14400        9000      14400      9000     14400       9000     14400      9000      14400      9000
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All dependent variables orthogonalized from strata fixed effects.
            The Lower and Upper CI are the upper and lower bound on the treatment-effect 95% confidence interval.
66




            In odd-numbered columns, we report Lee bounds on Any Treatment.
            In even numbered columns, we report Lee bounds on Any 100% Treatment.
            In these columns, we compare the Any 100% Treatment and Control by restricting the sample to not include the Any 50% Treatment.
D     Model
Main Results

In our model, citizens observe the quality of the administration of the election: S = 1 describes a success,
and S = 0 describes a failure. Failure may entail problems in the logistics of the ballot, delays in the
annoucement of the results, or election-related violence. Such problems occurred in the 2013 Kenyan
election, as described in section 2. Two factors affect the quality of the election: R, the resources available
to the IEBC; and F , fairness – of the election, the IEBC, or Kenyan democracy as a whole. The resources
can be high (R = H) or low (R = l) and the election can be fair (F = 1) or unfair (F = 0). If citizens
believe that F = 1, they report in our survey data that they trust the IEBC, that the election was fair,
and that they are satisfied with the way democracy works in Kenya. Citizens know that R and F are
independent and they have identical priors about F and R, denoted as P (F = 1) = p, P (R = H) =
q. They also know the conditional probabilities P (S = 0 | R, F ), which fully describe how different
values of R and F affect the likelihood of success and failure. We assume the following regarding these
conditional probabilities when the election is a failure:
                  P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H)   P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = l)
Assumption 1.                              >
                  P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H)   P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = l)
    This assumption means that when resources are low, the fairness of the election does not have much
influence on the likelihood of a failed election (because failure is almost inevitable). Instead, when re-
sources are high, success is much more likely when the election is fair than when it is unfair.
    Citizens do not observe R and F directly. Before the election, a fraction of citizens observe a signal
δ = {δl , δH } on the level of resources, and a fraction of citizens observe a signal γ = {γ0 , γ1 } on the
fairness of electoral institutions. We assume that these signals are informative:

Assumption 2.
    2A. δ is independent of F , and P (δ = δH | R = H) = α > β = P (δ = δH | R = l).
    2B. γ is independent of R, and P (γ = γ1 | F = 1) = µ > η = P (γ = γ1 | F = 0).

Lemma 1. People who receive δH positively update their prior on the level of resources allocated to the
organization of the election.

Proof. See Appendix.

Lemma 2. People who receive γ1 positively update their prior on the fairness of the election.
    Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the following two propositions hold.

Proposition 1. P (F = 1 | S = 0) > P (F = 1 | S = 0, δ = δH ): in case of an electoral failure, citizens who
received the signal that resources were high (δ = δH ) have a lower posterior about the fairness of the election than
those who did not receive any signal.

    The intuition behind Proposition 1 is simple. By sending a signal of its own high capacity to conduct
elections (δ = δH ), the IEBC sets high expectations in terms of the quality of the actual election. But voters

                                                         67
know that capacity is not the only determinant of electoral success – the honesty of the Commission can
also affect the election’s outcome. Upon observing electoral turmoil, such as election-related violence or
logistical problems at the polling stations, recipients of the messages infer that the election is unlikely to
have been fair. This result does not hold, however, if voters primarily interpret the campaign as a signal
of fairness (γ = γ1 ):

Proposition 2. P (F = 1 | S = 0) < P (F = 1 | S = 0, γ = γ1 ): in case of an electoral failure, citizens who
received the signal that the election was fair (γ = γ1 ) have a higher posterior about the fairness of the election than
those who did not receive any signal.

    Whether the campaign leads to an increase or a decrease in trust in the IEBC therefore depends on
how treated voters interpreted the messages they received. In other words, the sign of our treatment
effects on trust in the IEBC is informative about the way these messages were understood: conditional
on observing signals of electoral failure, a signal of high institutional capacity will lead to a decrease in
trust on average (Proposition 1), while a signal of fairness will have the opposite effect (Proposition 2).
The question of which interpretation prevailed was ex ante ambiguous. On the one hand, individuals
who received the messages from the IEBC must have observed that it had the resources to conduct a
mass texting campaign, suggesting the campaign sent a signal of high capacity (δ = δH ). On the other
hand, some messages (in particular those included in Treatment 3, which provided information about
the IEBC) emphasized the IEBC’s role in ensuring the election would be free an fair – a signal of honesty
(γ = γ1 ). Note that when the signal received by voters contains information on both F and R, we cannot
derive any general result on the relationship between P (F = 1 | S = 0) and P (F = 1 | S = 0, γ = γ1 )
absent any further assumptions. Then, the sign of the combined effect on citizens’ perception of F is
informative about which of the two signals was more salient.
    Given Proposition 1 and the risk that an unsuccessful election would alienate voters, why would the
IEBC ever want to conduct this kind of campaign? Under one additional assumption, text messages can
actually reinforce trust after a successful election, even if the messages are understood as a signal of high
capacity. We make the following assumption regarding voters’ beliefs in case the election is a success:
                  P (S = 1 | F = 1, R = H)   P (S = 1 | F = 1, R = l)
Assumption 3.                              >
                  P (S = 1 | F = 0, R = H)   P (S = 1 | F = 0, R = l)
    As under Assumption 1, the mapping between electoral success and fairness is stronger when re-
sources are high – fairness yields electoral success relatively more often when resources are high. Under
Assumptions 2 and 3, the following proposition holds:

Proposition 3. P (F = 1 | S = 1) < P (F = 1 | S = 1, δ = δH ): in case of an electoral success, citizens who
received the signal that resources were high (δ = δH ) have a higher posterior about the fairness of the election than
those who did not receive any signal.

    Proposition 3 implies two additional predictions. First, the sign of the average treatment effect on
trust depends on the relative fractions of citizens who observe electoral failure, and of those who do not.
Second, the magnitude of the decrease in trust should be largest among citizens who directly received


                                                          68
a signal of electoral failure (such as those voting in areas affected by violence) or among those who lost
the election and, as a result, are more likely to show disappointment and to consider the election was a
failure (on psychological effects induced by the outcomes of elections, see e.g. Anderson et al. (2005)). In
other words, as observed in Section 6, the interaction of treatment status with measures of exposure to,
or perception of the electoral failure should be negative.


Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1

Lemma. People who receive δH positively update their prior on the level of resources allocated to the organization
of the election.



                                            P (δ = δH , R = H)
           P (R = H | δ = δH ) =
                                  P (δ = δH , R = H) + P (δ = δH , R = l)
                                                  P (δ = δH | R = H) P (R = H)
                                =
                                  P (δ = δH | R = H) P (R = H) + P (δ = δH | R = l) P (R = l)
                                        αq
                                =
                                  αq + β (1 − q)
                                >q

    since α > β by assumption.
    Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 1

Proposition 1. P (F = 1 | S = 0) > P (F = 1 | S = 0, δ = δH ).

Sketch of the proof:

   1. We first show that:

         P (F = 1 | S = 0) > P (F = 1 | S = 0, δ = δH )
                                                 ⇔ P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0) > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)


   2. We then show that:

         P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0) > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)
                                                      P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H)   P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = l)
                                                  ⇔                            >
                                                      P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H)   P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = l)

      where the last inequality is true by Assumption 1. This completes the proof.


                                                       69
Detailed proof (Step 1):
    Note that:

                                                 P (F = 1, S = 0, δ = δH )
                   P (F = 1 | S = 0, δ = δH ) =
                                                    P (S = 0, δ = δH )
                                                 P (F = 1, S = 0) P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)
                                               =
                                                       P (S = 0) P (δ = δH | S = 0)
                                                                   P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)
                                               = P (F = 1 | S = 0)
                                                                       P (δ = δH | S = 0)

    Thus,

       P (F = 1 | S = 0) > P (F = 1 | S = 0, δ = δH )
  ⇔ P (δ = δH | S = 0) > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)
  ⇔ P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0) P (F = 1 | S = 0) + P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0) P (F = 0 | S = 0)
                 > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)
  ⇔ P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0) P (F = 0 | S = 0) > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0) [1 − P (F = 1 | S = 0)]
  ⇔ P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0) P (F = 0 | S = 0) > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0) P (F = 0 | S = 0)
  ⇔ P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0) > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)

Detailed proof (Step 2):

P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0) > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0)
⇔ P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0, R = H) P (R = H | F = 0, S = 0)
                     + P (δ = δH | F = 0, S = 0, R = l) P (R = l | F = 0, S = 0)
     > P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0, R = H) P (R = H | F = 1, S = 0)
                     + P (δ = δH | F = 1, S = 0, R = l) P (R = l | F = 1, S = 0)
⇔ P (δ = δH | R = H) P (R = H | F = 0, S = 0) + P (δ = δH | R = l) P (R = l | F = 0, S = 0)
     > P (δ = δH | R = H) P (R = H | F = 1, S = 0) + P (δ = δH | R = l) P (R = l | F = 1, S = 0)
                                                                                                   (D.1)
⇔ P (δ = δH | R = l) [P (R = l | F = 0, S = 0) − P (R = l | F = 1, S = 0)]
     > P (δ = δH | R = H) [P (R = H | F = 1, S = 0) − P (R = H | F = 0, S = 0)]
⇔ [P (δ = δH | R = l) − P (δ = δH | R = H)] [P (R = H | F = 1, S = 0) − P (R = H | F = 0, S = 0)] > 0
⇔ P (R = H | F = 0, S = 0) > P (R = H | F = 1, S = 0)                                              (D.2)
    P (R = H, F = 0, S = 0)   P (R = H, F = 1, S = 0)
⇔                           >
       P (F = 0, S = 0)          P (F = 1, S = 0)




                                                       70
                             P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H) P (F = 0, R = H)
     ⇔
       P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H) P (F = 0, R = H) + P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = l) P (F = 0, R = l)
                                 P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H) P (F = 1, R = H)
        >
           P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H) P (F = 1, R = H) + P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = l) P (F = 1, R = l)
                         P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H) P (R = H)
     ⇔
       P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H) P (R = H) + P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = l) P (R = l)
                             P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H) P (R = H)
        >                                                                                       (D.3)
           P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H) P (R = H) + P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = l) P (R = l)
     ⇔ P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H) P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = l)
          > P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H) P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = l) P (R = l)
         P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H)   P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = l)
     ⇔                            >
         P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H)   P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = l)

   where:
   (1) comes from the fact that δ is only determined by R,
   (2) uses Assumption 2a,
   and (3) uses the independence between F and R.
   The last inequality is true by Assumption (Assumption 1). We infer that P (F = 1 | S = 0) >
P (F = 1 | S = 0, δ = δH ).
   Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 2

The proof is identical to that of Proposition 1:

   1. We first show that:

         P (F = 1 | S = 0) < P (F = 1 | S = 0, γ = γ1 )
                                                ⇔ P (γ = γ1 | F = 0, S = 0) < P (γ = γ1 | F = 1, S = 0) .

      The proof of this step is identical to the proof of the first step in Proposition 1.

   2. We then show that:

         P (γ = γ1 | F = 0, S = 0) < P (γ = γ1 | F = 1, S = 0)
                                                                ⇔ P (γ = γ1 | F = 0) < P (γ = γ1 | F = 1)

      where the last inequality is true by assumption (Assumption 2b) and the equivalence comes from
      the fact that γ is only determined by F . This completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 3

By showing Proposition 1, we have shown that for a variable S affected by two independent variables R
and F ,
                                  P (S = 0 | F = 0, R = H)
                                                           > PP (S=0|F
                                                                (S=0|F
                                                                       =0,R=l)
                                                                       =1,R=l)
                                  P (S = 0 | F = 1, R = H)
                          and     P (δ = δH | R = H) = α > β = P (δ = δH | R = l)
                         implies P (F = 1 | S = 0) > P (F = 1 | S = 0, δ = δH )

This is true for any three variables S, e and Fe where R
                                     e R,              e and Fe are independent:
                                                     
                               P Se = 0 | Fe = 0, R
                                                  e=H
                                                       > (e e e )
                                                          P S=0|
                                                              e    Fe=0,R=l
                                                                         e
                                
                               P Se = 0 | Fe = 1, R
                                                  e=H     P ( S=0| F =1, R=l )
                                                                               
                         and   P δ = δ H | R = H = α > β = P δ = δH | R = l
                                            e                                  e
                                                                             
                       implies P Fe = 1 | Se = 0 > P Fe = 1 | Se = 0, δ = δH

In particular, it is true for Se = 1 − S, R
                                          e = R, and Fe = 1 − F (note that the independence of R
                                                                                               e and Fe
directly comes from the independence between R and F :

                            P (1 − S = 0 | 1 − F = 0, R = H)
                                                             > PP (1−S=0|1−F
                                                                  (1−S=0|1−F
                                                                             =0,R=l)
                                                                             =1,R=l)
                            P (1 − S = 0 | 1 − F = 1, R = H)
                   and      P (δ = δH | R = H) = α > β = P (δ = δH | R = l)
                 implies P (1 − F = 1 | 1 − S = 0) > P (1 − F = 1 | 1 − S = 0, δ = δH )

which can be rewritten as

                                  P (S = 1 | F = 1, R = H)
                                                           > PP (S=1|F =1,R=l)
                                                                (S=1|F =0,R=l)
                                  P (S = 1 | F = 0, R = H)
                          and     P (δ = δH | R = H) = α > β = P (δ = δH | R = l)
                         implies P (F = 0 | S = 1) > P (F = 0 | S = 1, δ = δH )

But
                             P (F = 0 | S = 1) > P (F = 0 | S = 1, δ = δH )
                         ⇔ 1 − P (F = 1 | S = 1) > 1 − P (F = 1 | S = 1, δ = δH )
                         ⇔ P (F = 1 | S = 1) < P (F = 1 | S = 1, δ = δH )
Therefore,
                                  P (S = 1 | F = 1, R = H)
                                                           > PP (S=1|F =1,R=l)
                                                                (S=1|F =0,R=l)
                                  P (S = 1 | F = 0, R = H)
                          and     P (δ = δH | R = H) = α > β = P (δ = δH | R = l)
                         implies P (F = 1 | S = 1) < P (F = 1 | S = 1, δ = δH )
We conclude that Proposition 3 (the third line) derives from Assumption 3 (the first line) and Assumption
2 (the second line).
                                                                                                Q.E.D.


                                                     72
                                                                                                                                                                                      E



                                                                                                                                                HHID:____________________
                                                       SECTIONB:INTERVIEWERINFORMATION/IDENTIFICATION
         Enumeratorinstruction:callthephonenumberprovided.Seekconsentfromtherespondent.Questions1Ͳ3shouldbefilledinbyyou.Thenasktherespondenttheremaining
         questions.Iftheyfailtoanswerusethefollowingcodes:DK=Ͳ99;NA=Ͳ98;RTA=Ͳ97
           1.    EnumeratornameandID
                                                                First:________________________Last:______________________                  EnumeratorID:_______________
                                                                
           2.    Individual’sphonenumber                                                  |____|____|____|____|____|____|____|____|____|____|
           3.    InterviewLanguage                    1.English,2.Swahili,3.Otherspecify_______________                                                     |____|
                                                                                                                                                                       
           4.    InterviewDate                                                          Day:|____|____|Month:|____|____|Year:2013
           5.    StartTime(24Hourclock)                                                        Hour:|____|____|Min:|____|____|
           6.    Individual’sname
                                                            First:______________________________________Last:________________________________________
                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                      Endline Survey Questionnaire




           7.    Individual’sgender                   1=Male,2=Female                                                                            |____|
                                                                                                                                                       
           8.    Wheredoyoulive?                   Province:1=Nairobi,2=Coast,3=Eastern,4=Central,5=RiftValley,                         |____|
                                                       6=Western,7=Nyanza,8=NE




73
                                                        County:                                                  Sublocation:
                                                        District:                                                    Village(ifrural):____________________________
                                                                                                                      ortown(ifurban):____________________________
                                                        Location:                                                    Constituency:
           9.    Howlonghaveyoulivedthere?                                                        Numberofyears:|____|____|
                                                                                                        Numberofmonths:|____|____|
           10.   Wherewereyouborn?                  Province:1=Nairobi,2=Coast,3=Eastern,4=Central,                                              |____|
                                                        5=RiftValley,6=Western,7=Nyanza,8=NE
                                                        County:                                               Sublocation:
                                                        District:                                                    Village(ifrural):_______________________________
                                                                                                                      ortown(ifurban):_____________________________
                                                        Location:                                                    Constituency:
     
                                         




           ElectionsEndline                                                                       Page2of9                                              12July2015
                                                                                                                                     HHID:____________________
                                                                 SECTIONC:SOCIOECONOMICS
     1.    Whatisyourage?                                                                   Years:|____|____|____| Months:|____|____|
     2.    Whatisthehighestlevelofeducationyouhave     USEEDUCATIONCODES                                                                                 |____|
           completed?
     3.    Canyouread?                                       1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     4.    Whatisyourmaritalstatus?                        1=Single,2=Monogamouslymarried,3=Polygamous married,4=Cohabiting,5=Separated,                 |____|
                                                                6=Widowed,7=Divorced,8=Other,specify
     5.    Howmanychildrendoyouhave?                                                                         |____|____|
     6.    Howmanypeopleabovetheageof18livewithyou?                                                           |____|____|
     7.    Whatisyourmainoccupation?                       USEOCCUPATIONCODES                                                                                |____|
                                                                                                                                                                       
     8.    Doesyourhouseholdownorrenttheplacewhere     1=Own,2=Rent,3=Occupywithoutownershiporpayment,4=Other,specify                              |____|
           youlive?                                                                                                                                                  
     9.    Howmuchlanddoesyourhouseholdown,ifany?
           (acres)                                                                                                  |____|____|____|
     10.   DoesyourhouseholdownaTV?                       1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|




74
     11.   Doesyourhouseholdownaradio?                    1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     12.   Doesyourhouseholdownabicycle?                  1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     13.   Doesyourhouseholdownacar/motorbike/truck?       1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     14.   Doesyourhouseholdownawatertank?               1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     15.   Doesyourhouseholdownacarbattery?              1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     16.   Doesyourhouseholdownacomputer?                 1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     17.   Doesyourhouseholdownagenerator?                1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     18.   Doesyourhouseholdownarefrigerator?             1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     19.   Doesyourhouseholdownastove?                    1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     20.   Doesyourhouseholdownanylivestock?              1=Yes,2=No                                                                                         |____|
     21.   Whatisyourmainsourceoflighting?               1=Electricity,2=Lantern,3=Pressurelamportinlamp,4=Fuelwood,5=Solar,6=Other,              |____|
                                                                specify




     ElectionsEndline                                                                      Page3of9                                      12July2015
                                                                                                                                              HHID:____________________
       22.   Whattypeoftoiletdoyouuse?                          1=Ownflushtoilet,2=Sharedflushtoilet,3=VentilatedImprovedPit(VIP),4=Traditional                   |____|
                                                                       pit,5=bucket,6=bush/river/stream,7=Other,specify
       23.   Whatisyourmainsourceofcookingfuel?                 1=Firewood,2=Charcoal,3=Kerosene,4=Gas,5=Electricity,6=Other,specify                                    |____|
       24.   Whatisyourmainsourceofdrinkingwater?              1=Pipedincompound/House,2=Publictap,3=Mechanicalwell,4=Ordinarywell,5=Water                        |____|
                                                                       trucks,6=Spring,7=River/stream/pond,8=Dam,9=Rainwater,10=Borehole,11=Tank,
                                                                       12=Other,specify
       25.   Whatisthemaintypeofmaterialthattheroofofthe   1=Grass/thatch,2=CorrugatedIron(mabati),3=Tiles,4=Wood,5=Tarpaulin/plastic                           |____|
             mainhouseismadeof?                                   sheets,6=Asbestos,7=Concrete,8=Other,specify
       26.   Whatisthemaintypeofmaterialthatthewallsof      1=Stone,2=Brick,3=Ironsheet,4=Mud/dung,5=Wood,6=Other, specify                                          |____|
             themainhousearemadeof?
       27.   Whatisthemaintypeofmaterialthatthefloorof      1=Mud/Dung/Sand(Naturalfloor),2=WoodPlanks(Rudimentaryfloor),3=Polished                              |____|
             themainhouseismadeof?                               wood/vinyl/tiles(Finished),4=Cement,5=Other,specify
       28.   Howoftendoyoulistentotheradio?                    1=Onceaday,2=Onceaweek,3=Onceamonth,4=Onceintwomonths,5=Onceinsix                      |____|
                                                                       months,6=Onceayear,7=Never,8=Other,specify
       29.   Whatsortsofprogramsdoyouusuallylistentoon       1=news/currentevents,2=talkshows,3=sports,4=drama,5=religious,6=music,7=social                    |____|
             theradio?                                               announcements,8=other,specify
       30.   HowoftendoyouwatchTV?                               1=Onceaday,2=Onceaweek,3=Onceamonth,4=Onceintwomonths,5=Onceinsix                      |____|
                                                                       months,6=Onceayear,7=Never,8=Other,specify




75
       31.   Whatsortsofprogramsdoyouusuallywatchonthe       1=news/currentevents,2=talkshows,3=sports,4=drama,5=religious,6=music,7=social                    |____|
             TV?                                                      announcements,8=other,specify
       32.   Howoftendoyoureadanewspaper?                       1=Onceaday,2=Onceaweek,3=Onceamonth,4=Onceintwomonths,5=Onceinsix
                                                                       months,6=Onceayear,7=Never,8=Cannotread,9=Other,specify                                              |____|
       33.   Whatisyourfavoritenewspapertoread?                 1=Nation,2=Standard,3=Taifa Leo,4=ThePeopleDaily,5=Other,specify,6=Cannotread,              |____|,|____|,|____|
             Enumerator:donotprompt;allowmultiple                7=Nopreference
             responses
       34.   Areyouamemberofacommunityorganizationor          1=Yes,2=No                                                                                                  |____|
             grouporofacredit,savingorinsurancegroup(eg
             cooperatives,SACCO,merryͲgoͲround)?
       35.   Whatisyourreligiousaffiliation?                      1=Catholic,2=Protestant,3=Adventist,4=Muslim,5=Atheist(none),6=Other,specify:                        |____|
                                                                       _______________
       36.   Howoftendoyouattendareligiouseventlike           1=Onceaday,2=Onceaweek,3=Onceamonth,4=Onceintwomonths,5=Onceinsix                        |____|
             ChurchorMosque?                                        months,6=Onceayear,7=Never,8=Other,specify
       37.   Whatisyourtribe?                                      1=Luo,2=Luhya,3=Kalenjin,4=Kamba,5=Kikuyu,6=Other,specify                                              |____|
       38.   Whatisthetribeofyourmother?                                                                                                                                     |____|
       39.   Whatisthetribeofyourfather?                                                                                                                                     |____|

     OCCUPATIONCODES



        ElectionsEndline                                                                           Page4of9                                       12July2015
                                                                                                                                              HHID:____________________
     1=Farming                     6=Conductor                  11=Mechanic                  16=Watchman                  21=Teacher                   26=Student
     2=Publicservice             7=Cleaner/househelp           12=Industrialworker         17=Messenger                 22=Healthworker            27=Business,specify
     3=Carpenter/mason            8=Waiter/cook                13=Manager                   18=Sales/shopkeeper          23=Doctor                    28=Salonist
     4=Clerk                      9=Driver                     14=Dairyfarmer               19=Secretary                 24=Nurse                    29=Retired
     5=Policeman                  10=Electrician               15=Professional              20=Tailor                    25=Unemployed               30=Other,specify
     EDUCATIONCODES
     0=None                        10=Form2                    13=Form5                    16=Univ2                    19=Univ5                    22=Adulteduc
     1Ͳ8=Std1Ͳ8                    11=Form3                    14=Form6                    17=Univ3                    20=Nursery                    23=Other,specify
     9=Form1                      12=Form4                    15=Univ1                    18=Univ4                    21=Vocational

     SECTIOND:POLITICALATTITUDES,KNOWLEDGEANDBEHAVIOR/PARTICIPATION
      Enumeratorinstruction:Pleasesay:“Thanksalotforansweringallmyquestionssofar.Iwillnowfinishtheinterviewwith afewquestionsregardingthelastgeneralelection.”
      Donotprompttheanswersatall.
        1.    WhatdoesIEBCstandfor?
        2.     WhatarethemissionsoftheIEBC?Enumerator:Ifthe       1.
               respondentprovidesoneanswerpromptthemasecond         2.
               timetoaskiftheyknowofothermissionsoftheIEBC.     3.
                                                                            4.




76
        3.     Canyoutellmewhatthedateofthelastgeneralelection                                  |____|____|/|____|____|/|____|____|____|____|
               was?DD/MM/YYYY
        4.     WhowaselectedPresident?Nameandparty.                                            Name:                                                   Party:
               Enumerator:donotprompt                                   1=UhuruKenyatta,                                          1=TheNationalAlliance
                                                                           2=Other,specify                       |____|             (TNA),2=Jubilee,            |____|
                                                                                                                                        3=Other,specify
                                                                            Specify:_____________________________                       Specify:_____________________________
        5.     Whoisyourcountygovernor?Nameandparty                  Name:                                                        Party:
        6.     Whoisyoursenator?Nameandparty                         Name:                                                        Party:
        7.     WhatistheroleoftheWomen’sRep?Enumerator:            1=Shesitswiththecountrygovernor,2=Shesitsinthe                          |____|
               prompt                                                      parliament,3=Shesitsinthesenate
        8.     WhoisthecurrentpresidentofUganda?Ifnospecify                     1=YoweriMuseveni,2=Other,specify                                  |____|
               Enumerator:donotprompt                                        Specifyifother:_____________________
        9.     Didyoureceiveanytextmessagesrelatedtotheelection   1=Yes,2=No                                                                         |____|
               aftergettingregisteredandbeforetheelection?
        10.    IfQ9=Yes,doyourememberfromwhomyoureceived           1=IEBC,2=Politicalparty,specifywhich,3=NGO,specify                |____|,|____|,|____|,|____|
               texts?Enumerator:allowmultipleresponses,donot         which,4=Presidentialcandidate,specifywhich,5=Other,              Specify:_______________________
               prompt.                                                     specify



         ElectionsEndline                                                                          Page5of9                                      12July2015
                                                                                                                                              HHID:____________________
     11.   IfQ9=Yes,howmanytextsdidyoureceiveintotalfrom                                                           |____|____|____|
           allorganizationsbeforetheelectionbutafterregistering
           tovote?
     12.   IfQ9=YesandananswerfromQ10=1,howmanytext                                                                 |____|____|____|
           messagesdidyoureceivefromtheIEBC?
     13.   IfQ9=Yes,doyourememberwhatthesemessageswere           1=Yes,2=No                                                                           |____|
           about?Ifyes,pleasespecify.Enumerator:allowmultiple         Specify1. _______________________________
           responses                                                         2.________________________________
                                                                              3.________________________________
                                                                              4.________________________________
                                                                              
     14.   IfQ9=Yes,didyoumentionthesemessagestoanyone           1=Yes,2=No                                                                           |____|
           else?
     15.   IfQ14=Yes,towhomdidyoumentionthesemessages?           1=Nobody,2=familymembers,3=friends,4=neighbors,                   |____|,|____|,|____|,|____|,|____|
           Enumerator:allowmultipleresponses                          5=other,specify
     16.   Didanyoneelsementiontoyouthattheyreceivedtexts       1=Yes,2=No                                                                           |____|
           abouttheelectionbeforetheelectionhappened?
     17.   IfQ16=Yes,fromwhomdidyouhearaboutthese                1=Nobody,2=familymembers,3=friends,4=neighbors,                   |____|,|____|,|____|,|____|,|____|
           messages?Enumerator:allowmultipleresponses                5=other,specify




77
     18.   IfQ16=Yes,doyouknoworrememberfromwhomthis            1=IEBC,2=Politicalparty,specifywhich,3=NGO,specify                 |____|,|____|,|____|,|____|
           personreceivedtexts?Enumerator:allowmultiple             which,4=Presidentialcandidate,specifywhich,5=Other,
           responses,donotprompt.                                     specify
     19.   IfQ18=Yes,doyourememberwhatthesemessageswere          1=Yes,2=No                                                                           |____|
           about?Ifyes,pleasespecify.                                    Specify1._______________________________
                                                                              2.________________________________
                                                                              3.________________________________
                                                                              4.________________________________
                                                                              
     20.   Beforetheelection,butafterregisteringtovote,didyou   1=Yes,2=No                                                                           |____|
           receiveanyotherinformationontheelectionsorany
           encouragementtovotefromsomepartyororganization
           (egaphonecall,avisit,aflyer)?
     21.   IfQ20=Yes,ofwhatform/how?                                 1=Phonecall,2=Inpersonvisit,3=Leafletorflyer,                                 |____|
                                                                          4=Wenttoapoliticalmeeting,5=Radioshows,6=TV
                                                                          shows,7=Roadshows,8=Other,specify
     22.   IfQ20=Yes,fromwhomdidyoureceivethisinformation?       1=IEBC,2=Politicalparty,specifywhich,3=NGO,specify                 |____|,|____|,|____|,|____|
           Enumerator:allowmultipleresponses                          which,4=Presidentialcandidate,specifywhich,5=Other,              Specify:_________________________
                                                                          specify




     ElectionsEndline                                                                              Page6of9                                      12July2015
                                                                                                                                       HHID:____________________
     23.   Didyougotoapoliticalmeetingoraroadshow?           1=Yes,2=No                                                                      |____|
     24.   Didyoulistentopoliticalradioshowsorwatch             1=Yes,2=No                                                                      |____|
           politicalTVshows?
     25.   Overall,doyoufeelyouwerewellinformedaboutthe        1=Yes,2=No                                                                      |____|
           election?
     26.   Howmuchdidyoufollowthecampaignsfortheelection,      Enumerator:rangeis1Ͳ5                                                         |____|
           onascaleof1Ͳ5where1isnotatalland5isvery
           intensely(suchasonadailybasis)?
     27.   Howmuchdidyoudiscusstheelectionswithyourfriends,    Enumerator:rangeis1Ͳ5                                                         |____|
           familymembersandneighbors,onascaleof1Ͳ5where1
           isnotatalland5isveryintensely(suchasonadaily
           basis)?
     28.   Howmanyofthepresidentialdebatesbetweenthe             Enumerator:rangeis0Ͳ2                                                         |____|
           candidatesdidyouwatchonTV?
     29.   Didthelastelectionsaffectorchangeyourlifeinany     1=Yes,2=No                                                                      |____|
           way?
     30.   IfQ29=Yes,how?
     31.   Howdoyoufeelabouttheoutcomeofthelastelections?      1=Verysatisfied,2=Satisfied,3=Indifferent,                                   |____|




78
                                                                         4=Dissatisfied,5=Verydissatisfied
                                                    DoyouagreeordisagreewiththefollowingstatementsregardingpoliticsinKenya?
     32.   Politicsandgovernmentsometimesseemsocomplicated       1=Stronglyagree,2=Agree,3=Neitheragreenordisagree,                          |____|
           thatyoucan’treallyunderstandwhatisgoingon.          4=Disagree,5=Stronglydisagree
     33.   Theworldisrunbyfewpeopleinpower,andthereisnot   1=Stronglyagree,2=Agree,3=Neitheragreenordisagree,                          |____|
           muchthatsomeonelikemecandoaboutit.                  4=Disagree,5=Stronglydisagree
     34.   Weshouldchooseourleadersinthiscountrythrough        1=Stronglyagree,2=Agree,3=Neitheragreenordisagree,                          |____|
           regular,openandhonestelections.                         4=Disagree,5=Stronglydisagree
     35.   Whichofthefollowingstatementsisclosesttoyourown    1=Democracyispreferabletoanyotherkindofgovt,2=In                         |____|
           opinion?                                                    somecircumstances,anonͲdemocraticgovtcanbe
                                                                        preferable,3=Forsomeonelikeme,itdoesn’tmatter
                                                                        whatgovtwehave
     36.   Overallhowsatisfiedareyouwithhowdemocracyworks 1=Verysatisfied,2=Fairlysatisfied,3=Notverysatisfied,                            |____|
           inKenya?                                                  4=Notatallsatisfied,5=Kenyaisnotademocracy
                                                                        (Enumerator:don’tpromptoption5)
            Foreachofthefollowingpairsofstatements,tellmewhichofthetwoisclosesttoyourviewaboutKenyanpolitics.Choose eitherStatement1orStatement2
     37.   1:Theuseofviolenceisneverjustifiedinpolitics.        2:Inthiscountryitissometimesnecessarytouse                             |____|
                                                                         violenceinsupportofajustcause.




     ElectionsEndline                                                                            Page7of9                                  12July2015
                                                                                                                                         HHID:____________________
       38.   1:Ascitizensweshouldbemoreactiveinquestioningthe 2:Inourcountrythesedaysweshouldshowmore                                    |____|
             actionsofourleaders.                                      respectforauthority.
       39.   1:Allpeopleshouldbepermittedtovote,eveniftheydo 2:Onlythosewhoaresufficientlywelleducated should                             |____|
             notfullyunderstandalltheissuesinanelection.          beallowedtochooseourleaders.
       40.   1:Womencanbegoodpoliticiansandshouldbe               2:Womenshouldstayathometotakecareoftheir                                |____|
             encouragedtostandinelections.                            children.
       41.   1:Inourcountry,itisnormaltopayabribetoa          2:Itiswrongtopayabribetoanygovernmentofficial.                         |____|
             governmentofficialtoencouragethem.
                                                             Enumerator:Say“NowIamgoingtoaskyousomequestionsontrust.”
       42.   Generallyspeaking,wouldyousaythatmostpeoplecan       1=Mostpeoplecanbetrusted,2=Needtobecareful                                 |____|
             betrustedorthatyouneedtobeverycarefulindealing
             withpeople?
       43.   Ingeneral,canyoutrustmembersofyourtribe?              1=Yes,2=No                                                                        |____|
       44.   Ingeneral,canyoutrustmembersinothertribes?            1=Yes,2=No                                                                        |____|
       45.   Howimportantisyourethnicortribalorigintoyourlife?1=Veryimportant,2=Somewhatimportant,3=Not                                        |____|
                                                                        important
       46.   DoyoutrusttheIEBC,theelectoralcommissionofKenya? 1=Yes,2=No                                                                           |____|




79
       47.   DoyoutrusttheSupremecourt?                              1=Yes,2=No                                                                        |____|
       48.   Doyoutrustthepolice?                                     1=Yes,2=No                                                                        |____|
       49.   Doyouthinktheelectionsthisyearwerefairand           1=Yes,2=No                                                                        |____|
             transparent?
       50.   DoyouthinktheIEBC,theelectoralcommissionofKenya,    1=Yes,2=No                                                                        |____|
             shouldbereplaced?
       51.   Doyouthinkthesupremecourtdecisionontheelection      1=Yes,2=No                                                                        |____|
             wasfair?
       52.   Howinterestedareyouinpublicaffairs?                    1=Veryinterested,2=Somewhatinterested,3=Not                                   |____|
                                                                           interested
       53. Ingeneral,inyourlife,areyouveryhappy,somewhat         1=Veryhappy,2=Somewhathappy,3=Nothappy                                        |____|
           happyornothappy?
     Enumerator:Say“NowIamgoingtoaskyousomequestionsaboutyourparticipationinthispastelectionandpreviouselections.”
       54. Didyouregistertovoteforthe2013election?           1=Yes,2=No                                                                              |____|
       55.   IfQ54=Yes,wheredidyouregistertovote?                   PollingStation:______________________          Constituency:______________       Ward:____________
       56.   Howfaristhatfromwhereyoulive?                         Distance(km):|____|____|____|____| 
                                                                           Minutestowalk:|____|____|____|____|orHoursinamatatu:|____|____|____|____|



       ElectionsEndline                                                                           Page8of9                                     12July2015
                                                                                                                                      HHID:____________________
     57.   Isitlocatedinthesametownorvillageaswhereyou   1=Yes,2=No                                                                      |____|
           live?
     58.   Didyouvoteinthegeneralelectionthisyear?           1=Yes,2=No                                                                      |____|
     59.   Wheredidyouvote?                                     Pollingstation:_______________           Constituency:____________          Ward:_______________
     60.   DidyouvoteforPresident?                              1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
     61.   IfQ60=No,whynot?                                      1=Didnotknowcandidates/didnothaveenoughinformation,2=Was                         |____|
                                                                     toldnotto,3=Didn’tthinkmyvotewouldmatter,4=Other,specify
     62.   DidyouvoteforMP?                                     1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
     63.   IfQ62=No,whynot?                                      1=Didnotknowcandidates/didnothaveenoughinformation,2=Was                         |____|
                                                                     toldnotto,3=Didn’tthinkmyvotewouldmatter,4=Other,specify
     64.   DidyouvoteforGovernor?                               1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
     65.   IfQ64=No,whynot?                                      1=Didnotknowcandidates/didnothaveenoughinformation,2=Was                         |____|
                                                                     toldnotto,3=Didn’tthinkmyvotewouldmatter,4=Other,specify
     66.   DidyouvoteforSenator?                                1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
     67.   IfQ66=No,whynot?                                      1=Didnotknowcandidates/didnothaveenoughinformation,2=Was                         |____|
                                                                     toldnotto,3=Didn’tthinkmyvotewouldmatter,4=Other,specify




80
     68.   DidyouvoteforWomen’sRep?                            1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
     69.   IfQ68=No,whynot?                                      1=Didnotknowcandidates/didnothaveenoughinformation,2=Was                         |____|
                                                                     toldnotto,3=Didn’tthinkmyvotewouldmatter,4=Other,specify
     70.   DidyouvoteforWardRep?                               1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
     71.   IfQ70=No,whynot?                                      1=Didnotknowcandidates/didnothaveenoughinformation,2=Was                         |____|
                                                                     toldnotto,3=Didn’tthinkmyvotewouldmatter,4=Other,specify
     72.   Didyouvoteinthepreviousgeneralelectionin2007?    1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
     73.   Wereyouaffectedbytheviolencefollowingthelast     1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|
           electionin2007/2008?
     74.   IfQ73=Yes,howwereyouaffected?Enumerator:allow     1=SomeoneinmyHHdied,2=SomeoneinmyHHwasinjured,3=MyHH              |____|,|____|,|____|,
           multipleresponses                                       wasdisplaced,4=ArelativeoutsidemyHHwaskilled,5=Arelative                 |____|
                                                                     outsidemyHHwasinjured,6=ArelatedHHwasdisplaced,7=Other,
                                                                     specify
     75.   Didyouvoteinthe2010constitutionalreferendum?       1=Yes,2=No                                                                               |____|

                                                                                    
                                                                         Thankyouforyourtime



     ElectionsEndline                                                                     Page9of9                                     12July2015
