                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE OSTRICH IN US:
SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS, INCOME, SPENDING, AND LIQUIDITY

                                          Arna Olafsson
                                          Michaela Pagel

                                        Working Paper 23945
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23945


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2017




  We thank Ted O’Donoghue, John Driscoll, Nachum Sicherman, Michael Grubb, Paul Tetlock,
  Nicola Gennaioli, Botond Koszegi, Daniel Gottlieb, Cary Friedman, Benjamin Keys, Constança
  Esteves-Sorenson, Silvia Saccardo, Matthew Rabin, David Laibson, Paige Skiba, Devin Pope,
  Vicki Bogan, Valentin Haddad, Marina Niessner, Andrea Prat, and conference and seminar
  participants at Cornell, Maryland, 2017 BEAM at Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, NBER Summer
  Institute, ECWFC at the WFA, NYU, Columbia, ESSFM Gerzensee, Zurich, University of
  Indiana, University of Innsbruck, University of Melbourne, and the National University of
  Singapore for a range of insightful comments. This project has received funding from Danish
  Council for Independent Research, under grant agreement no 6165-00020. We thank numerous
  seminar participants, our discussants, and conference participants at the AFFECT Conference
  University of Miami, University of Kentucky Finance Conference, and 6th ITAM Finance
  Conference. We are indebted to Ágúst Schweitz Eriksson and Meniga for providing and helping
  with the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
  the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2017 by Arna Olafsson and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
  exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
  including © notice, is given to the source.
The Ostrich in Us: Selective Attention to Financial Accounts, Income, Spending, and Liquidity
Arna Olafsson and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 23945
October 2017
JEL No. D14,D90,G41

                                          ABSTRACT

A number of theoretical research papers in micro as well as macroeconomics model and analyze
attention but direct empirical evidence remains scarce. This paper investigates the determinants of
attention to financial accounts using panel data from a financial management software provider
containing daily logins, discretionary spending, income, balances, and credit limits. We find that
individuals are considerably more likely to log in because they get paid utilizing exogenous
variation in paydays due to weekends and holidays. Beyond looking at the causal effect of
income on attention, we examine how attention depends on individual spending, balances, and
credit limits within individuals’ own histories. We find that attention is decreasing in spending
and overdrafts and increasing in cash holdings, savings, and liquidity. Moreover, attention jumps
discretely when balances change from negative to positive. We argue that our findings cannot be
explained by rational theories of inattention. Instead our findings are consistent with Ostrich
effects and anticipatory utility as the main motivation for paying attention to financial accounts
and thus provide new tests for information- or belief-dependent utility models. Furthermore, we
show that some of our findings can be explained by a recent influential one of those models (K
szegi and Rabin, 2009), which assumes individuals experience utility over news or changes in
expectations about consumption.


Arna Olafsson
Copenhagen Business School
Department of Finance
Solbjerg Plads 3
2000 Frederiksberg
Denmark
ao.fi@cbs.dk

Michaela Pagel
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mpagel@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

A recent theoretical literature in asset pricing and macroeconomics introduces attention as an ex-
planatory mechanism. Among others, Woodford (2009), Paciello and Wiederholt (2013), Chien
et al. (2012), Andrei and Hasler (2014), Reis (2006), and Gabaix and Laibson (2002) show that
attention matters in the aggregate. Moreover, a number of microeconomic papers model attention
such as Caplin and Leahy (2001), Caplin and Leahy (2004), Golman and Loewenstein (2015), Ely
et al. (2015), and Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010). Nevertheless, empirical evidence on
the determinants of attention lags behind the theoretical advances and remains scarce. To inform
the theoretical literature and better understand the determinants of paying attention, this paper thus
constitutes a large-scale empirical study of individual attention to current, savings, and credit-card
accounts.
    More specifically, we try to shed light on the following questions: When and under what con-
ditions do individuals pay attention to their financial accounts? Can our empirical findings be
explained by rational theories of inattention? To what extent is inattention not rational but selec-
tive and driven by Ostrich effects or anticipatory utility? In a nutshell, we argue that inattention is
selective rather than rational and that Ostrich effects and anticipatory utility are first-order impor-
tant for individual attention to financial accounts. This conclusion is nicely illustrated in Figure 1
showing logins as a function of the current account balance that may be negative when individuals
maintain an overdraft or positive if not. We can see a positive correlation between account balances
and logins together with a jump when the balance goes from negative to positive.
    Standard economic models predict that information is valuable when it helps to make better
decisions. Theories of rational inattention posit that individuals trade off the costs and benefits of
seeking information. The costs of attention include information-processing costs as well as time
and opportunity costs, while benefits of attention are potential improvements in decision making.
There exist countless situations in which information is useful and sought after but there also exist



                                                  2
              Figure 1: Propensity to log in and current account balance (raw data)


situations in which people seek out apparently useless information or avoid useful information
(see Golman et al., 2016, for a survey of the literature). Thus, attention does not appear to only
be an input into decision-making for spending and saving. In light of this evidence, a literature on
information-dependent and belief-dependent utility emerged positing that information also has a
hedonic impact on utility that goes beyond mechanical costs and benefits. We hope to provide new
empirical tests for these theories and show that a news-utility model, as developed by Kőszegi and
Rabin (2009), can rationalize some of our findings.
   The digitization of budgeting processes with financial aggregation apps and the attendance
tracking of online behavior allow direct measurement of individual attention in ways that previ-
ously were not possible. In this paper, we use online account logins to measure individual attention
to financial accounts following three studies that analyze a direct measure of attention but only
to retirement portfolios (Sicherman et al., 2015; Karlsson et al., 2009; Gherzi et al., 2014). We
look at the determinants and effects of paying attention to financial accounts using data from a
financial aggregation and service app from Iceland—a data source that not only allows individ-
ual tracking of attention but also provides high-frequency income and spending data derived from
the actual transactions and account balances of individuals; overcoming the limitations of accu-
racy, scope, and frequency that existing data sources of consumption and income have. Gelman
et al. (2014) and Baker (2014) were the first to advance the measurement of income and spending


                                                 3
with such app data from the US. We use data from Iceland which has four main advantages: 1)
It essentially eliminates the remaining limitation of the previously used app data–the absence of
cash transactions–since Icelandic consumers use electronic means of payments almost exclusively,
2) the app is marketed through banks thus covering a fairly broad fraction of the population, 3)
the spending and income data is pre-categorized and the categorization is very accurate with few
uncategorized transactions, 4) the app cannot be used to make transactions and thus serves infor-
mation purposes only, and 5) all financial accounts are personal (one cannot issue cards for family
members for instance).
    We first look at the individual propensity to check financial accounts in response to regular
income payments that always arrive on a certain day of the month. To alleviate endogeneity con-
cerns, we use indicator variables for the arrival of payments in addition to individual, day-of-week,
day-of-month, holiday, and month-year fixed effects to utilize exogenous variation in payment ar-
rival due to weekends and holidays; i.e., the payday is moved if the day of the month happens to
be on a weekend or holiday.1 We find that individuals are 62 percent more likely to log in once and
94.2 percent more likely to log in twice or more on a payday.
    To interpret this finding, we argue that a rationally inattentive agent, who does not experience
information- or belief-dependent utility, would behave differently. Five rational benchmarks come
to mind: 1) individuals log in independently of their transactions because there is either full or
no uncertainty associated with them, 2) individuals log in after transactions to verify these post
correctly, 3) individuals log in to budget or plan spending, 4) individuals log in when opportunity
costs are low, and 5) individuals log in to avoid financial fee payments. Hypotheses 1) can be ruled
out as we just established that income causes logins. Moreover, we can rule out 2) because we find
the same responses in magnitudes to salary as well as irregular or exogenous payments for which
    1
      In theory, one would need individual-by-day-of-month fixed effects to single out this exogenous variation or
everyone has to be paid on the same day of the month. In practice, 85 percent of individuals get paid within a few days
in the end or beginng of the month and we can also restrict the sample to individuals who get paid on the exact same
day of the month.




                                                          4
the transaction verification motive should be more relevant (recall that, for identification purposes
we only look at salary payments to those that come on a certain day throughout the sample period).
Additionally, we do not find a larger log in response on paydays with many other transactions. We
can rule out 3) because we find that the log in response on paydays is higher when liquidity or cash
holdings are high (rather than low when individuals should care more about budgeting). Here,
it is important to note that we only look at within-individual variation, i.e., we sort individual-
date observations of cash, liquidity, and spending into deciles to compare individuals within their
own histories. Finally, we can rule out 4) because there is no relationship between the payday
response and spending, a potential measure of opportunity costs.2 With respect to 5), we know that
individuals pay financial fees that could be avoided if they were to log in more from our companion
paper (in Carlin et al., 2016, we find that an exogenous increase in logins causes a reduction in
financial fee payments of approximately $2.50 per log in). Finally, as mentioned, when we look at
two or more logins, we find an even larger spike on paydays even though all payments post in the
mornings. We thus conclude that individuals log in because they enjoy seeing money in their bank
accounts, i.e., they experience a form of anticipatory utility.
       We use the same identification strategy to estimate the causal effect of credit card payments.
In Iceland, a fraction of credit cards impose the 2nd of the month as the automatic credit payment
date. In turn, individuals use overdrafts to repay credit cards in full rather than revolve credit
card debt. Using a fixed-effects strategy, we can thus utilize variation in the day of the credit
card payment stemming from weekends and holidays. We also find a positive log in response.
While this result is consistent with individuals worrying about their liquidity, we find that the log
in response on credit card due dates is increasing rather than decreasing in liquidity, which points
towards selective attention and Ostrich effects.
       We also examine the direct relationship between logging in and individual spending and fi-
   2
     Olafsson and Pagel (2016) show that individuals spend more on the days they get paid. To shed light on the
mechanism by which income affects attention, we control for spending in additional specifications. However, we find
that spending is not the mechanism by which income affects attention.



                                                        5
nancial standing such as liquidity and cash holdings. Again, we only look at within-individual
variation, i.e., we sort individual-date observations into deciles of individual spending and finan-
cial standing to compare individuals within their own histories. Thus, none of the variation reflects
cross-sectional differences. Moreover, we control for individual fixed effects and thereby all self
selection on observable or unobservable time-invariant characteristics on top of a set of calendar
fixed effects. Technically, we can only report correlations. However, given the comprehensiveness
of the fixed-effects approach and the absence of selection, the bar for omitted variable and reverse
causality bias is high.3 We document a number of patterns in investor attention and individual
financial conditions:

    • Attention decreases with individual spending and increases with individual savings.

    • Attention increases with individual cash holdings and liquidity.

    • Attention decreases with individual overdrafts especially intermediate amounts.

    • Attention exhibits a discontinuous jump when the checking account balance changes from
         negative to positive.

       Again, for all of these findings, we consider rational theories of inattention: transaction verfica-
tion, budgeting, planning, and opportunity costs. However, for each case, we argue that the theory
does not explain all evidence. Transaction verfication is directly ruled out by the negative rela-
tionship between attention and spending. In terms of budgeting, consumption smoothing is more
beneficial at low income and wealth levels and we would therefore expect the opposite relationship
between attention and cash or overdrafts.4 In terms of planning, it could be that individuals log in
when they hold a lot of cash to plan spending. However, this theory is not consistent with us seeing
a stronger relationship for savings account balances, that should not be planned for spending, than
   3
      From our companion paper (Carlin et al., 2016), we know that logins cause a reduction in financial fee payments
but we cannot find substantial effects on spending or checking and savings account balances.
    4
      We formally show that any risk averse agent finds consumption smoothing more beneficial at low income or
wealth levels if his or her utility function also features prudence.

                                                         6
current account balances. In terms of opportunity costs, while it makes sense that individuals do
not log in when they are busy spending, this theory cannot explain why attention increases in cash
holdings. After all, if cash holdings are low, then individuals have spent a lot in the past. For that
reason, their opportunity costs should be low and they should log in more not less.
   Table 1 summarizes our empirical findings and the various theories we consider. We indicate
whether or not the theories could be easily modified to be consistent with our findings.




                                                  7
                   Table 1: Empirical findings and possible theoretical explanations


                                     No/perfect   Transaction                           Opportunity   Selective
                                                                 Budgeting   Planning
                                    information   verification                            costs       attention
        Individuals log in
                                        7              3            (7)         3           (7)          3
      because they get paid
    Individuals log in twice
                                        7              7            (7)         3           (7)          3
     because they get paid
       Income response
                                        7              7            (7)         3           (7)          3
 similar for irregular payments
        Income response
                                        7              7            7           3          (3)           3
 increasing in cash and liquidity
       Income response
                                        7              7            7          (3)          7           (3)
     unrelated to spending
      Individuals log in
                                        7              3            3           7           3           (3)
 because they make a payment
       Payment response
                                        7              7            7           3           3           (3)
 increasing in cash and liquidity
       Logins decreasing
                                        7              7            7           3           3            3
        with spending
       Logins increasing
                                        7              7            7           3           7            3
     with cash and liquidity
    Logins more increasing
                                        7              7            7           7           3           (3)
    with savings than cash
        Logins u-shaped
                                        7              7            7           3           7           (3)
         in overdrafts
     Attention jumps when
                                        7              7            7          (7)          7            3
     balance turns positive
         Logins reduce
                                       (3)            (3)          (3)         (3)         (3)          (3)
     financial fee payments

 Note: 7 unlikely to explain, (7) explain with major modifications, (3) explain with modifications, 3consistent
 with theory



   Overall, we feel that most findings are consistent with anticipatory utility and one specific form
of selective attention called the Ostrich effect introduced by Galai and Sade (2006) and Karlsson
et al. (2009). Karlsson et al. (2009) propose that attention amplifies the hedonic impact of infor-
mation, which implies that investors should pay more attention to their finances after good news
than after bad news. The authors show that individual investors’ attention to personal portfolios

                                                           8
increases after positive returns on market indices. In the context of financial accounts, the existing
evidence is thus consistent with cash inflows, be it from income payments or wealth shocks, or
large cash and liquidity holdings causing individuals to log in to their accounts more often. In
contrast, in dire times, when individuals feel they overspent and hold little cash or large overdrafts,
they prefer to not pay attention.5 Two important differences between logging in to retirement ac-
counts, as analyzed by Karlsson et al. (2009), and spending accounts are the following: 1) we know
individuals can save money by paying more attention to their accounts (Carlin et al., 2016), while
we are not sure whether individual investors have any skill in stock picking and 2) in principle, un-
certainty about financial account balances is considerably lower than uncertainty about portfolios.
Documenting selective attention in the domain of spending accounts is therefore of independent
interest.
    While our empirical findings point towards Ostrich effects and anticipatory utility as a first-
order determinant for checking financial accounts, we also think that the avoidance of fee pay-
ments are a determinant of logging in. Individuals in our sample incur substantial fee payments
that may be avoided if they were to check their accounts more often. We know that because, in
an accompanying paper, Carlin et al. (2016) document that the mobile app introduction of this
personal finance software decreased financial penalty payments. Furthermore, Stango and Zinman
(2014) document that individuals respond to surveys about overdrafts by paying greater attention
to account balances and incurring less fees and Medina (2016) finds that reminders for timely
payment reduce credit card late-fees paid.
    We thus try to reconcile and formalize intuitions consistent with these two key findings for
attention, 1) that individuals check their accounts more often if they received income and hold
more cash and 2) that individuals worry about incurring fees. In the model by Kőszegi and Rabin
   5
     These empirical results stand in contrast to the idea that individuals pay more attention to their accounts when
they have fewer resources and worry about their liquidity. Though, as shown in Olafsson and Pagel (2016), very few
individuals are actually hitting their credit limits even right before individual paychecks. Nevertheless, individuals may
have personal rules as to how much consumer debt they take. In fact, we see attention being u-shaped in overdrafts
and thus some reversal in attention when individuals hold very large overdrafts relative to their own histories.



                                                            9
(2009), individuals not only derive utility from current consumption but also from changes in
expectations or news about present and future consumption. To generate attitudes towards wealth
bets consistent with prospect theory, the model assumes that bad news hurt more than good news
please. This assumption implies that expecting to receive news entails a first-order disutility. Thus,
the agent is averse to receiving news. However, if the agent is more wealthy, news hurt less on
average as the agent fluctuates around a less steep part of his or her concave utility function.
Because the agent trades off the costs of expected news disutility with the benefits of staying fully
informed and avoiding fee payments, he or she checks his or her accounts more often after income
payments or wealth shocks. However, he or she also checks his or her accounts more often, if he
or she holds little cash and worries more about fee payments. Thus, the model reconciles the two
key empirical findings.
   In terms of broader implications, our findings are relevant for theories of rational inattention.
Macroeconomic models of rational inattention are likely to generate different aggregate dynamics
if inattention were selective (for instance, Andrei and Hasler, 2014; Reis, 2006; Gabaix and Laib-
son, 2002; Gabaix, 2016). Our findings are also relevant for the literature on information costs. If
individuals are willing to pay to not receive information (which could be inferred from this study
in connection with Carlin et al., 2016), then information costs are effectively negative rather than
positive (for instance, Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp, 2009, 2010; Abel et al., 2013; Alvarez
et al., 2012). Beyond rational inattention and information costs, our findings possibly relate to the
literature on poverty traps (see Azariadis and Stachurski, 2005, for a survey) as well as the litera-
ture on poverty and cognitive function (Mani et al., 2013; Carvalho et al., 2016). Individuals may
choose to not pay attention in dire financial standing in turn making things even worse. Finally,
our findings are important for policy prescriptions or (field) experimental interventions, i.e., it has
to be taken into account that inattention may be highly selective rather than rational.
   The paper is organized as follows: first, we briefly review the literature to then provide a data
description and summary statistics in Section 2. Section 3 documents the main analysis while


                                                  10
Section 4 concludes.


Literature review

The most related papers are Sicherman et al. (2015), Karlsson et al. (2009), and Gherzi et al. (2014)
who use online retirement account logins to measure investor attention to portfolios. However,
to the best of our knowledge, to date no paper documents 1) the marginal propensity to check
financial accounts (i.e., current, savings, and credit-card accounts) in response to cash inflows and
2) the relationship between paying attention and individual spending and financial standing.
    A literature has emerged that analyzes when people seek useless information or avoid informa-
tion, even when it is free and could improve decision making, (see, e.g., Loewenstein, 1994; Eliaz
and Schotter, 2010; Powdthavee and Riyanto, 2015). Casual observation, as well as considerable
theoretical, laboratory, and field research suggests that such behavior is, in fact, common. More
specifically, investors are inattentive to their portfolios (Bonaparte and Cooper, 2009; Brunner-
meier and Nagel, 2008; Gabaix and Laibson, 2002; Reis, 2006; Woodford, 2009) and may actively
avoid looking at their financial portfolios when the stock market is down (Karlsson et al., 2009;
Sicherman et al., 2015). Moreover, individuals at risk for health conditions often eschew medi-
cal tests (e.g., for serious genetic conditions or STDs) even when the information is costless and
should, logically, help them to make better decisions (Ganguly and Tasoff, 2014; Sullivan et al.,
2004; Lerman et al., 1996, 1999; Lyter et al., 1987; Oster et al., 2013; Thornton, 2008). Finally,
managers often avoid hearing arguments that conflict with their preliminary decisions (see, e.g.,
Schulz-Hardt et al., 2000), even though such arguments could help them avoid implementing mea-
sures that are ill-founded. Finally, the findings by Zimmermann (2014) and Falk and Zimmermann
(2014) underscore the importance of attention for belief-dependent utility and support the idea that
individuals can actively manage attention in a self-serving way, to increase or decrease anticipatory
utility.
    In light of this evidence, starting with Loewenstein (1987), recent theoretical work has made

                                                 11
substantial progress in modeling the notion that beliefs about or the anticipation of future consump-
tion can have direct utility consequences (see, e.g., Caplin and Leahy, 2001, 2004; Brunnermeier
and Parker, 2005; Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006; Epstein, 2008; Kőszegi and Rabin, 2009; Dillen-
berger, 2010; Bénabou, 2012; Strzalecki, 2013; Golman and Loewenstein, 2015; Golman et al.,
2016; Ely et al., 2015). Logging in to financial accounts can be interpreted as paying attention to
finances. Alternatively, it could be interpreted as a decision to make finances more salient. Thus,
this paper informs a small but growing theoretical literature that is incorporating salience and focus
into economic decision-making (e.g., Bordalo et al., 2010; Koszegi and Szeidl, 2013; Bushong et
al., 2015).



2     Data and summary statistics

2.1    Data

This paper exploits new data from Iceland generated by Meniga, a provider of financial aggrega-
tion software for European banks and financial institutions. Meniga has become Europe’s leading
private financial management (PFM) provider. Their PFM solution is currently used by more than
40 million individuals in 18 countries, with more already scheduled to be added, in partnership
with retail banks and financial institutions. The company allows financial institutions to offer their
online customers a platform for connecting all their financial accounts, including bank accounts
and credit card accounts, in a single location. Each day, the application automatically records
all the bank and credit card transactions including balances and descriptions. We use the entire
de-identified population of active users in Iceland and data derived from their records from Jan-
uary 2011 to January 2017 and perform the analysis on normalized and aggregated user-level data
for different income and spending categories. In January 2014, the Icelandic population counted
325,671 individuals–254,538 of which were above the age of 16. At the same time, Meniga had



                                                 12
35,855 users–approximately 14 percent of individuals above the age of 16. Because the app is
marketed through banks, the sample of Icelandic users is fairly representative. The app collects
some demographic information such as age, gender, and marital status. Moreover, we can infer the
number of (small) children, employment status, and geographical region. The user population is a
substantial fraction of the population and very heterogeneous, including large numbers of users of
different ages, education levels, and geographic location.


2.2   Summary statistics

Income, spending, and demographics: Table 2 displays summary statistics of the Icelandic users,
including income and spending in US dollars across three log in and income terciles. Moreover, it
displays some demographic statistics. The average user is 40 years old, with 15 percent of users
being pensioners. This information is reassuring: besides the young and tech-savvy using this app,
we also observe the older generation. Moreover, roughly 50 percent of users are female – a much
higher number than the one seen in other papers using data of this kind. Overall, the characteristics
of the sample with respect to age, gender, employment, income, and spending figures are remark-
ably similar to the ones of the representative national household survey conducted by Statistics
Iceland.


                                       {Table 2 around here}


   Logins: Figure 2 shows the distribution of the daily propensity to log in, i.e., a dummy variable
equal to one if the individual logs in that day of the month or week for male and female users. It
can be seen that men log in more often than women and all individuals log in more often around the
end and beginning of the month and more on workdays than weekends. Figure 3 displays whether
or not men and women log in on a particular day when they receive different types of income
payments. It can be seen that all individuals log in more often when they get paid but also that


                                                 13
there are large differences in the login responses of different payments. Again, men log in more
often on average.


                                         {Figure 2 around here}




3     Analyses and results

Here we describe our empirical setting and baseline identification strategy to uncover the effects
of receiving a payment and credit card due dates on logins. Moreover, we explore the correlations
between logins and individual financial standing such as cash holdings, overdrafts, and liquidity as
well as individual spending.


3.1   Propensity to check financial accounts in response to income payments

We estimate the payday effects on logins by running the following regression:

                         7
                         X
                 xit =          βk Ii (P aidt+k ) + δdow + φdom + ψmy + ξh + ηi + it            (1)
                         k=−7

where xit is an indicator variable of whether individual i logged in to his or her account on date
t, δdow is a day-of-week fixed effect, φdom is a day-of-month fixed effect, ψmy is a month-by-
year fixed effect, ξh is a holiday dummy, ηi is an individual fixed effect, and Ii (P aidt+k ) is an
indicator that is equal to 1 if individual i receives a payment at time t + k and that is equal to 0
otherwise. The βk coefficients thus measure the fraction by which income arrival increases the
probability of logging in on the days surrounding the receipt of a payment. We use indicator
variables for income payments to alleviate potential endogeneity concerns at the income level.
The day-of-week dummies capture within-week patterns for logins. The day-of-month dummies
capture within-month patterns for logins. We restrict the income payments to regular payments

                                                   14
that occur on a certain day of the month. When paydays fall on a weekend or a holiday they are
moved to the last working day before or the next one. Weekends and holidays therefore generate
an exogenous source of variation in the pay date.6 Standard errors are clustered at the individual
level.
       Figure 4 displays the payday response for the two weeks and four weeks around paydays of
regular salary payments. As can be seen, the log in coefficient is five times larger on the days
individuals get paid relative to the days surrounding payment receipt. In terms of magnitudes
relative to the average logins, individuals are 62 percent more likely to log in on the day they get
paid.


                                             {Figure 4 around here}


       To interpret this finding, we have to think about how a rational agent or rationally inattentive
agent, who does not experience information- or belief-dependent utility, would behave. As out-
lined in the introduction, five possibilities come to mind: 1) individuals log in unrelated to their
transactions because there is either full or no uncertainty associated with transactions, 2) individu-
als log in to verify all transactions post correctly, 3) individuals log in for budgeting and planning
purposes, 4) individuals log in when opportunity costs are low, and 5) individuals log in to avoid
financial fee payments.
       Hypotheses 1) can be ruled out as we see that income causes logins. Moreover, we can rule out
2) for the following three reasons. First, is important for identification that we only use payments
that come on a certain day of the month to make sure that weekends and holidays generate an
exogenous source of variation in the pay date. Moreover, by using only payments that come at a
certain day of the month throughout the sample period, we can rule out transaction verification as
a motive for logging in as there should be no news associated with their arrival. Second, we find
   6
     In theory, one would need individual-by-day-of-month fixed effects to single out this exogenous variation or
everyone has to be paid on the same day of the month. In practice, 85 percent of individuals get paid within a few days
in the end or beginng of the month and we can also restrict the sample to individuals who get paid on the same day.

                                                         15
almost the same responses in magnitudes to irregular as well as exogenous payments for which
the transaction verification motive should be more relevant. Figure 5 shows responses to irregular
income payments, such as insurance claims, dividends, or grants. Here, we find a marginally
larger spike in the attention response in addition to a bit of a run-up before the payment. This
additional margin may capture a transaction-verification motive, which we thus not consider first-
order important. Alternatively, we can use plausibly exogenous income payments, such as lotteries
and tax rebates, and also document a marginal propensity to log in of similar magnitude. Third,
other transactions, such as spending, is not increasing the spike in attention caused by the paycheck
as can be seen in Figure 7.


                                           {Figure 5 around here}


    Additionally, we can rule out 3), the budgeting motive, because we find that the log in response
on paydays is higher when liquidity or cash holdings are high (rather than low when individuals
should care more about budgeting). To analyze the effect of cash and liquidity on attention to
financial accounts on paydays we run the following regression:

                       10
                       X
               xit =         βd Ii (P aidt ) ∗ Liqi (dt ) + δdow + φdom + ψmy + ξh + ηi + it             (2)
                       d=0

where the variables xit , δdow , φdom , ψmy , ξh , ηi , and Ii (P aidt ) are specified as above and Liqi (dt )
is an indicator for each liquidity decile (relative to individuals’ own average liquidity). The βd
coefficients thus measure the fraction by which income arrival increases the probability of logging
in for each liquidity decile. The same approach can be used to look at the effect of cash holdings on
attention to financial accounts. Figure 6 displays the relationship between logging in on paydays
relative to other days for different levels of individual cash and liquidity holdings. We can see that
individuals are more likely to log in on paydays especially when their cash holdings and liquidity
are relatively large. Here, one can nicely see the heterogeneity: individuals are around 30 percent


                                                      16
more likely to log in relative to the baseline probability to log in of around 3 percent for low cash
holdings and around 200 percent more likely to log in for high cash holdings.


                                      {Figure 6 around here}


   Moreover, in Figure 7, we sort according to spending rather than liquidity finding no relation-
ship. Spending can be seen as a measure of opportunity costs and thus addresses Hypothesis 5).
Individuals tend to log in less when they spend a lot relative to their own history of spending but
there is no relationship between spending and logins on paydays. As an alternative to concurrent
spending one can consider cash holdings as a measure of opportunity costs as they reflect past
spending (when past spending was high then cash holdings are low and thus opportunity costs are
low). Here, the positive relationship we observe in Figure 6 goes against the opportunity costs
story. Moreover, it is evidence against hypthesis 3), the planning motive. If spending is high on
a payday, there is less need to plan and individuals should log in less. However, we do not find a
relationship between spending on paydays and the attention response.


                                      {Figure 7 around here}


   We know from Olafsson and Pagel (2016) that spending responds to income arrival. To single
out the effect of income, we control for spending in additional specifications. While controlling
for spending constitutes a bad controls problem, it is still informative about the mechanism if the
coefficients are not affected. We find that controlling for spending does not change our coefficients
and we thus conclude that spending is not the mechanism underlying how income affects attention.
   Finally, we find an even larger spike for second or more logins. In terms of magnitudes relative
to the average logins, individuals are 62 percent more likely to log in once and 94.2 percent more
likely to log in twice or more on a payday. It is important to note that the second log in is unlikely
to be explained by individuals not being able to verify the payment upon the first log in because the

                                                 17
vast majority of income payments are posted in the early morning. Overall, we thus conclude that
individuals log in because they enjoy seeing money in their bank accounts, i.e., they experience a
form of anticipatory utility.
       We find a unique spike on paydays whereas an anticipatory utility story would suggest that
logins are higher in the days after the payday too. In the above regression, this motive is captured
by the day-of-month fixed effects as we will show now. Figure 7 shows logins as a function of
days since the regular payment controlling for individual, day-of-week, day-of-month, month-by-
year, and holiday fixed effects. Here, we can see a clear payday cycle that is not captured by the
day-of-month fixed effects or the calendar cycle. It can be seen that individuals log in most often
on paydays for regular payments and logins steadily decline after. These findings support the idea
that anticipatory utility plays a role for deciding whether or not to pay attention.


3.2      Propensity to check financial accounts in response to credit card pay-

         ments

We can use the same identification strategy to assess the response in attention to regular credit
card bill payments. Credit card due dates vary in the same way as paydays because of weekends
and holidays, generating an exogenous source of variation in bill payments.7 Figure 8 displays the
log-in response for the two weeks around the credit card due date. The first graph excludes day-
of-month fixed effects while the second graph includes them. As can be seen, individuals are more
likely to log in on the days they have to pay their credit card bill, although the magnitude is only half
of the one from regular or irregular payments. Moreover, the initial spike in the graph excluding
day-of-month fixed effects is probably due to other events in the beginning of the month that are
captured by the day-of-month fixed effects as it disappears in the second graph. We thus conclude
that incoming or large outgoing payments cause spikes in attention but incoming payments three
   7
     In Iceland, credit card bills are typically paid via automatic direct debit from their checking accounts on their due
date.


                                                           18
times more so than outgoing ones.


                                       {Figure 8 around here}


   While the spike in attention on credit card due dates appears to be consistent with individuals
worrying about liquidity constraints at first sight, we also find that the increase in attention on
credit card due dates is increasing in liquidity, which is again consistent with an Ostrich-effect
intuition. This pattern can be seen in Figure 9. Table 3 shows the regression results in a table
format. In particular, the table shows the effects of paycheck arrival and the credit card due dates
controlling for a variety of individual and calendar fixed effects as well as liquidity. It can be
seen that paycheck arrival and bill dates both increase logins. Moreover, the spike in attention
is not majorly affected by controlling for liquidity. Again, all of these results are consistent with
anticipatory utility being the first-order motivation to check financial accounts. Individuals enjoy
seeing money in their bank accounts.


                                {Figure 9 and Table 3 around here}


   Moreover, in Figure 9, we display the endogenous response to credit card payments. Here, we
use a dummy for days after which credit card balances reduce by at least 50 percent. One can
nicely see that planned payments increase logins as one would expect.


3.3   Attention, spending, balances, and liquidity

Figure 10 displays the estimates of a logit model for the probability of logging in when individuals
spend relatively more or less and when they have more or less savings. We first calculate how much
one individual spends (saves) compared to how much he or she spends (saves) on average and then
split that individual’s spending (savings) in 11 groups. The first group is zero spending (savings)
and the remaining groups split spending (savings) up in deciles 1 to 10. Each point is therefore

                                                 19
comparing the individual’s propensity to log in to the log-in rate when he spends (saves) nothing.
While we technically report correlations, in practice, the set of fixed effects impose a very high
bar for selection, omitted variable bias, and reverse causality. All selection on (un)observables is
controlled for and we only compare individuals within their own histories. Moreover, the calendar
fixed effects should control for all recurring planning motives. Finally, we know from our com-
panion paper (Carlin et al., 2016) that logins do not cause substantial changes in spending patterns.
More formally, we run the following regression:

                                      11
                                      X
                      logit(xit ) =         βd Si (dt ) + ψmy + δdow + ξh + ηi + it                 (3)
                                      d=0

where xit , ψmy , δdow , ξh , and ηi are specified as above. Thus, we control for individual, month-by-
year, day-of-week, and holiday fixed effects. Si (dt ) is an indicator that is equal to 1 if individual i
is in spending (savings) decile d on date t as explained above.
   We find that individuals are generally less likely to log in when they spend relatively more. In
contrast, individuals are more likely to log in when they have low or high levels of savings relative
to some intermediate range. The coefficient interpretation of this logit regression is not obvious.
Spending increases the odds of logging in but little spending less so than a lot of spending. The log
of the baseline probability to log in (that is in the ballpark of two percent) is -1.5, thus a variation
in the coefficient of 0.3 for spending or saving increases the odds by approximately 20 percent.


                                        {Figure 10 around here}


   An opportunity costs explanation for paying attention would suggest that individuals log in less
when they are busy spending. To rule out this explanation, one can look at past spending that is
summarized in cash holdings and overdrafts. When individuals’ past spending was relatively high,
their cash holdings are relatively low, and thus their opportunity costs are low. As documented
next, however, we find a negative relationship between logging in and cash holdings as well as


                                                     20
overdrafts suggesting that opportunity costs are not a key determinant of when individuals log in.8
       Figure 11 displays the propensity to log in by deciles of individual cash (savings plus positive
checking account balances). In the same way as before, each individual’s cash holdings are split
into 11 groups, group 0 is when the individual holds zero cash and groups 1 to 10 are deciles of
the his or her value of cash. Again, we control for individual, month-by-year, day-of-week, and
holiday fixed effects and thus impose a high bar in terms of selection, omitted variables, and reverse
causality. We can see that cash holdings are positively related to logging in, i.e., individuals log in
more often when they have more cash.


                                           {Figure 11 around here}


       The way that low cash holdings and large overdrafts imply high past spending, large cash hold-
ings imply future spending. Thus, the question is whether individuals use the app to rationally plan
future spending. While planning to spend in the future is very hard to distinguish from anticipatory
utility, we can address this theory by noting that the positive relationship is more pronounced for
savings than current account balances. Given that a savings account is not dedicated to spending,
as the debit card always subtracts from the checking account, we thus conclude that planning fu-
ture spending is not the main determinant of logging in to financial accounts when cash holdings
are large.
       Figure 12 displays the propensity to log in by deciles of overdraft debt. We split each individ-
ual’s overdraft debt into 11 groups, group 0 belongs to zero holdings of debt and groups 1 to 10
are deciles of the value of debt. Again, we control for month-by-year, day-of-week, and holiday
fixed effects. Here, it can be seen that holding debt is always negatively correlated with logging
in. More specifically, the coefficient on overdraft is always negative implying that individuals log
   8
     In principle, low cash today implies either high past spending or low past income. To make sure, we pick up the
variation in past spending, we can control for the monthly cycle using week-of-month fixed effects in the following
regressions.




                                                        21
in more when they carry more overdrafts. While overdraft always reduces logins, the effect is U-
shaped within negative overdrafts, i.e., having little or a lot of overdraft reduces logins less relative
to having some intermediate amount. Because logins are always reduced by overdrafts and having
little still reduces overdrafts less than having a lot, we again conclude that selective attention is
more consistent with our findings than budgeting or liquidity constraints.
   A potential explanation for the above finding could be the following: individuals cannot per-
form transactions using the app. Therefore, when they have large overdrafts and want to transfer
money, they log in using their bank account rather than the app. Note that, however, when the
individual holds overdrafts, the current account balance is negative (as is the credit card balance),
thus, the individual would have to transfer money from a savings account or an unlinked account.
To address that explanation, we can only look at individuals who have zero or low savings levels
or control for the change in overdrafts the following day. We find that the documented U-shape is
very robust across sample splits and specifications.
   Moreover, Figure 12 displays the propensity to log in by deciles of the current account balance.
We can see that the propensity to log in jumps discretely when the current account balance changes
from negative to positive. It is important to note that the figure only includes individuals that hold
both a positive and a negative current account balance during our sample period. Therefore, the
discontinuous jump at zero is not caused cross-sectionally by one group being on the left side of
zero and another group being on the right side. Instead the jump suggests that as soon as individuals
do no longer have a negative current account balance or overdraft they are more likely to look up
their financial accounts. Individuals prefer to see a black current account balance as opposed to a
red one. This figure also shows a negative correlation between overdrafts and logins and a positive
correlation between cash holdings and logins in the raw data, which again outlines the robustness
of our findings.


                                       {Figure 12 around here}


                                                   22
    We can also quantify the jump as a regression coefficient of a positive balance on logins in
a linear probability model controlling for individual fixed effects, day-of-week, month-by-year,
and holiday fixed effects as well as income payments. We obtain an 8.1% relative increase of the
baseline probability to log in.
    Overall, we conclude from this analysis that our causal results for selective attention with
respect to income hold much more generally. Individuals do not pay attention when they spend
a lot or have low cash holdings. On the other hand, it seems sensible to assume that individuals
worry to some extent about financial fee payments. After all, in an accompanying paper, Carlin et
al. (2016) document that the mobile app introduction of this personal finance software decreased
financial penalty payments. Furthermore, Stango and Zinman (2014) document that individuals
respond to surveys about overdrafts by paying greater attention to account balances and incurring
less fees and Medina (2016) finds that reminders for timely payment reduce credit card late-fees
paid.



4       Theoretical framework

We now outline a model of belief-dependent utility that was derived by Kőszegi and Rabin (2009)
and assumed in a life-cycle model with inattention to brokerage accounts by Pagel (2014). This
model formalizes our intuitions for our key empirical results: individuals dislike paying attention
to their accounts especially when cash holdings are low but they also worry about fee payments.
Moreover, we formally show that a rationally inattentive agent, subject to exogenous attention
costs, would pay more attention if wealth and income is low.
    The benefit of checking is that the agent avoids fee payments. Additionally, she experiences
news utility γβν(u0 (c) − u0 (c̃)) with c ∼ Fc (c̃), as proposed in Kőszegi and Rabin (2009), which
is positive or negative depending on the realizations of her income and bill payments Ỹ − B̃ ∼
                                                                    Ỹ −B̃−µ
FY B = N (µ, σ 2 ) with realization denoted by ỹ − b̃ and S̃ =         σ
                                                                               ∼ F = N (0, 1) with


                                                23
realization denoted by s̃. Kőszegi and Rabin (2009) generalize prospect-theory preferences via the
function ν(·) that is given by ν(x) = ηx for x > 0 and ν(x) = ηλx for x ≤ 0 with η > 0 and
λ > 1. The agent thus cares about good and bad news but dislikes bad news more than she likes
good news. Because bad news hurt more than good news please, the agent dislikes checking in
general as news disutility is painful in expectation. Moreover, the agent is more willing to check
if income is high because checking becomes less painful on a less steep part of the concave utility
curve. If the agent does not check then she may incur a financial fee f whenever ỹ − b̃ < 0.
If that happens, the fee will be subtracted from future consumption. If she checks her accounts,
she can avoid fees by simply transferring money from other accounts, which does not affect her
consumption. Thus, when she pays attention, she will not pay a fee. All consumption takes place
in the future, with utility given by βu(c). I(a) = 1 if the agent pays attention to her accounts and
zero otherwise. The agent maximizes

                     ˆ
             E[(γβ       ν(u(c) − u(c̃)))I(a)dFc (c̃) + βu(c)I(a) + βu(c)(1 − I(a))]


                            with c = ỹ − b̃ − f I(ỹ − b̃ > 0)(1 − I(a)).

The agent pays attention to her accounts, if the expected utility from checking is greater than the
expected utility from being inattentive
      ˆ
E[(γβ ν(u(ỹ − b̃) − u(Ỹ − B̃))dFY B (Ỹ − B̃) + βu(ỹ − b̃)] > E[βu(ỹ − b̃ − f I(ỹ − b̃ < 0))]

which can be rewritten as

                             ˆ     ∞
             E[γβη(λ − 1)              (u(µ + σs̃) − u(µ + σ S̃))dF (S̃)] + E[βu(µ + σs̃)]
                              s̃



                                 > E[βu(µ + σs̃ − f I(µ + σs̃ < 0))].

Suppose utility is linear, which can be seen as a good approximation for small stakes. In turn, the


                                                     24
comparison becomes

                                   ˆ     ∞
            E[γβη(λ − 1)σ                    (s̃ − S̃)dF (S̃)] + βµ > β(µ − f P rob(µ + σs̃ < 0))
                                    s̃

                                                       ˆ      ∞
                                                                                              µ
                  ⇒ −a + E[γβη(λ − 1)σ                            (s̃ − S̃)dF (S̃)] > −βf F (− ).
                                                         s̃                                   σ

   And we can easily establish the following comparative statics. When the fee is increased,
i.e., f ↑⇒ −βf F (− σµ ) ↓, then checking is more likely. When overall cash holdings are in-
creased and thereby the fee payment is less likely, i.e., µ ↑⇒ F (− σµ ) = P rob(s̃ < − σµ ) ↓⇒
−βf F (− σµ ) ↑, then checking is less likely. When the news-utility parameters are increased, i.e.,
                         ˆ ∞
ηλ ↑⇒ E[γβη(λ − 1)σ           (s̃ − S̃)dF (S̃)] ↑, then checking is less likely. And finally when the
                           s̃
                         |         {z        }
                                             <0
cash variance is increased, then news disutility is increased but the likelihood of a fee payment is
increased too.
   Now, suppose utility is concave and exponential u(c) = − 1θ e−θc , which is an appropriate
assumption for large stakes,

                        ˆ    ∞
                  −θµ
  E[γβη(λ − 1)e                  (e−θσs̃ − e−θσS̃ )dF (S̃)] + E[βe−θ(µ+σs̃) ] < E[βe−θ(µ+σs̃−f I(µ+σs̃>0)) ]
                        s̃



   For this case, we can establish the following comparative statics. When the fee is increased,
i.e., f ↑, then checking is more likely. When overall cash holdings are increased, i.e., µ ↑, then ex-
                                                        ´∞
pected news disutility is decreased E[γβη(λ − 1)e−θµ s̃ (e−θσs̃ − e−θσS̃ )dF (S̃)] ↓, which makes
checking more likely, but expected fee payments are decreased too (E[βe−θ(µ+σs̃−f I(µ+σs̃>0)) ] −
E[βe−θ(µ+σs̃) ]) ↓, which makes checking less likely. When the news-utility parameters are in-
                                      ´∞
creased, i.e., ηλ ↑⇒ E[γβη(λ − 1)e−θµ s̃ (e−θσs̃ − e−θσS̃ )dF (S̃)] ↑, then checking is less likely.
Finally, if the cash variance is increased, i.e., σ ↑, then news disutility is increased E[γβη(λ −
       ´∞
1)e−θµ s̃ (e−θσs̃ − e−θσS̃ )dF (S̃)] ↑ and checking is less likely but expected fee payments are



                                                              25
increased (E[βe−θ(µ+σs̃−f I(µ+σs̃>0)) ] − E[βe−θ(µ+σs̃) ]) ↑, which makes checking more likely.
   To formalize these intuitions for a general utility function u(·), consider the risk premium when
the agent pays attention, i.e., the compensating utility differential for paying attention if or if not
knowing s̃ = 0:

                                           ˆ      ∞
    π = E[βu(µ)] − E[γβη(λ − 1)                       (u(µ + σs̃) − u(µ + σ S̃))dF (S̃)] − E[βu(µ + σs̃)].
                                             s̃



Taking the derivative with respect to the amount of risk σ yields

                               ˆ     ∞
      ∂π
         = −E[γβη(λ − 1)                 (s̃u0 (µ + σs̃) − S̃u0 (µ + σ S̃))dF (S̃)] − E[βs̃u0 (µ + σs̃)]
      ∂σ                        s̃



and for small risks:

                                                           ˆ     ∞
             ∂π
                |σ→0 = −E[γβη(λ − 1)u0 (µ)                           (s̃| −
                                                                          {z S̃})dF (S̃)] − E[βs̃u
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                     (µ)] > 0.
             ∂σ                                             s̃                              | {z }
                                                                        <0                     =0


Proposition. For the standard agent or hyperbolic-discounting agent (η = 0 or η > 0 and λ = 1),
the risk premium for paying attention in the presence of small risks is zero (the agents are second-
order risk averse). In contrast, for the news-utility agent (η > 0 and λ > 1), the risk premium
for paying attention is always positive. Additionally, the risk premium for paying attention is
decreasing in expected cash holdings µ if u(·) is concave.

Proof. See derivation.

   Thus, expecting to check causes a first-order decrease in expected utility and the agent has a
first-order willingness to incur fees even when uncertainty is small. Note that, the effect of cash
holdings, µ, only affects the agent through higher expected consumption, not a lower likelihood of
the fee payment in this approximation. Thus, news disutility is lower when income or wealth and
therefore consumption is large.


                                                               26
   We can now do a back-of-the-envelope calculation to assess in how far the avoidance of news
utility can explain the amount of fee payments we see empirically. Average monthly fee payments
amount to approximately $40. We assume that individuals experience news disutility at a monthly
                                        c1−θ
level and utility is given by u(c) =    1−θ
                                               with θ = 4. In turn, we calibrate annual labor income
uncertainty in line with the life-cycle literature, for instance, Carroll (1997), as follows: Y ∼
                 2
log − N (µann , σann ) with µann = 0 and σann = 0.2. At the monthly level, income uncertainty is
                    √
then given by σ = 12σann . Moreover, we assume that cash holdings are given by one standard
                                         √
deviation in monthly income, i.e., µ = 12σann , and can calculate the fraction ∆ of monthly
consumption the news-utility agent would be willing to give up to avoid news disutility.

                                                  ˆ     ∞
                    µ+ 12 σ 2      −1
                 ∆e             = u (E[η(λ − 1)             (u(eµ+σs̃ ) − u(eµ+σS̃ ))dF (S̃)])
                                                   s̃



We obtain a fraction of 3 percent of cash holdings which amounts to $47 per month for η = 1 and
λ = 2 (standard parameters in the prospect-theory and news-utility literature explaining Kahneman
and Tversky (1979)). In turn, as an out-of-sample calibrational test, we compute the decrease in
monthly news disutility when the agent goes from µ = σ to µ = −σ of cash holdings and obtain
a fraction of 24 percent which thus makes the agent much more likely to check in line with our
empirical findings. We conclude that the first-order willingness to avoid fee payments predicted
by news utility can be a reasonable explanation for the amount of fee payments we see in the data.
   Nevertheless, the news-utility model is fully based on rational expectations about present and
future consumption. As such, it is not able to rationalize an increase in attention at a fully ex-
pected income payment. To address this finding, one has to consider a model in which the income
payments affects utility not through future consumption but independently so.
   Let’s now return to the standard agent. As just seen, any standard agent’s risk premium is zero
for small risks. Moreover, for large risks, the risk premium is positive if the utility function is
concave and increasing in wealth or income if the utility function is prudent (refer to Gollier, 2004,


                                                      27
for a more in depth analysis). To see this, simply assume that the standard agent pays an exogenous
attention cost a. In turn, he will pay attention if


                     E[βu(µ + σs̃ − a)] > E[βu(µ + σs̃ − f I(µ + σs̃ > 0))].


Simplifying consumption to µc , the standard agent’s risk premium for paying attention is


                        π = E[βu(µc − a)] − E[βu(µc − f I(µ + σs̃ < 0))]


For each increment of risk σ, we obtain

                         ∂π
                            = −E[βf δ(µ + σs̃)s̃u0 (µc − f I(µ + σs̃ < 0))]
                         ∂σ

where δ is the negative dirac delta function, the derivative of the indicator function (which is
constantly zero in s̃ except at the point s̃ = − σµ where the function is positive and infinitely large).
In turn,
                        ∂ ∂π
                          ∂σ
                             = −E[βf δ(µ + σs̃)s̃u00 (µc − f I(µ + σs̃ < 0))]
                        ∂µc

= E[βs̃]E[f δ(µ + σs̃)u00 (µc − f I(µ + σs̃ < 0)))] − Cov(βs̃, f δ(µ + σs̃)u00 (µc − f I(µ + σs̃ < 0)))) < 0
  |                       {z                      } |                        {z                       }
                           =0                                                 >0 if u000 >0

Thus, the standard agent’s risk premium is decreasing in consumption or wealth µc if he is prudent
u000 > 0. In other words, consumption smoothing is more beneficial at low income and wealth
levels. Prudence implies that the standard agent wants to allocate risk to the wealthy states.
   Using the above calibration, we ask how much the standard agent would be willing to pay
of monthly consumption to avoid all monthly income uncertainty, not only the fee payment (we
want to avoid calibrating the fee). The answer is only 0.66%. Moreover, this value changes only
marginally for lower values of consumption µc . Therefore, standard risk aversion and prudence
about fee payment uncertainty is unlikely to generate the amount of fee payments we see in the


                                                      28
data. We need first-order risk aversion and prudence for income uncertainty at a daily or monthly
level.



5        Conclusion

Beyond mechanical costs and benefits, paying attention to financial accounts may have a hedo-
nic impact on utility by causing anxiety or anticipatory feelings. In response to casual observa-
tion and empirical evidence on information avoidance, a literature on information-dependent and
belief-dependent utility emerged. Moreover, inattention has been shown to matter in the aggregate.
However, empirical evidence on when individuals pay attention to their financial accounts remains
scarce. We aim to fill this gap by using data from a financial aggregation app that allows bank
customers to manage all their bank accounts and credit cards across multiple banks in one place.
The digitization of budgeting processes and the attendance tracking of online behavior allow us to
directly measure individual attention in ways that previously were not possible. Moreover, we have
access to spending, income, balances, and credit limits data that is characterized by outstanding
accuracy and comprehensiveness.
    We find evidence consistent with selective attention and Ostrich effects. Income payments
cause individuals to log in more often and people log in less when they have relatively low cash
holdings or spend a lot. Additionally, when individuals are very indebted, they log in less which
appears inconsistent with standard models and the need for budgeting as the first-order motivation
for checking financial accounts. To formalize intuitions for our key empirical findings, we analyze
a model of news utility developed by Kőszegi and Rabin (2009). We establish that individuals have
a first-order willingness to incur fees as they dislike checking when bad news hurt more than good
news please. But, checking becomes less painful in expectation when cash holdings are large.
    In terms of broader implications, our findings are relevant for theories of rational inattention.
In macroeconomics, for instance, theories of rational inattention are likely to generate different


                                                 29
aggregate dynamics if inattention were selective. More generally, our findings question the as-
sumption that information costs are always positive. If individuals are willing to pay to not receive
information (which could be inferred from this study in connection with Carlin et al., 2016), then
information costs are effectively negative rather than positive. Beyond rational inattention and in-
formation costs, our findings possibly relate to the literature on poverty traps and cognitive function
in poverty.
   Logging in to financial accounts can be interpreted as paying attention to finances. Alterna-
tively, it could be interpreted as a decision to make finances more salient. There exists a small
but growing theoretical literature that is incorporating salience and focus into economic decision-
making (e.g., Bordalo et al., 2010; Koszegi and Szeidl, 2013; Bushong et al., 2015). To further
explore how salience affects economic decisions is a promising avenue for future research.




                                                  30
References

Abel, Andrew B, Janice C Eberly, and Stavros Panageas, “Optimal inattention to the stock
  market with information costs and transactions costs,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (4), 1455–1481.

Alvarez, Fernando, Luigi Guiso, and Francesco Lippi, “Durable consumption and asset man-
  agement with transaction and observation costs,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102
  (5), 2272–2300.

Andrei, Daniel and Michael Hasler, “Investor attention and stock market volatility,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 2014, p. hhu059.

Azariadis, Costas and John Stachurski, “Poverty traps,” Handbook of economic growth, 2005,
  1, 295–384.

Baker, Scott, “Debt and the Consumption Response to Household Income Shocks,” Working Pa-
  per, Stanford University 2014.

Bénabou, Roland, “Groupthink: Collective delusions in organizations and markets,” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 2012, p. rds030.

Bonaparte, Yosef and Russell Cooper, “Costly portfolio adjustment,” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research, 2009.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Salience theory of choice under risk,”
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2010.

Brunnermeier, Markus K and Jonathan A Parker, “Optimal expectations,” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1092–1118.




                                              31
   and Stefan Nagel, “Do wealth fluctuations generate time-varying risk aversion? Micro-
  evidence on individuals’ asset allocation,” The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 713–
  736.

Bushong, Benjamin, Matthew Rabin, and Joshua Schwartzstein, “A model of relative think-
  ing,” Technical Report, Working paper 2015.

Caplin, Andrew and John Leahy, “Psychological expected utility theory and anticipatory feel-
  ings,” Quarterly Journal of economics, 2001, pp. 55–79.

  and    , “The supply of information by a concerned expert,” The Economic Journal, 2004, 114
  (497), 487–505.

Carlin, Bruce, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel, “Technology Adoption Across Generations:
  Financial Fitness in the Information Age,” Working Paper, 2016.

Carroll, Christopher D, “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothe-
  sis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1997, 112 (1), 1–55.

Carvalho, Leandro S, Stephan Meier, and Stephanie W Wang, “Poverty and economic
  decision-making: Evidence from changes in financial resources at payday,” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2016, 106 (2), 260–284.

Chien, YiLi, Harold Cole, and Hanno Lustig, “Is the Volatility of the Market Price of Risk
  Due to Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing?,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6),
  2859–2896.

Dillenberger, David, “Preferences for One-Shot Resolution of Uncertainty and Allais-Type Be-
  havior,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (6), 1973–2004.

Eliaz, Kfir and Andrew Schotter, “Paying for confidence: An experimental study of the demand
  for non-instrumental information,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2010, 70 (2), 304–324.

                                                32
Ely, Jeffrey, Alexander Frankel, and Emir Kamenica, “Suspense and surprise,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 2015, 123 (1), 215–260.

Epstein, Larry G, “Living with risk,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (4), 1121–1141.

Falk, Armin and Florian Zimmermann, “Beliefs and utility: Experimental evidence on prefer-
  ences for information,” Technical Report, Working paper 2014.

Gabaix, Xavier, “Behavioral Macroeconomics Via Sparse Dynamic Programming,” Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

   and David Laibson, “The 6D bias and the equity-premium puzzle,” in “NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 2001, Volume 16,” MIT Press, 2002, pp. 257–330.

Galai, Dan and Orly Sade, “The ostrich effect and the relationship between the liquidity and the
  yields of financial assets,” The Journal of Business, 2006, 79 (5), 2741–2759.

Ganguly, Ananda and Joshua Tasoff, “Fantasy and Dread: An Experimental Test of Attentional
  Anticipatory Utility,” Working Paper, 2014.

Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and Steven Tadelis,
  “Harnessing naturally occurring data to measure the response of spending to income,” Science,
  2014, 345 (6193), 212–215.

Gherzi, Svetlana, Daniel Egan, Neil Stewart, Emily Haisley, and Peter Ayton, “The meerkat
  effect: Personality and market returns affect investors’ portfolio monitoring behaviour,” Journal
  of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2014, 107, 512–526.

Gollier, Christian, The economics of risk and time, MIT press, 2004.

Golman, Russell and George Loewenstein, “Curiosity, information gaps, and the utility of
  knowledge,” Information Gaps, and the Utility of Knowledge (April 16, 2015), 2015.

                                                33
  , David Hagmann, and George Loewenstein, “Information Avoidance,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 2016.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk,”
  Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society, 1979, pp. 263–291.

Karlsson, Niklas, George Loewenstein, and Duane Seppi, “The ostrich effect: Selective atten-
  tion to information,” Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 2009, 38 (2), 95–115.

Koszegi, Botond and Adam Szeidl, “A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (1), 53–104.

Kőszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin, “A model of reference-dependent preferences,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2006, pp. 1133–1165.

  and    , “Reference-dependent consumption plans,” The American Economic Review, 2009, 99
  (3), 909–936.

Lerman, Caryn, Chanita Hughes, Bruce J Trock, Ronald E Myers, David Main, Aba Bonney,
  Mohammad R Abbaszadegan, Anne E Harty, Barbara A Franklin, Jane F Lynch et al.,
  “Genetic testing in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer,” Jama, 1999, 281 (17),
  1618–1622.

  , Steven Narod, Kevin Schulman, Chanita Hughes, Andres Gomez-Caminero, George Bon-
  ney, Karen Gold, Bruce Trock, David Main, Jane Lynch et al., “BRCA1 testing in families
  with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer: a prospective study of patient decision making and out-
  comes,” Jama, 1996, 275 (24), 1885–1892.

Loewenstein, George, “Anticipation and the valuation of delayed consumption,” The Economic
  Journal, 1987, 97 (387), 666–684.



                                               34
  , “The psychology of curiosity: A review and reinterpretation.,” Psychological bulletin, 1994,
  116 (1), 75.

Lyter, David W, Ronald O Valdiserri, Lawrence A Kingsley, William P Amoroso, and
  Charles R Rinaldo Jr, “The HIV antibody test: why gay and bisexual men want or do not
  want to know their results.,” Public health reports, 1987, 102 (5), 468.

Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao, “Poverty impedes cog-
  nitive function,” science, 2013, 341 (6149), 976–980.

Medina, Paolina, “Selective Attention in Consumer Finance: Experimental Evidence from the
  Credit Card Market,” Working Paper, 2016.

Nieuwerburgh, Stijn Van and Laura Veldkamp, “Information immobility and the home bias
  puzzle,” The Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (3), 1187–1215.

   and    , “Information acquisition and under-diversification,” The Review of Economic Studies,
  2010, 77 (2), 779–805.

Olafsson, Arna and Michaela Pagel, “The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence from Personal Fi-
  nance Management Software,” Working Paper, 2016.

Oster, Emily, Ira Shoulson, and E Dorsey, “Optimal expectations and limited medical testing:
  evidence from Huntington disease,” The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (2), 804–830.

Paciello, Luigi and Mirko Wiederholt, “Exogenous information, endogenous information and
  optimal monetary policy,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2013, p. rdt024.

Pagel, Michaela, “A news-utility theory for inattention and delegation in portfolio choice,” Tech-
  nical Report, working paper 2014.




                                                35
Powdthavee, Nattavudh and Yohanes E Riyanto, “Would you pay for transparently useless ad-
  vice? A test of boundaries of beliefs in the folly of predictions,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2015, 97 (2), 257–272.

Reis, Ricardo, “Inattentive consumers,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53 (8), 1761–
  1800.

Schulz-Hardt, Stefan, Dieter Frey, Carsten Lüthgens, and Serge Moscovici, “Biased informa-
  tion search in group decision making.,” Journal of personality and social psychology, 2000, 78
  (4), 655.

Sicherman, Nachum, George Loewenstein, Duane J Seppi, and Stephen Utkus, “Financial
  attention,” Review of Financial Studies, 2015, p. hhv073.

Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman, “Limited and varying consumer attention evidence from
  shocks to the salience of bank overdraft fees,” Review of Financial Studies, 2014, p. hhu008.

Strzalecki, Tomasz, “Temporal resolution of uncertainty and recursive models of ambiguity aver-
  sion,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (3), 1039–1074.

Sullivan, Patrick S, Amy Lansky, Amy Drake, HITS-2000 Investigators et al., “Failure to
  return for HIV test results among persons at high risk for HIV infection: results from a multistate
  interview project,” JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 2004, 35 (5),
  511–518.

Thornton, Rebecca L, “The demand for, and impact of, learning HIV status,” The American
  economic review, 2008, 98 (5), 1829–1863.

Woodford, Michael, “Information-constrained state-dependent pricing,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2009, 56, S100–S124.



                                                36
Zimmermann, Florian, “Clumped or piecewise? evidence on preferences for information,” Man-
  agement Science, 2014, 61 (4), 740–753.




                                            37
                      Table 2: Summary statistics by terciles of logins and income


                                                 Log in terciles                   Income terciles


                                          (1)         (2)           (3)     (1)         (2)          (3)
     Number of individual logins          0.00        0.01          0.10    0.02        0.04      0.05
     Number of household logins           0.01        0.01          0.11    0.03        0.04      0.06
     Propensity to log in                0.1%        0.4%          6.1%    1.2%        2.3%      3.1%
       smartphone log in                 0.0%        0.1%          2.0%    0.4%        0.7%      1.0%
       desktop log in                    0.1%        0.3%          4.4%    0.8%        1.7%      2.2%
       tabloid log in                    0.0%        0.0%          0.2%    0.0%        0.1%      0.1%
     Monthly income                       3217       3543          3939     448        2995      7240
     Monthly regular income               3099       3426          3822     428        2933      6969
38




     Monthly irregular income               92         90            92       20         60       193
     Monthly financial fees                -24         -23           -19     -14        -22       -30
     Overdraft                           -1740       -1712         -1557   -1453       -1453     -2046
     Savings account balance              2527       3220          4979    2428        2924      4939
     Current account balance              1991       2060          1877    1590        1378      2837
     Credit card balance                 -1204       -1313         -1748   -1041       -1099     -1989
     Overdraft limit                      2446       2534           2546   1993        2067      3311
     Credit card limit                    3501       4080           5891   3178        3304      6492
     Cash holdings                        4518       5280           6856   4017        4302      7776
     Liquidity                            9261       10582         13545    8146       8575      15591
     Monthly discretionary spending       1384        1478          1578    923        1432      2080
     Age                                  41.7        42.2          40.7    37.3        42.2      45.1
     Female                               52%         48%           43%     51%         54%       38%
     Spouse                               19%         24%           40%     25%         28%       30%
Figure 2: Distribution of logins over the month and by day of week (Sunday to Saturday) by men
(M) and women (F)




                                             39
             Salary                        Rent benefits                    Loans write-offs




            Pensions                        Investments                    Lottery payments




      Tax rebates or refunds               Child benefits                    Parental leave




     Unemployment benefits                 Loans received                    Payday loans


Figure 3: Average logins on regular days (left bars) and days with different income arrivals (right
bars) by men (M) and women (F)




                                                40
             Figure 4: Propensity to log in around paydays of regular salary payments

  Linear probability model of propensity to log in on dummies for the two or four weeks around regular
paycheck arrival controlling for individual and calendar (month-by-year, day-of-month, day-of-week, and
               holiday) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.




Figure 5: Propensity to log in around paydays of irregular payments and plausibly exogenous
payments

 Linear probability model of propensity to log in on dummies for the two weeks around irregular income
  arrival or plausibly exogenous income arrival (lotteries and tax rebates) controlling for individual and
  calendar (month-by-year, day-of-month, day-of-week, and holiday) fixed effects. Standard errors are
                                     clustered at the individual level.




                                                    41
Figure 6: Differences in propensity to log in on paydays versus other days as functions of individual
cash holdings and liquidity

    Coefficients on day of paycheck of propensity to log in in linear probability model for ten deciles of
individual cash (positive current account balance and savings balance) or liquidity (current account balance
   plus credit card balance plus overdraft and credit limits plus savings account balance) relative to own
     history of individual spending or liquidity controlling for individual and calendar (month-by-year,
                            day-of-month, day-of-week, and holiday) fixed effects.




Figure 7: Differences in propensity to log in on paydays versus other days as functions of individual
spending and as a function of days since regular paydays

Left side: Coefficients on day of paycheck of propensity to log in in linear probability model for ten deciles
     of individual spending relative to own history of individual spending controlling for individual and
    calendar (month-by-year, day-of-month, day-of-week, and holiday) fixed effects. Right side: Linear
 probability model of propensity to log in on days since regular paycheck arrival controlling for individual
            and calendar (month-by-year, day-of-month, day-of-week, and holiday) fixed effects.




                                                     42
                   Figure 8: Propensity to log in around credit card bill due dates

Linear probability model of propensity to log in on dummies for the two weeks around credit card bill due
 dates controlling for individual and calendar fixed effects (on the left side we control for month-by-year,
  day-of-week, and holiday fixed effects, on the right side we control for month-by-year, day-of-month,
       day-of-week, and holiday fixed effects). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.




Figure 9: Differences in propensity to log in on paydays versus other days as functions of individual
spending and on credit card due dates versus other days as functions of individual liquidity and
endogenous log in response before reductions in credit card balances

Left side: Coefficients on day of credit card due date of propensity to log in in linear probability model for
 ten deciles of individual liquidity relative to own history of individual liquidity controlling for individual
     and calendar (month-by-year, day-of-month, day-of-week, and holiday) fixed effects. Right side:
                        Endogenous logins before reductions in credit card balances.




                                                      43
                              Table 3: Effect of Paydays and Credit Card Bill Due Dates on the Propensity to Log in

                                                                Log in Dummy                                                           Total Logins
                                            (1)           (2)                  (3)         (4)                    (5)            (6)                  (7)         (8)
     Paycheck                           0.0094***     0.0082***                                               0.0206***      0.0185***
                                         (0.0001)      (0.0004)                                                (0.0003)       (0.0011)
     Credit Card                                                         0.0036***      0.0052***                                                0.0081***     .0112***
     Bill Due                                                             (0.0001)       (0.0004)                                                 (0.0005)      (0.0009)
     individual fixed effects               X             X                    X            X                      X             X                    X           X
     month-by-year fixed effects            X             X                    X            X                      X             X                    X           X
     day-of-month fixed effects             X             X                    X            X                      X             X                    X           X
     day-of-week fixed effects              X             X                    X            X                      X             X                    X           X
     holiday dummies                        X             X                    X            X                      X             X                    X           X
     liquidity                                            X                                 X                                    X                                X
     #individuals                        14,048         3,493              14,067        12,326                 14,048         3,493               14,067      12,326
     #obs                              24,752,576     2,553,383          24,786,054     9,010,306             24,752,576     2,553,383           24,786,054   9,010,306
     #obs per individual                 1,762           731               1,762           731                  1,762           731                1,762         731
44




     Note: ∗ p<0.1, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗ p<0.01           Linear probability regression of propensity to log in or total logins on a dummy for the day of paycheck arrival or
     credit card bill due date controlling for individual and calendar fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
                Figure 10: Propensity to log in by deciles of spending and savings

 Quadratic fit of logit regression coefficients for each decile of individual spending or savings account
balance relative to individual’s own history of spending or saving controlling for individual and calendar
                                                fixed effects.




       Figure 11: Propensity to log in by deciles of individual cash and liquidity holdings

 Quadratic fit of logit regression coefficients for each decile of individual cash (positive current account
balance plus savings account balance) or liquidity (current account balance plus credit card balance plus
 overdraft and credit limits plus savings account balance) relative to individual’s own history of cash or
                       liquidity controlling for individual and calendar fixed effects.




                                                    45
Figure 12: Propensity to log in by deciles of individual overdraft and by the current account balance

 Quadratic fit of logit regression coefficients for each decile of individual overdraft relative to individual’s
  own history of overdrafts controlling for individual and calendar fixed effects. Binned current account
balances in a cross-sectional comparison including only individuals who have negative and positive current
                                               account balances.




                                                      46
