                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GLOBAL EVIDENCE ON ECONOMIC PREFERENCES

                                           Armin Falk
                                          Anke Becker
                                        Thomas Dohmen
                                         Benjamin Enke
                                        David B. Huffman
                                           Uwe Sunde

                                       Working Paper 23943
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23943


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017




We thank the editor, Andrei Shleifer, and three anonymous referees. For comments and
discussions we are grateful to Johannes Hermle, Benedikt Herrmann, Fabian Kosse, Guido
Neidhoefer, and seminar participants at Caltech, CESifo Area Conference on Behavioural
Economics, Columbia Business School, EALE conference in Ghent, Bozen-Bolzano, IZA Bonn,
LISER, LMU Munich, Maastricht, SITE Experimental Economics, Stockholm, UC San Diego,
Bologna, Copenhagen, Konstanz, Toulouse, Virginia, and Berlin. Ammar Mahran provided
outstanding research assistance and Markus Antony outstanding administrative support. Falk
acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council through ERC # 209214.
Dohmen acknowledges financial support from NWO Vidi grant 452-10-006, and from Netspar.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Armin Falk, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David B. Huffman, and
Uwe Sunde. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Global Evidence on Economic Preferences
Armin Falk, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David B. Huffman, and Uwe
Sunde
NBER Working Paper No. 23943
October 2017
JEL No. D0,D03,D9

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies the global variation in economic preferences. For this purpose, we present the
Global Preference Survey (GPS), an experimentally validated survey dataset of time preference,
risk preference, positive and negative reciprocity, altruism, and trust from 80,000 individuals in
76 countries. The data reveal substantial heterogeneity in preferences across countries, but even
larger within-country heterogeneity. Across individuals, preferences vary with age, gender, and
cognitive ability, yet these relationships appear partly country specific. At the country level, the
data reveal correlations between preferences and bio-geographic and cultural variables such as
agricultural suitability, language structure, and religion. Variation in preferences is also correlated
with economic outcomes and behaviors. Within countries and subnational regions, preferences
are linked to individual savings decisions, labor market choices, and prosocial behaviors. Across
countries, preferences vary with aggregate outcomes ranging from per capita income, to
entrepreneurial activities, to the frequency of armed conflicts.

Armin Falk                                                       Benjamin Enke
Department of Economics                                          Department of Economics
University of Bonn                                               Harvard University
Adenauerallee 24-42, 53113 Bonn                                  Littauer M008
armin.falk@uni-bonn.de                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                                 and NBER
Anke Becker                                                      enke@fas.harvard.edu
Harvard University
Department of Human Evolutionary Biology                         David B. Huffman
11 Divinity Ave                                                  Economics Department
Cambridge MA 02138                                               University of Pittsburgh
ankebecker@fas.harvard.edu                                       230 S. Bouquet St.
                                                                 Pittsburgh, PA 15260
Thomas Dohmen                                                    huffmand@pitt.edu
Department of Economics
University of Bonn                                               Uwe Sunde
Adenauerallee 24-42, 53113 Bonn                                  University of Munich
t.dohmen@uni-bonn.de                                             Department of Economics
                                                                 Schackstr 4
                                                                 80539 Munich
                                                                 GERMANY
                                                                 Uwe.Sunde@econ.lmu.de
1     Introduction
Many theories of human behavior, in economics and neighboring disciplines, assume that a set of
preferences drives individual decision-making. This includes preferences about risk, the timing
of rewards, and in the social domain, reciprocity, altruism, and trust. Given the importance of
preferences in economists’ conceptual framework, a substantial empirical literature has focused
on understanding the potential determinants and consequences of preference variation. While
this literature has produced many insights about individual-level heterogeneity in preferences in
certain populations, less is known about the global variation in preferences. This partly reflects
the lack of a global data set, representative at the country level, with measures specifically
designed to capture economic preferences.
    This paper introduces such a dataset, the Global Preference Survey (GPS). The empirical
analysis is motivated by a set of questions about the extent and nature of global preference
heterogeneity, at different levels of aggregation: Do countries differ in terms of average prefer-
ences? Are certain preferences correlated, leading to preference bundles? How large is cross-
country variation in preferences relative to within country variation? Regarding the potential
determinants of preference heterogeneity, do the GPS preference measures vary with individ-
ual characteristics like gender, age, and cognitive ability? To what extent are these differences
universal, or more country-specific? Are country-level preference profiles related to differences
in geography, culture, language, or religion? Turning to the relationship between preferences
and outcomes, how does individual-level heterogeneity in financial, labor market, or prosocial
choices vary with preferences around the world? Are differences in aggregate preference pro-
files correlated with the cross-country variation in outcomes such as economic development,
charitable activities, or violent conflict?
    This paper explores these questions by making use of the core features of the GPS: (i) cov-
erage of 76 countries that represent approximately 90 percent of the world population; (ii)
representative population samples within each country for a total of 80,000 respondents, (iii)
measures designed to capture time preference, risk preference, altruism, positive reciprocity,
negative reciprocity, and trust, based on an ex ante experimental validation procedure (Falk et
al., 2016) as well as pre-tests in culturally heterogeneous countries, (iv) standardized elicitation
and translation techniques through the pre-existing infrastructure of a global polling institute,
Gallup. Upon publication, the data will be made publicly available online. The data on individual
preferences are complemented by a comprehensive set of covariates provided by the Gallup
World Poll 2012.
    The analysis begins by describing the nature of the heterogeneity in preferences, both across
and within countries. Many of the world’s most patient populations are located in Europe or
the English-speaking world, while risk taking is particularly prevalent in large parts of Africa
and the Middle East. Prosocial preferences are particularly pronounced throughout Asia and
relatively weak in Sub-Saharan Africa. The various preference measures are also correlated,
giving rise to distinct “preference profiles” of groups of countries: Patience and willingness to


                                                 1
take risks are one pair of correlated preferences, and the prosocial traits of positive reciprocity,
altruism, and trust form another grouping. While the between-country variation in preferences
is substantial, within-country variation is larger, suggesting that individual characteristics are
even more important for explaining preference differences than national borders.
    The analysis next turns to a more systematic, regression-based analysis of potential determi-
nants of preference variation. The results establish that, at the individual level, preferences vary
systematically with gender, cognitive ability, and age. For example, women are more impatient,
less risk tolerant, and more prosocial than men. Cognitive skills are uniformly positively linked
to patience, risk taking, and social preferences, and all preferences are subject to age patterns.
At the same time, the relationships between sociodemographics and preferences hide consid-
erable heterogeneity across countries: while some relationships, such as between risk aversion
and gender, go in the same direction in almost all countries, others, such as the age profile for
patience, appear to depend on the level of development.
    Prior research has articulated and tested various hypotheses about how (population-level)
preference profiles might be determined by geographic or cultural variables, including a “cul-
ture of honor”, a “Protestant ethic”, a “savings-linguistics” hypothesis, or relationships between
agricultural conditions and preferences (e.g., Weber, 1930; Nisbett and Cohen, 1996; Tabellini,
2008; Chen, 2013; Galor and Özak, 2016; Galor et al., 2017; Litina, 2016). The GPS allows in-
vestigating the correlations between all preferences and such geographic and cultural variables.
Regarding biological and geographic conditions, patience, trust, and negative reciprocity are all
significantly positively correlated with absolute latitude and the presence of large domesticable
animals, the latter result broadly in line with the culture of honor hypothesis. Trust is signifi-
cantly decreasing in different measures of agricultural suitability. Turning to cultural variables,
patience is strongly and significantly correlated with Protestantism and a linguistic structure
called future time reference, in line with previously articulated hypotheses and evidence. More-
over, different measures of individualism are positively correlated with patience.
    In a next step, we explore the relationships between preferences and individual-level be-
haviors and outcomes that economists have emphasized as being potentially driven by risk,
time, and social preferences. The data show that patient individuals are more likely to save and
have higher educational attainment; more risk tolerant individuals are more likely to be self-
employed and to be smokers; and social preferences are predictive of a broad range of proso-
cial behaviors and outcomes such as donating, volunteering time, assisting strangers, helping
friends and relatives, or family structure. These relationships of preferences with outcomes are
qualitatively similar across almost all countries, which provides an additional, out of context
check of the ability of the GPS measures to capture behaviorally relevant heterogeneity across
a wide range of cultures.
    Finally, the paper studies the correlations between country-level preferences and a selected
set of outcome variables that previous literatures have suggested may be related to preferences.
In a first step, we focus on the relationship between preferences and economic development. An
extensive line of work has studied the relationship between trust and per capita income (e.g.,


                                                 2
Knack and Keefer, 1997; Algan and Cahuc, 2010), and a considerable theoretical literature has
emphasized the role of time preference for development. In the GPS data, trust is significantly
correlated with development; at the same time, the relationship between patience and income
is much stronger, in terms of both quantitative magnitude and statistical significance. For exam-
ple, when both patience and trust are inserted into a joint regression, trust loses significance.
Moving to additional aggregate outcomes, we establish that risk taking is significantly correlated
with proxies for entrepreneurial activities, in line with the within-country correlation between
risk taking and self-employment. Average social preferences correlate with donations and volun-
teering across countries, again akin to the corresponding within-country results. Finally, average
negative reciprocity in a country is strongly correlated with the frequency of armed conflicts.
    The findings of this paper tie into several different literatures in behavioral and experimental
economics, cultural economics, and long-run development. Within behavioral and experimen-
tal economics, researchers have investigated both potential individual-level determinants and
outcomes of preference variation, though typically in smaller and more specialized samples.
Work on potential determinants includes Barsky et al. (1997); Frederick (2005); Dohmen et al.
(2008); Croson and Gneezy (2009); Dohmen et al. (2010, 2011), while research on outcomes
has been conducted by Barsky et al. (1997); Ventura (2003); Kirby and Petry (2004); Eckel et
al. (2005); Bonin et al. (2007); Chabris et al. (2008); Guiso and Paiella (2008); Dohmen et al.
(2009); Meier and Sprenger (2010); Rustagi et al. (2010); Tanaka et al. (2010); Sutter et al.
(2013); Golsteyn et al. (2014); Kosfeld and Rustagi (2015); Åkerlund et al. (2016). This paper
speaks to open questions in the literature, e.g., whether certain gender differences in prefer-
ences are relatively universal or specific to certain cultures or development levels, or perhaps
the product of publication bias (Gneezy et al., 2009; Niederle, 2014).
    In cultural economics and political economy, this paper is most closely related to research
that has measured variation in preferences across societies by focusing on small selected groups
such as small-scale societies or university students (Henrich et al., 2001, 2006, 2010; Apicella et
al., 2014; Rieger et al., 2014; Talhelm et al., 2014; Vieider et al., 2015b). The GPS has the poten-
tial to open up research agendas on the cultural origins of preference variation, something that
has been difficult thus far given the absence of representative cross-country data on preferences.
Another related literature has investigated the role of culture or geography in shaping economic
behavior, but focusing on variables such as female labor force participation, fertility, individual-
ism, and future-orientation (Giuliano, 2007; Fernández and Fogli, 2009; Gorodnichenko and
Roland, 2011; Alesina and Giuliano, 2013; Chen, 2013; Alesina et al., 2015; Galor and Özak,
2016). Finally, the results on the cross-country relationships between preferences and outcomes
naturally tie into the literature on comparative development, which makes increasing use of ar-
guments about cultural variation (Ashraf and Galor, 2013; Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013; Galor
and Özak, 2016). While this literature has largely focused on trust, the GPS data may open up
the investigation of additional hypotheses.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides details on the GPS
dataset and compare the data with other commonly available data sources. Section 3 presents


                                                 3
descriptives on the global preference variation. Section 4 studies the relationship between pref-
erences and potential determinants of preference variation, both at the individual and at the
country level. Section 5 investigates the relationships between preferences and economic out-
comes and Section 6 concludes.



2     Dataset

2.1    General Data Characteristics
The GPS data were collected within the framework of the 2012 Gallup World Poll, a survey that
includes representative population samples in a large number of countries, and asks about social
and economic issues, on an annual basis. This section discusses some noteworthy characteristics
of the data. In addition, Online Appendix A contains an extensive documentation of the data-
collection process and details on the construction of the preference measures.
    One important feature of the GPS data is that it measures preferences for a nationally
representative sample for each of the 76 countries covered. Thus, it is possible to study how
preferences vary within the population of a given country, and also to construct country level
averages, shedding light on how preferences vary across countries. The median sample size was
1,000 participants per country.¹ Respondents were selected through probability sampling; ex-
post representativeness of the data can be achieved using weights provided by Gallup. In total,
the sample involves preference measures for more than 80,000 participants worldwide.
    The 76 countries included in the GPS constitute a geographically and culturally diverse set
of nations. They were chosen with the aim of providing a globally representative sample. The
collection of countries spans all continents, various cultures, and different levels of development.
Specifically, it includes 15 countries from the Americas, 25 from Europe, 22 from Asia and Pacific,
as well as 14 African countries, 11 of which are Sub-Saharan. This set of countries covers about
90% of both the world population and global income.
    Another feature of the GPS data is a standardized data collection protocol across countries,
achieved through several steps. Before the 2012 World Poll, Gallup conducted pre-tests of the
GPS survey items in 22 countries of various cultural heritage. This was in order to ensure the
implementability of the preference module in the available survey time of 7 to 8 minutes, and to
test whether respondents of culturally and economically heterogeneous background understand
and interpret the items adequately (see Online Appendix A.3 for details). For all countries, there
was a translation of all survey items from the original language, to the local language, and back
again in an iterative process; this is Gallup’s regular translation scheme, to ensure comparable
meaning of the questions across languages. Monetary values used in the survey questions were
also calibrated according to median household income for each country, so as to hold monetary



    ¹Notable exceptions include China (2,574 obs.), Haiti (504 obs.), India (2,539 obs.), Iran (2,507
obs.), Russia (1,498 obs.), and Suriname (504 obs.).


                                                 4
stakes constant.² Finally, most of the interviews for the World Poll 2012 took place using the
same response mode across individuals and countries – face-to-face interviews – although in
18 countries, telephone interviews were also used. Table 11 in Online Appendix A shows the
countries included in the GPS, along with numbers of observations and the survey mode.


2.2     Preference Measures
The GPS was designed to measure a set of preferences that play a central role in economic theory.
While economic models abstract away from many details of preferences, they explicitly model
preferences over certain attributes – timing, risk, and payoffs of others – that are typically rele-
vant for the trade-offs involved in economic decisions. Accordingly, the GPS includes measures
of time preference, risk preference, and three conceptually distinct types of social preferences:
unconditional altruism, positive reciprocity, and negative reciprocity. The GPS also includes a
novel measure of trust.³
    The GPS preference measures are based on twelve survey items, which were selected in an
initial survey validation study (see Falk et al., 2016, for details). The validation procedure in-
volved conducting multiple incentivized choice experiments for each preference, and testing the
relative abilities of a wide range of different question wordings and formats to predict behavior
in these choice experiments. The particular items used to construct the GPS preference mea-
sures were selected based on optimal performance out of menus of alternative items (for details
see Falk et al., 2016). Experiments provide a valuable benchmark for selecting survey items, be-
cause they can approximate the ideal choice situations, specified in economic theory, in which
individuals make choices in controlled decision contexts. Experimental measures are very costly,
however, to implement in a globally representative sample, whereas survey measures are much
less costly.⁴ Selecting survey measures that can stand in for incentivized revealed preference
measures leverages the strengths of both approaches.
    The survey items are summarized in Table 1. For most preferences the optimization proce-
dure resulted in a combination of two survey items, involving one qualitative item, which is
more abstract, and one quantitative item, which puts the respondent into a precisely defined

     ²As a benchmark, we used the monetary amounts in Euro that were offered in the validation study
in Germany. Since monetary amounts used in the validation study with the German sample were round
numbers to facilitate easy calculations (e.g., the expected return of a lottery with equal chances of win-
ning and losing) and to allow for easy comparisons (e.g., 100 Euro today versus 107.50 in 12 months),
we also rounded monetary amounts in all other countries to the next “round” number. While this nec-
essarily resulted in some (very minor) variations in the real stake size between countries, it minimized
cross-country differences in the understanding of the quantitative items due to difficulties in assessing
the involved monetary amounts.
     ³Although at least partly a belief rather than a preference, trust has also been argued to be funda-
mental for a wide range of economic transactions (e.g., Arrow, 1972).
     ⁴For example, the measure should ideally involve large menus of choices, to give tight identification
of preferences, but this is costly in terms of time. Also, to allow real choices, experiments should involve
real stakes, but this is financially costly on a large scale. Data sets that contain experimental preference
measures for several countries typically come from small- or medium-scale experiments and are based
on student or other convenience samples (e.g., Rieger et al., 2014; Vieider et al., 2015b,a).


                                                     5
                                  Table 1: Survey items of the GPS

   Preference                                Item Description                              Weight
                   Intertemporal choice sequence using staircase method                     0.71
   Patience
                   Self-assessment: Willingness to wait                                     0.29
                   Lottery choice sequence using staircase method                           0.47
   Risk taking
                   Self-assessment: Willingness to take risks in general                    0.53
   Positive        Gift in exchange for help                                                0.52
   reciprocity     Self-assessment: Willingness to return a favor                           0.48
   Negative        Self-assessment: Willingness to take revenge                             0.37
   reciprocity     Self-assessment: Willingness to punish unfair behavior towards self     0.265
                   Self-assessment: Willingness to punish unfair behavior towards others   0.265
                   Donation decision                                                        0.54
   Altruism
                   Self-assessment: Willingness to give to good causes                      0.46
   Trust           Self-assessment: People have only the best intentions                      1
  Notes. See Online Appendix A.6 for the wording of the questions and Online Appendix A.9 for a
  discussion of the weights.


hypothetical choice scenario. The quantitative items more closely resemble the choice-based ex-
periment measures, in that they hold stakes, probabilities, and relevant information conditions
constant, helping deliver comparable measures across different individuals and cultures. At the
same time, the qualitative items also have explanatory power for behavior in the experiments.
    For each preference, the survey items are combined into a single preference measure using
the weights that (endogenously) emerged from this experimental validation procedure. In par-
ticular, the experimental validation procedure allows an analysis of which linear combination
of survey items performs best in predicting the corresponding experimental behavior. These
weights are then used to compute the final preference measures, in line with the goal of con-
structing variables that have experimental counterparts. At the same time, future research using
the GPS may wish to focus on selected subsets of our items by, e.g., focusing attention on the
quantitative survey formats.
    Finally, for ease of interpretation, each preference measure is standardized at the individual
level, so that, by construction, each preference has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one in the individual-level world sample.


Time Preference. The measure of time preference is derived from the combination of re-
sponses to two survey measures, one with a quantitative and one with a qualitative format.
The quantitative survey measure consists of a series of five interdependent hypothetical binary
choices between immediate and delayed financial rewards, a format commonly referred to as
“staircase” (or “unfolding brackets”) procedure (Cornsweet, 1962). In each of the five questions,
participants had to decide between receiving a payment today or larger payments in 12 months:

       Suppose you were given the choice between receiving a payment today or a payment in
       12 months. We will now present to you five situations. The payment today is the same
       in each of these situations. The payment in 12 months is different in every situation.
       For each of these situations we would like to know which one you would choose. Please

                                                 6
      assume there is no inflation, i.e., future prices are the same as today’s prices. Please
      consider the following: Would you rather receive amount x today or y in 12 months?

    The immediate payment x remained constant in all subsequent four questions, but the
delayed payment y was increased or decreased depending on previous choices (see Online
Appendix A.6.1 for an exposition of the entire sequence of binary decisions). In essence, by
adjusting the delayed payment according to previous choices, the questions “zoom in” around
the respondent’s point of indifference between the smaller immediate and the larger delayed
payment and make efficient use of limited and costly survey time. The sequence of questions
has 32 possible ordered outcomes. In the international survey, monetary amounts x and y were
expressed in the respective local currency, scaled relative to median household income in the
given country.
    The qualitative measure of patience is given by the respondents’ self-assessment regarding
their willingness to wait on an 11-point Likert scale, asking “how willing are you to give up
something that is beneficial for you today in order to benefit more from that in the future?”. As
Table 1 indicates, the quantitative item has a weight of 71% in the time preference measure.


Risk Preference. Risk preferences were also elicited through a series of related quantitative
questions as well as one qualitative question. Just as with patience, the quantitative measure
consists of a series of five binary choices. Choices were between a fixed lottery, in which the
individual could win x or zero, and varying sure payments, y:

      Please imagine the following situation. You can choose between a sure payment of a
      particular amount of money, or a draw, where you would have an equal chance of
      getting amount x or getting nothing. We will present to you five different situations.
      What would you prefer: a draw with a 50 percent chance of receiving amount x,
      and the same 50 percent chance of receiving nothing, or the amount of y as a sure
      payment?

    Choice of the lottery resulted in an increase of the sure amount being offered in the next
question, and vice versa, thereby zooming in around the individual’s certainty equivalent. On-
line Appendix A.6.2 contains an exposition of the entire sequence of survey items. The qual-
itative item asks for the respondents’ self-assessment of their willingness to take risks on an
eleven-point scale (“In general, how willing are you to take risks?”). This qualitative subjective
self-assessment has previously been shown to be predictive of risk-taking behavior in the field
in a representative sample (Dohmen et al., 2011) as well as of incentivized experimental risk-
taking across countries in student samples (Vieider et al., 2015b). The qualitative item and the
outcome of the quantitative staircase measure were combined through roughly equal weights
(Table 1).


Positive Reciprocity. Respondents’ propensities to act in a positively reciprocal way were
also measured using one quantitative item and one qualitative question. First, respondents were

                                                 7
presented a choice scenario in which they were asked to imagine that they got lost in an un-
familiar area and that a stranger – when asked for directions – offered to take them to their
destination. Respondents were then asked which out of six presents (worth between 5 and 30
euros, or the respective country-specific equivalents) they would give to the stranger as a “thank
you”. Second, respondents were asked to provide a self-assessment about how willing they are
to return a favor on an 11-point Likert scale. These two items receive roughly equal weights
(Table 1).


Negative Reciprocity. Negative reciprocity was elicited through three self-assessments. First,
respondents were asked how willing they are to take revenge if they are treated very unjustly,
even if doing so comes at a cost (0-10). The second and third item probed respondents about
their willingness to punish someone for unfair behavior, either towards themselves or towards a
third person.⁵ This last item captures prosocial punishment and hence a concept akin to norm
enforcement. These three items receive weights of about one third each (Table 1).


Altruism. Altruism was measured through a combination of one qualitative and one quanti-
tative item, both of which are related to donations. The qualitative question asked respondents
how willing they would be to give to good causes without expecting anything in return on an
11-point scale. The quantitative scenario depicted a situation in which the respondent unex-
pectedly received 1,000 euros and asked them to state how much of this amount they would
donate. These two items were weighted about equally (Table 1).


Trust. The trust measure is based on one item, which asked respondents whether they assume
that other people only have the best intentions (Likert scale, 0-10). The item was a strong
predictor of trusting behavior in incentivized trust games, in the survey design stage. Time
constraints and the fact that there already exists a global measure of trust in the World Values
Survey (WVS) data set determined the choice to have only one item measuring trust.


2.3     Further Variables of Interest
The Gallup World Poll includes a wide range of individual-level background variables such as
(i) extensive sociodemographic information (e.g., age, gender, family structure, religious affili-
ation, location of residence, or migration background including country of origin), (ii) a variety
of self-reported behaviors and economic outcome variables including income, educational at-
tainment, savings, labor market decisions, health, and behavior in social interactions, and (iii)


    ⁵In the original survey design exercise, the second and third item were collapsed into one question
which asked people how willing they are to punish others, without specifying who was treated unfairly
(Falk et al., 2016). However, in the pilot in 22 countries, a number of respondents indicated that this
lack of specificity confused them, so that we broke this survey item up into two questions. Accordingly,
the weights for deriving an individual-level index of negative reciprocity are determined by dividing the
OLS weight for the original item by two.


                                                   8
opinions and attitudes about issues such as local and global politics, local institutional qual-
ity, economic prospects, safety, or happiness. The data contain regional identifiers (usually at
the state or province level), hence allowing for cross-regional analyses within countries. The
GPS survey module also elicited a self-reported proxy for cognitive skills by asking people to as-
sess themselves regarding the statement “I am good at math” on an 11-point Likert scale. The
publicly available GPS dataset includes all preference measures as well as information on re-
spondents’ age, gender, cognitive skills, and country of residence. In addition, the data contain
Gallup’s individual-level identifier, so that the preference measures can be matched to Gallup’s
entire World Poll dataset.


2.4     The GPS as a Complement to Existing Global Surveys
Questions in existing global surveys, although designed for other purposes, could potentially
serve as proxies for the set of preferences measured in the GPS. This could arise due to hap-
penstance, or because a question was designed to measure a trait studied in another discipline,
which has some conceptual overlap with the notion of preferences as defined in economic the-
ory. A challenge, however, is distinguishing weak from strong proxies, when relying on intuition.
One way that the GPS complements existing surveys is by providing a new source of data to
assess the validity of potential preference proxies.
    This subsection presents results from such a validation exercise, for measures in the WVS
and the data of Hofstede (2001), two widely used global surveys that are designed to measure
traits that might be related to preferences: attitudes, beliefs and personality traits.⁶ The WVS
provides individual-level responses for representative samples from a wide range of countries,
while the Hofstede data includes measures for a similar range of countries, but at the country-
level, and based on non-representative samples (mainly IBM employees).
    Identifying candidate preference proxies in these data sets involved looking for key-words,
and types of trade-offs, that seemed plausibly related to a respective preference. This initial
identification was necessarily based on intuition. The procedure did not yield any WVS questions
or Hofstede cultural dimensions that asked about something that seemed related to positive or
negative reciprocity. It did lead to identifying measures that might possibly proxy for the other
preferences, with varying degrees of plausibility.
    In the WVS, the question that seems most closely related to time preference is an item
designed to capture “Long Term Orientation” in terms of childrearing. Specifically, the survey
asks: “Here is a list of qualities that children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any,
do you consider to be especially important?” This variable is coded as 1 if the individual lists
“thrift, saving money and things,” regardless of what other qualities the respondent lists. For

    ⁶There are various regional surveys, including the Barometer surveys of different world regions, and
the European Values Survey, which have similar features to the WVS. The former mainly contain various
measures of trust, whereas the latter is basically a regional version of the WVS, and thus includes similar
measures to the ones that we analyze in the WVS. These surveys have a more limited geographic coverage
than the WVS.


                                                    9
risk preference, there is a seemingly plausible proxy in the WVS, which asks the respondent to
judge their similarity with a hypothetical person described as follows: “Adventure and taking
risks are important to this person; to have an exciting life.” This WVS question was derived from
the Schwartz Values Survey (Schwartz, 2012), and designed to capture a universal “value of
stimulation.” A WVS survey item that seems to come closest to capturing altruism, albeit from a
particular, societal perspective, asks respondents how similar they are to a hypothetical person
for whom “[i]t is important [...] to do something for the good of society.” The WVS also includes
a well-known measure of trust, which we compare to the GPS trust measure. The WVS measure
asks whether the respondent thinks “most people can be trusted” or whether they would rather
say that “you can’t be too careful.”
    The Hofstede data set contains various cultural dimensions (Hofstede, 2001) that are com-
posed of collections of qualitative survey items. Two cultural dimensions have labels that are
evocative of time and risk preference, respectively: The “Long Term Orientation” (LTO) cultural
dimension, which is occasionally used in economics, and the “Uncertainty Avoidance” dimen-
sion. Both of these measures include individual items that seem distant from either time or risk
preference, but the data do not include responses to individual items so it is not possible to use
a sub-set of items for preference proxies.⁷
    Table 2 reports the country-level correlations. Starting with the WVS, the table shows that
the questions for patience and altruism are only weakly correlated with the corresponding GPS
preference measures. This might reflect the fact that the LTO item in the WVS is about childrea-
ring rather than individual patience, and the altruism question is about a particular, societal
perspective. On the other hand, the WVS value of stimulation measure, and the WVS trust ques-
tion, are significantly positively correlated with the GPS risk preference and trust measures,
respectively.⁸ The Hofstede long term orientation and uncertainty avoidance dimensions also
turn out to be significantly correlated with the corresponding GPS preference measures, per-
haps surprisingly given that some of the individual items underlying the cultural dimensions
appear far removed from preferences.


     ⁷The four items for long term orientation are: (1) value a person places on “doing a service to a
friend;” (2) value of “thrift (not spending more than needed);” (3) agreement with “persistent efforts
are the surest way to results;” (4) an item asking “How proud are you to be a citizen of your country?”.
The uncertainty avoidance dimension consists of: (1) “How often do you feel nervous or tense?” ; (2)
“All-in-all, how would you describe your health these days?”; (3) agreement with “One can be a good
manager without having a precise answer to every question that a subordinate may raise about his or
her work;” (4) agreement with “a company’s or organization’s rules should not be broken – not even
when the employee thinks breaking the rule would be in the organization’s best interest.”
     ⁸If the WVS candidate proxies capture preferences, one might also expect them to be related to
determinants, and economic outcomes, in a similar way to the measures in the GPS. Tables 19 through
20 in Online Appendix I explore these relationships. For the WVS value of stimulation measure, and the
trust measure, we find that the relationships to determinants and outcomes are broadly similar to those
obtained with the GPS risk and trust measures. For the candidate altruism and time preference proxies in
the WVS, by contrast, the variation with determinants and outcomes is different from the corresponding
GPS measures. For example, the WVS time preference proxy has the opposite gender difference to the
GPS patience measure, and is negatively related to educational attainment at the individual level, and
GDP at the country level, the opposite of what one would expect if it were to capture patience.


                                                  10
Table 2: Relationships between preference proxies in the WVS and Hofstede (2001) and GPS measures

                                                       Spearman’s rho     p-Value   Obs.
              Correlations with GPS patience
                   WVS Long Term Orientation                 0.07         0.59      60
                    Hofstede Long Term Orientation           0.43         <0.01     60
              Correlations with GPS risk taking
                    WVS Value of Stimulation                 0.32          0.03     48
                    Hofstede Uncertainty Avoidance           -0.34         0.01     60
              Ccorrelation with GPS altruism
                   WVS Altruism                              0.19          0.27     35
              Correlation with GPS trust
                    WVS Trust                                0.49         <0.01     60


    In sum, the exercise helps distinguish weaker and stronger preference proxies in existing
data sets. It provides evidence for the meaningfulness of the widely used WVS trust measure,
and points to a potentially valuable proxy for risk preference for the WVS set of countries. The
results also lend some support for using two of the Hofstede dimensions as preference proxies,
although the latter are not available on the individual level or for representative samples.
    The GPS also complements existing surveys in another way, as it contains data on the whole
set of preferences, including positive and negative reciprocity, at the individual, regional, and
country level. In contrast to existing datasets, this allows the exploration of the correlation struc-
ture among multiple preference dimensions, and investigations of how relationships between
preferences and outcomes might be subject to omitted variable concerns because preferences
are intra-correlated.



3     Distribution of Preferences Around the Globe
Figures 1 and 2 show how the country averages for each preference compare to the world
average.⁹ Each preference is normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation one in
the individual-level data. Country averages are computed using sampling weights provided by
Gallup. In each figure, white denotes countries in which the country-level average is within
-0.05 to 0.05 of a standard deviation of the world mean. Darker blue indicates higher values of
a given trait, while darker red colors indicate lower values. Grey countries are not included in
the GPS. To provide a complementary perspective, Table 3 provides information on the average
preferences for various groupings of countries.




    ⁹Country-level averages are calculated using the sampling weights provided by Gallup. The sampling
weights ensure that our measures are representative of the population at the country level. See Online
Appendix A.4.3 for more details.


                                                 11
                                       Patience




                                      Risk Taking




                                 Positive Reciprocity




< − 0.5          −0.35 − −0.25      −0.05 − 0.05        0.25 − 0.35        > 0.5     NA



          Figure 1: World maps of patience, risk taking, and positive reciprocity.


                                              12
                              Negative Reciprocity




                                     Altruism




                                       Trust




< − 0.5       −0.35 − −0.25      −0.05 − 0.05        0.25 − 0.35        > 0.5   NA



          Figure 2: World maps of negative reciprocity, altruism, and trust.


                                           13
                            Table 3: Regional averages and variance decomposition

                             Patience     Risk taking     Pos. recip.     Neg. recip.     Altruism      Trust    # Obs.

  Western Europe               0.49          -0.11            0.06            0.04          -0.04       0.10        11
  Eastern Europe              -0.12          -0.12           -0.02            0.10          -0.22       -0.07       16
  Neo Europe                   0.73           0.15            0.16            0.02           0.26       0.23         3
  South and East Asia         -0.01          -0.10            0.07            0.11           0.13       0.04        13
  North Africa & ME           -0.14           0.16            0.07            0.08           0.13       0.23         9
  Sub-Saharan Africa          -0.16           0.34           -0.34           -0.11          -0.15       -0.33       11
  South America               -0.21          -0.03           -0.08           -0.16          -0.05       -0.10       13

  % between-
                               13.5            9.0            12.0             7.0           12.3        8.2
  country variation

 Notes. Neo-Europe includes the United States, Canada, and Australia. Regional averages of each preference, expressed in
terms of standard deviations from the world individual mean. The variance decomposition in the bottom row decomposes
the individual-level variation into the variance of the average preference across countries and the average of the within-
country variance. Formally, the between-country variation corresponds to the R2 of an OLS regression of all individual-level
observations on a set of country dummies in which all observations are weighted by the sampling weights provided by
Gallup to achieve (ex post) representativeness. ME = Middle East.



    The figures reveal that preferences vary substantially across countries, by at least one stan-
dard deviation for each preference.¹⁰ Most differences are statistically significant: Calculating
t-tests of all possible (2,850) pairwise comparisons for each preference, the fraction of signifi-
cant (1-percent level) country differences are: 78% for risk, 83% for patience, 80% for altruism,
81% for positive reciprocity, 79% for negative reciprocity, and 78% for trust, respectively.
    In terms of patterns of preference variation, a first observation is that populations of Euro-
pean ancestry tend to be more patient than the world mean. Indeed, all of the ten most patient
countries in the world are either located in the Neo-European, English-speaking world, or else
in Western Europe, with the Scandinavian countries exhibiting particularly high levels of pa-
tience. Trust levels are also particularly high in Neo-Europe, while western European countries
are notable for being relatively risk averse.
    To the East, the former communist Eastern European countries are on average rather risk
averse, not very patient, and low on altruism, but the patterns are less clear compared to their
Western European counterparts. Countries in East and South Asia are also relatively impatient,
except for “Confucian countries” (China, Japan, South Korea). This group of countries is consis-
tently risk averse and relatively negatively reciprocal. On average, altruism is high, but patterns
are diverse at the country level.
    Middle Eastern and North African populations have in common relatively high levels of risk
tolerance and low levels of patience. Social preferences and trust in this group of countries are
fairly diverse. Notably, all of the ten most risk tolerant countries in our sample are located in
the Middle East or Africa, with most of these in sub-Saharan Africa; in addition, all sub-Saharan

   ¹⁰Online Appendix B.1 provide an alternative way to visualize the heterogeneity, with histograms of
preferences at the country and individual levels.


                                                           14
                   Table 4: Pairwise correlations between preferences at country level


                       Patience   Risk taking   Pos. reciprocity   Neg. reciprocity   Altruism   Trust

   Patience               1
   Risk taking         0.230∗∗         1
   Pos. reciprocity    0.0155      -0.256∗∗             1
   Neg. reciprocity    0.258∗∗      0.193∗          -0.154                1
                                                            ∗∗∗
   Altruism            -0.0104     -0.0152         0.711               -0.132            1
                                                            ∗∗∗
   Trust                0.190      -0.0615         0.363                0.160         0.273∗∗     1

  Notes. Pairwise Pearson correlations between average preferences at country level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
  p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


populations are on average lower than the world mean on positive reciprocity, altruism, and
trust, and are rather impatient. Finally, in the Southern Americas, most populations appear
impatient, and low in terms of negative reciprocity. They have more intermediate values in risk
taking and the prosocial traits, i.e., altruism, positive reciprocity, and trust.
    In sum, different types of preferences are spatially and culturally concentrated. While indi-
vidual preferences exhibit geographic variation, preferences might also be correlated amongst
each other, giving rise to distinct country-level preference profiles. Table 4 shows Pearson cor-
relations of preferences together with levels of significance.
    The significant correlations indicate that preferences are not distributed independently of
one another. One set of traits that goes together is risk tolerance and patience, as shown by
the positive and statistically significant correlation at the country level. This is in spite of the
special case of Sub-Saharan African countries, which tend to be risk seeking and impatient, as
discussed above.
    Another grouping of positively correlated traits involves prosociality, i.e., the traits of pos-
itive reciprocity, altruism and trust. While trust constitutes a belief rather than a preference,
all of these traits share in common that they describe positive behavioral dispositions towards
others. The correlation between altruism and positive reciprocity is particularly high, and trust
also tends to be higher where people are positively reciprocal. This is intuitive as it is hard to
imagine high levels of trust absent positive reciprocity, i.e., trust-rewarding behaviors.
    Despite being related to the social domain, negative reciprocity is not at all correlated with
prosociality. Instead, it is positively correlated with patience. We report the correlation structure
among preferences at the individual level in Online Appendix C.
    Evidence that preference dispositions vary substantially across countries does not imply that
cross-country or cultural differences are the primary source of preference variation in the world.
The last row of Table 3 shows results from a total variance decomposition, which reveals that the
within-country variation in preferences is actually larger than the between-country variation,
an observation that varies only minimally by preference. Across preferences, about 10% of the
total variation is due to between-country variation. Part of the within-country variation might


                                                   15
reflect measurement error, so that the variation in true preferences is overstated. However, the
available evidence on the size of test-retest correlations and measurement error suggests that it
is highly unlikely that measurement error alone produces the fact that within-country variation
dominates between-country variation, see Online Appendix D for details.¹¹



4     Determinants and Cultural Correlates of Preferences

4.1     Preferences and Individual Level Characteristics
The pronounced within-country heterogeneity in preferences calls for a better understanding
of individual-level preference variation. The following analysis investigates whether preference
heterogeneity is related to three traits: age, gender and cognitive ability. Indeed, a large lit-
erature in behavioral economics has investigated the relationships between these traits and
preference variation, mostly for two reasons. First, they are associated with differences in eco-
nomic outcomes; if preferences vary with these traits, this could be part of the explanation for
outcome differences.¹² Second, these traits are plausibly exogenous to preferences. Although
the evidence is correlational, the previous literature has proposed various mechanisms, ranging
from biological to purely social, through which gender, age, and cognitive ability might deter-
mine preferences.¹³ Because most previous evidence on preferences has come from individual
countries, or non-representative samples, the GPS provides new insights into which relation-
ships might reflect mechanisms that are more universal, and which might be specific to certain
societies. For instance, the origins and universality of gender differences across cultures remain
an open question (e.g., Gneezy et al., 2009; Niederle, 2014).
    For the purposes of our analysis, we make use of the sociodemographic covariates contained
in the GPS. As a proxy for cognitive skills, our dataset contains a measure of self-reported math
skills that we use to proxy for cognitive skills. While this is an imperfect proxy for cognitive abil-
ity, there is evidence that math skills are correlated with cognitive ability in general (Borghans
et al., 2016), that subjective assessments of ability are correlated with measured cognitive abil-
ity, and that these have predictive power for academic achievement (Marsh, 1990; Marsh et al.,
2005; Spinath et al., 2006; Ackerman and Wolman, 2007; Chamorro-Premuzic et al., 2010).
Since such relative self-assessments might be interpreted in different ways across countries, we
only use self-reported cognitive skills for within-country analyses.
    Table 5 presents OLS regression estimates for how preferences are related to gender, cogni-

    ¹¹The between-country variation should be scaled up by the inverse of the fraction of variance that is
due to measurement error. A very conservative estimate of the test-retest correlation of a given preference
measure that is as low as 0.33 implies that the between-country variation is about three times as high
as reported in Table 3. Since test-retest correlations between 0.5 and 0.6 are typically found for single
items that constitute our measures, we are confident that the between-country variation does not exceed
50 percent.
    ¹²See, e.g., Barsky et al. (1997); Donkers et al. (2001); Frederick (2005); Sutter and Kocher (2007);
Croson and Gneezy (2009); Dohmen et al. (2010, 2011); Benjamin et al. (2013).
    ¹³See Croson and Gneezy (2009); Dohmen et al. (2011); Benjamin et al. (2013).


                                                   16
tive ability, and age across the GPS sample. We report results with country fixed effects as well
as subnational region fixed effects. The preference variables are standardized so coefficients
are in units of standard deviations. In Online Appendix E we show that the results are robust
to adding a set of additional control variables.
    Starting with time preference, Table 5 documents that women are less patient than men, on
average across the world, but the difference is quite small. Patience is more pronounced among
individuals with higher cognitive ability, and it varies with age, in a hump-shaped pattern: Mid-
dle aged individuals are the most patient, compared to the young and the elderly. There is
limited previous cross-country evidence on time preference, but the small gender difference we
find is in line with a cross-country study on college students.¹⁴ Earlier studies have also found
that higher cognitive ability goes with greater patience, but this has been documented in only a
small set of countries, e.g., the US, Germany, and Chile. There is little previous evidence, from
cross-country or representative data, on how patience varies with age.
    Turning to risk preference, Table 5 indicates that women are substantially more risk averse
than men, by about a fifth of a standard deviation. Risk aversion is more pronounced for individu-
als with lower cognitive ability. The elderly are also significantly more risk averse than the young,
on average around the world. The gender difference we find for risk aversion is qualitatively
in line with the results of many previous studies, for particular countries or non-representative
sub-populations.¹⁵ Previous studies have also found a similar relationship between risk aversion
and cognitive ability, for a few countries. A similar shaped age profile in risk preference has been
documented previously, for individual countries.¹⁶
    Social preferences and trust also vary significantly with individual characteristics. Table 5
shows that positive reciprocity and altruism are more pronounced among women, while nega-
tive reciprocity is weaker among women. Positive reciprocity, altruism, and negative reciprocity
are all positively related to cognitive ability. The estimates reveal that positive reciprocity has a
hump-shaped relationship to age, negative reciprocity is declining with age, and altruism is not
significantly related to age. The few previous cross-country studies relating social preferences
to gender and age have mainly focused on students or other non-representative samples, and
found varying results.¹⁷ Some previous studies have also found a positive relationship between
cognitive ability and altruism, using student subjects (e.g. Chen et al., 2013). Finally, the results


    ¹⁴See Wang et al. (2016) for results from a survey with college students across 45 countries.
   ¹⁵Vieider et al. (2015a) conduct experiments measuring risk preference in 30 countries, with student
subjects, and find that female students are more risk averse than males, on average; the study does not
compare gender differences across countries. In meta-analyses, females tend to be more risk averse in the
majority of studies (Byrnes et al., 1999; Croson and Gneezy, 2009), but effect sizes are heterogeneous,
and roughly 40% of studies do not find a gender difference (Niederle, 2014). The mixed results across
studies could potentially reflect small samples (Niederle, 2014).
   ¹⁶E.g., Dohmen et al. (2011) show that willingness to take risks declines with age in a representative
sample of German adults. See also Dohmen et al. (forthcoming). Mata et al. (2016) show that the WVS
measure of “value of stimulation” declines with age.
    ¹⁷Engel (2011) provides a meta-analysis of studies measuring altruism using dictator games, mainly
for student subjects, across 35 countries. The analysis finds no gender difference in altruism, and a
positive relationship between age and altruism, in contrast to our findings.


                                                  17
                                                     Table 5: Correlates of preferences at individual level

                                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                Patience             Risk taking         Pos. reciprocity    Neg. reciprocity            Altruism                 Trust
                             (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)
      1 if female         -0.056∗∗∗   -0.060∗∗∗   -0.17∗∗∗   -0.18∗∗∗   0.049∗∗∗   0.053∗∗∗   -0.13∗∗∗   -0.14∗∗∗   0.10∗∗∗    0.097∗∗∗   0.066∗∗∗   0.059∗∗∗
                           (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)

      Subj. math skills   0.028∗∗∗    0.026∗∗∗    0.046∗∗∗   0.043∗∗∗   0.038∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗   0.040∗∗∗   0.035∗∗∗   0.044∗∗∗   0.041∗∗∗   0.056∗∗∗   0.054∗∗∗
                           (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)

      Age                  0.72∗∗∗     0.76∗∗∗    -0.083     -0.080     1.02∗∗∗    1.10∗∗∗    -0.36∗     -0.39∗∗    -0.0061    -0.0090     0.37∗       0.28




18
                           (0.17)      (0.17)     (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.17)     (0.16)     (0.19)     (0.18)      (0.14)     (0.14)    (0.21)      (0.20)

      Age squared         -1.45∗∗∗    -1.50∗∗∗    -1.20∗∗∗   -1.19∗∗∗   -1.17∗∗∗   -1.27∗∗∗   -0.45∗∗    -0.40∗∗    0.015      0.010      0.032        0.11
                           (0.20)      (0.20)      (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.18)     (0.16)    (0.18)     (0.18)     (0.15)     (0.16)     (0.20)      (0.19)

      Country FE            Yes            No       Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes           No

      Region FE              No         Yes         No        Yes         No        Yes         No        Yes         No        Yes         No         Yes
      Observations         78501       77585      78445      77543      78869      77949      77521      76718      78632      77721      77814       76922
      R2                    0.17        0.21       0.17       0.22       0.13       0.22       0.11       0.18       0.13       0.19       0.11        0.17
      Notes. OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. Coefficients are in terms of units of standard deviations of the
     respective preference (relative to the individual world mean). Age is divided by 100. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
on trust in Table 5 are broadly in line with evidence from the trust literature.
    We turn next to a country-level analysis, to see whether the aggregate results in Table 5
reflect an underlying uniformity, or instead conceal heterogeneity across societies. For each
country separately, we regress a given preference on age, age squared, gender, and cognitive
ability. We then summarize the results in three figures. Figure 3 shows the gender coefficients
for the different countries, with a separate panel for each preference. Figure 4 presents cognitive
ability coefficients in a similar format. Because the relationships between some preferences and
age is non-linear and cannot be summarized with a single coefficient, Figure 5 plots age profiles.
Showing profiles for 76 countries in one graph is unwieldy, so the figure compares two groupings
of countries, OECD members versus non-OECD; this division of countries captures some of the
most salient cross-country differences or commonalities.
    Beginning with time preference, Figure 3 shows that the slightly larger degree of impatience
among women, at the aggregate level, conceals substantial heterogeneity. Only 68 percent of
countries have a coefficient indicating greater impatience for women, and only 32 percent have
a statistically significant difference (p-value < 0.1) in that direction. Figure 4 indicates, by
contrast, that the relationship of patience with cognitive ability goes in the same direction, and
is statistically significant, in almost all countries. This suggests that the relationship is relatively
universal, and arguably not the product of institutions or specific educational and value systems.
In Figure 5 we see that the hump-shaped age pattern for patience, observed in the aggregate,
is actually only present for OECD-member countries; the profile is different (strictly declining)
in non-OECD countries.
    Turning to risk preference, Figure 3 reveals that in 95 percent of countries, the gender co-
efficient is non-zero and in the direction of greater risk aversion among women. Of these, 82
percent are statistically significant at least at the 10-percent level. This reveals the widespread
prevalence of the gender difference in risk preference, in qualitative terms, across a wide range
of cultures and on a representative basis. Figure 4 shows that in almost all countries, lower
cognitive ability is associated with significantly greater risk aversion. The age profiles in Fig-
ure 5 imply that risk tolerance is decreasing with age for both OECD and non-OECD countries.
This similarity in age profiles is interesting given the diversity of historical experiences across
countries, for different age groups.
    For positive reciprocity, some relationships to individual characteristics are more universal
than others. While women are more positively reciprocal on average across the world, Figure 3
shows that this is statistically significant for only 26 percent of countries, so the difference is
driven by a sub-set of societies. By contrast, Figure 4 shows that positive reciprocity is associated
with higher cognitive ability irrespective of culture. In terms of age profiles, Figure 5 reveals
another difference across societies: The profile for positive reciprocity is hump-shaped for OECD
countries, but less so for non-OECD countries.
    Figure 3 shows that altruism and negative reciprocity are related to gender in opposite
ways across countries, in line with the aggregate results. In most countries, altruism is more
pronounced among women, whereas negative reciprocity is less pronounced. Altruism and neg-


                                                  19
Figure 3: Gender coefficients by country. For each country, we regress the respective preference on gender,
age and its square, and subjective math skills, and plot the resulting gender coefficients as well as their
significance level. In order to make countries comparable, each preference was standardized (z-scores)
within each country before computing the coefficients. Solid green diamonds indicate countries in which
the gender coefficient is not statistically different from zero at the 10% level, while red dots / blue
diamonds / pink triangles denote countries in which the effect is significant at the 1% / 5% / 10% level,
respectively. Positive coefficients imply that women have higher values in the respective preference.


ative reciprocity are both associated with higher cognitive ability in almost every country, as
seen in Figure 4. Figure 5 indicates that altruism is weakly increasing with age for OECD coun-
tries, and largely flat for non-OECD, whereas negative reciprocity declines with age for both
groups of countries.
    Finally, Figures 3, 4, and 5 show that the aggregate results on trust are largely born out in



                                                   20
Figure 4: Cognitive ability coefficients by country. For each country, we regress the respective preference
on gender, age and its square, and subjective math skills, and plot the resulting coefficients on subjective
math skills as well as their significance level. In order to make countries comparable, each preference was
standardized (z-scores) within each country before computing the coefficients. Solid green diamonds in-
dicate countries in which the cognitive ability coefficient is not statistically different from zero at the
10% level, while red dots / blue diamonds / pink triangles denote countries in which the effect is signif-
icant at the 1% / 5% / 10% level, respectively. Positive coefficients imply that higher cognitive ability is
associated with higher values in the respective preference.




                                                    21
                                          OECD countries                                                                        non-OECD countries




                                                                                                  .5
       .5




                                                                                                         0
             0
   Preference




                                                                                              Preference
                                                                                           -.5
-.5    -1




                                                                                                  -1
                  20                      40                  60              80                             20                      40                 60              80
                                               Age                                                                                        Age

                       Patience                 Risk taking        Pos. reciprocity                               Patience                Risk taking        Pos. reciprocity
                       Neg. reciprocity         Altruism           Trust                                          Neg. reciprocity        Altruism           Trust




  Figure 5: Age profiles by OECD membership. The figures depict the relationship between preferences
  and age conditional on country fixed effects, gender, and subjective math skills. These are augmented
  component plus residuals plots, in which the vertical axis represents the component of the preference
  that is predicted by age and its square plus the residuals from the regression in the first column of Table 5.
  The horizontal axis represents age, winsorized at 83 (99th percentile).


   the data on individual countries. One exception is the positive relationship of trust to gender
   at the aggregate level; at the country level, women are more trusting than men in about 68
   percent of countries, but this is statistically significant for only about 33 percent. Previous stud-
   ies, conducted in different countries, have sometimes found that women are less trusting than
   men, perhaps reflecting this cultural specificity. In almost all countries, trust is increasing with
   cognitive ability, and trust increases with age for both OECD and non-OECD countries.
                 In summary, some relationships between preferences and individual characteristics appear
   to reflect mechanisms that are relatively universal across a wide range of countries. There are
   other relationships, however, such as between time preference and gender, or positive reci-
   procity and age, for which the qualitative relationships differ substantially across countries.
  These latter findings point to cases where results from one country might not generalize to
   others, and where the underlying mechanisms might be sensitive to cultural differences.


   4.2                 Geographic and Cultural Correlates
  To unpack the nature of country-level variation, this section relates preferences to a set of ge-
   ographic and cultural variables that have been proposed as potential determinants of prefer-
   ences in the literature. While the results presented here are to be understood as simple raw
   correlations, they nonetheless speak to previously articulated narratives, hypotheses, or empir-
   ical results. For example, various authors have proposed that the evolution of time preference
   and trust is related to geographic conditions (Galor and Özak, 2016; Litina, 2016), and that
   negative reciprocity is intimately linked to biological endowments as in the “culture of honor”
   hypothesis of Nisbett and Cohen (1996). The GPS allows for a comprehensive evaluation of
   these hypotheses using experimentally validated survey measures of preferences.
                 The analysis is divided into (bio-) geographical characteristics, which are more likely to be


                                                                                      22
exogenous to preferences, and cultural variables that are potentially endogenous to preferences,
at least in the long run. The first five rows of Table 6 present the Pearson correlations between
all preferences and the following geographic conditions: (i) a summary statistic of geographic
conditions proposed by Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013), which consists of the first principal
component of absolute latitude, agricultural suitability, rate of East-West orientation, and size
of landmass, coded such that the first component is positively correlated with per capita income
(Olsson and Hibbs, 2005); (ii) a summary statistic of biological conditions, which is the principal
component of number of annual or perennial wild grasses and number of domesticable big
animals, again coded such that the first component is positively correlated with per capita
income (Olsson and Hibbs, 2005); (iii) distance from the equator, (iv) agricultural suitability,
adjusted for post-Columbian migration flows using the migration matrix of Putterman and Weil
(2010) and (v) a recently developed index of crop suitability, also ancestry-adjusted (Galor and
Özak, 2016).
    First focusing on the geography summary statistic of the variables in Olsson and Hibbs
(2005), we see that most preferences are significantly related to geographic conditions. For
example, patience, negative reciprocity and trust are all positively correlated with those geo-
graphic variables that have previously been argued to be conducive for economic development
(Diamond, 2005; Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013).
    While the Olsson-Hibbs summary statistic has the advantage of capturing various dimen-
sions of geography, its interpretation as principal component is not fully transparent, so we
also report separate correlations between preferences and distance to the equator as well as
agricultural suitability indices. The results show that patience, negative reciprocity and trust
all increase in distance from the equator. On the other hand, the results show that agricultural
suitability and crop suitability are only very weakly correlated with the GPS patience variable.¹⁸
However, both agricultural and crop suitability are significantly negatively correlated with trust.
All other preferences are largely uncorrelated with agricultural suitability.
    Turning to the Olsson-Hibbs summary statistic of biological endowments, patience, neg-
ative reciprocity and trust all positively covary with biological conditions. Further unpacking
these relationships, negative reciprocity is positively correlated with the number of large do-
mesticable animals, broadly in line with the culture of honor hypothesis (Nisbett and Cohen,
1996; Grosjean, 2014). On the other hand, those bio-geographic conditions that are conducive
to development are negatively correlated with risk taking.
    Next, we study correlations between preferences and cultural variables that have been pro-
posed as potential drivers of preference variation. We consider linguistic structures, religion,
individualism, and family ties. First, various recent papers have argued that language might
shape people’s preferences and behaviors (Tabellini, 2008; Chen, 2013; Sutter et al., 2014; Ga-
lor et al., 2017). In particular, a linguistic feature called weak future time reference (FTR) has
attracted attention because it correlates with future-oriented decisions. This linguistic variable

   ¹⁸Galor and Özak (2016) find a correlation between Hofstede’s Long Term Orientation variable and
crop suitability for agriculture.


                                                23
       Table 6: Pairwise correlations between preferences and geographic and cultural variables

                                  Patience     Risk taking    Pos. recip.     Neg. recip.   Altruism     Trust        # Obs.

  (Bio-) geography
  Geographic conditions (O-H)     0.45∗∗∗        -0.31∗∗          0.20         0.39∗∗∗       -0.10      0.39∗∗∗        51
  Absolute latitude               0.48∗∗∗        -0.19            0.13          0.25∗∗       -0.13      0.26∗∗         76
                                                                                                    ∗           ∗∗∗
  Agricultural suitability (aa)    -0.02         -0.14            0.03           0.03        -0.22      -0.47          73
                                                                                                    ∗           ∗∗∗
  Crop suitability (aa)            0.11          -0.18            -0.11          0.08        -0.22      -0.37          73
                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗                 ∗∗         ∗∗                         ∗∗∗
  Biological conditions (O-H)     0.37          -0.37             0.30          0.30         -0.00      0.44           51

  Culture
  Weak future time reference      0.32∗∗∗        -0.13            0.13          -0.04        0.07        0.21∗         68
                                         ∗∗∗
  Pronoun drop not allowed        0.57            0.08            0.04           0.06        0.01        0.18          67
  Share Protestants               0.45∗∗∗         0.10            -0.20∗        -0.17        -0.14       -0.01         76
                                         ∗∗∗
  Individualism                   0.65           -0.01            -0.03          0.14        -0.15       0.15          60
                                         ∗∗∗            ∗∗                                          ∗
  Family ties                     -0.57          0.34             0.11          -0.02        0.27        0.09          49

  Notes. Pairwise Pearson correlations between average preferences and other geographic and climatic variables at
 country level. See Online Appendix J for additional information about the variables. In analyses with language
 variables, the sample only includes countries for which we could classify the interview language of at least 50%
 of our respondents. Geographic and biological conditions are the first principal components of the geography and
 biological variables in Olsson and Hibbs (2005), also see Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013). (aa) = ancestry-adjusted.
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


assumes a value of one if a given language allows to speak about the future in present tense, and
zero otherwise. Table 6 shows that in our data patience is also highly and significantly correlated
with weak FTR.¹⁹ Moreover, weak FTR is postively correlated with trust. Second, we study the
linguistic feature of pronoun drop, which was originally used by Tabellini (2008). This variable
assumes a value of one if a language does not allow to drop pronouns, which is hypothesized to
invoke a stronger emphasis on individual needs as opposed to those of other people. However,
perhaps in contrast with this notion, we find that pronoun drop is uncorrelated with all of the
social preferences. Instead, it is strongly correlated with patience.²⁰
    A prominent hypothesis in the social sciences is Weber’s (1930) argument of a “Protestant
ethic”, which, among other aspects, is believed to have made people more patient. We inves-
tigate this argument on a correlational basis by relating our patience measure to the share
of Protestants in a given country (Barro, 2003). Consistent with Weber’s hypothesis, we find
that Protestantism is strongly correlated with patience. This correlation is robust to restricting

    ¹⁹For this analysis, we made use of the classification by Chen (2013), with minor additions and
changes. First, we set Persian to missing after corresponding with him (he originally classified Persian
as strong FTR, which is open to discussion). Second, we managed to classify Moroccan Arabic (strong),
Fula (strong), and Khmer (weak).
    ²⁰Online Appendix F investigates the relationship between preferences and FTR and pronoun drop
at the individual level within countries by exploiting within-country variation in interview language. In
these analyses, weak FTR is again significantly associated with patience and trust, and additionally with
altruism and positive reciprocity. The linguistic feature of no pronoun drop is also again correlated with
patience, and in addition, with risk taking and altruism.


                                                             24
attention to Europe or predominantly Christian countries.
    Finally, we turn our attention to variables that measure aspects of social and family struc-
ture. Hofstede (2001) proposes a measure of individualism that has subsequently been used in
economics (Gorodnichenko and Roland, 2011). Likewise, Alesina and Giuliano (2013) extract
a measure of family ties from the WVS which measures the importance of the family relative to
other aspects in life. Intuitively, it seems possible that family ties and individualism are related
to social preferences. However, we find only weak evidence for such relationships. While family
ties are correlated with altruism, all other correlations are not significant. Instead, individualism
and family ties are also both correlated with patience.
    In sum, this section has brought to light that the distribution of preferences across countries
is not random, but rather follows geographic and cultural patterns. In particular, patience is
strongly related to many cultural and geographic conditions, and future research might tap
further into the potential of the GPS to illuminate potential causal channels.



5      Preferences and Outcomes
This section investigates the relationship of economic outcomes to preferences. The focus is on
outcomes that previous literatures have hypothesized might depend on a particular preference
or set of preferences.


5.1      Preferences and Individual Outcomes
5.1.1     Accumulation Decisions

Economic theory suggests that patience is instrumental for savings and investments in human
capital. We evaluate the relationship of the our patience measure to these outcome variables in
the GPS. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 display the results of a linear probability model, in
which we employ as dependent variable a binary indicator for whether the respondent saved
in the previous year. Patience is correlated with savings behavior both in specifications with
country and subnational region fixed effects, and conditional on socioeconomic covariates such
as age, gender, income, cognitive ability, and religion. The point estimate implies that a one
standard deviation increase in patience is associated with a roughly 15% increase of the prob-
ability of saving relative to the baseline probability of 26.7%. Columns (3) and (4) establish
that patience is also significantly related to educational attainment; these estimates are based
on a three-step categorical variable (roughly: primary, secondary, and tertiary education).²¹ In
Online Appendix G.2, we show that the significant relationship between our patience variable
and accumulation processes is not driven by only a few countries. Rather, the coefficient of pa-
tience is positive in more than 90% of countries for both savings and education, and in most
cases statistically significant.

    ²¹All results are robust to using (ordered) probit estimations.


                                                    25
                Table 7: Patience and accumulation decisions, risk preferences and risky choices

                                                                             Dependent variable:
                                 Accumulation decisions                                               Risky choices
                     Saved last year                 Education                  Own business        Plan start business     Smoking int.
                     (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)
                           ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
  Patience         0.038           0.027         0.069         0.033
                    (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)
  Risk taking                                                                 0.027∗∗∗   0.024∗∗∗   0.023∗∗∗   0.019∗∗∗   0.057∗∗∗   0.032∗∗
                                                                               (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.02)    (0.01)
  Country FE         Yes             No            Yes           No             Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No
  Region FE          No              Yes           No            Yes            No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes
  Controls           No              Yes           No            Yes            No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes
  Observations      15260           14459        79357         68409          72839      62125      57072      50687      15309      14490
  R2                 0.07            0.18         0.21          0.36           0.06       0.14       0.11       0.17       0.03       0.23
  OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. Saved last year is a binary indicator, while
 education level is measured in three categories (roughly elementary, secondary, and tertiary education). Self-employment
 and planned self-employment are binary, while smoking intensity is measured in three categories (never, occasionally,
 frequently). Additional controls include age, age squared, gender, subjective math skills, log household income, and indi-
 cators for religious affiliation. See Online Appendix J for additional information about the variables.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
 ∗∗∗
     p < 0.01.



5.1.2 Risky Choices

We next investigate the relationship of risk preferences to behaviors that have been hypothesized
to depend on a taste for risk. Specifically, the career choice of being self-employed as well as the
risky health behavior of smoking have been modeled as depending on sufficient willingness to
take risks (e.g., Kihlstrom and Laffont, 1979; Viscusi and Hersch, 2001). As columns (5) and (6)
of Table 7 document, our preference measure is related to actual self-employment. The same
pattern holds when considering individuals’ intention to start their own business, conditional
on not being self-employed (columns (7)-(8)). Columns (9) and (10) relate risk preferences to
the respondent’s smoking intensity, measured on a three-point scale (never, occasionally, and
frequently). We find that more risk-tolerant people are more likely to smoke, both with country
and subnational region fixed effects, and conditional on a set of additional covariates. Online
Appendix G.2 again shows that the correlations between risk preferences and labor market or
health decisions are qualitatively similar across countries.


5.1.3     Social Interactions

Next, we analyze the relationships of the social preference measures to behaviors and outcomes
in the social domain. We focus on behaviors that correspond to unconditional giving, and behav-
iors that are linked to maintaining social relationships, as these types of outcomes have been
hypothesized to depend on altruism, and reciprocity, respectively.²²
    Table 8 summarizes the results. Columns (1)-(8) show that altruism is significantly related
to a broad range of giving behaviors including donating, volunteering time, helping strangers,

    ²²See, e.g., Andreoni (1989) for theoretical work on altruism, and Fehr and Gächter (2002) and Rand
et al. (2009) for discussions of how reciprocity may help sustain cooperative relationships.


                                                                             26
                                                                  Table 8: Social preferences and social interactions

                                                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                  Donated             Volunteered               Helped          Sent money / goods       Voiced opinion       Have friends / relatives           In a
                                   money                  time                 stranger          to other individual       to official            I can count on             relationship
                               (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)      (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)        (11)         (12)          (13)        (14)
      Altruism               0.066∗∗∗   0.059∗∗∗   0.038∗∗∗   0.036∗∗∗    0.056∗∗∗   0.052∗∗∗   0.036∗∗∗    0.032∗∗∗    0.025∗∗∗   0.022∗∗∗   0.020∗∗∗     0.017∗∗∗      -0.0025      0.0031
                              (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)
      Positive reciprocity   0.0010     0.0046     0.0060∗     0.0022     0.038∗∗∗   0.034∗∗∗   0.019∗∗∗    0.020∗∗∗    0.00095    -0.0015    0.018∗∗∗     0.016∗∗∗      0.012∗∗∗    0.0083∗∗∗
                             (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)
      Trust                  0.0088∗∗   0.0054     0.0077∗∗   0.010∗∗∗   -0.0077∗∗   -0.0066∗    0.0017     0.0020      0.0033     0.0023     0.0011        0.0020       0.010∗∗∗     0.0024
                              (0.00)    (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)




27
      Negative reciprocity   -0.0059∗   -0.0027    -0.00031   -0.0014     0.0062     -0.0022    0.0088∗∗    0.0030      0.021∗∗∗   0.017∗∗∗   0.0096∗∗     0.00064       -0.012∗∗∗   0.00038
                              (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)
      Country FE               Yes         No         Yes        No         Yes           No       Yes         No         Yes        No         Yes           No           Yes          No
      Region FE                 No        Yes         No         Yes        No            Yes      No         Yes         No         Yes         No           Yes           No          Yes
      Controls                  No        Yes         No         Yes        No            Yes      No         Yes         No         Yes         No           Yes           No          Yes
      Observations            57456      52124      57439      52116       55233      51919      55519       52276      55191      51873       65117        57835         76888       66693
      R2                       0.18       0.24       0.08       0.14        0.08       0.15       0.11        0.18       0.05       0.10        0.09         0.17          0.05        0.24
      OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. For the purposes of this table, age is divided by 100. Additional controls include age, age squared, gender,
     subjective math skills, log household income, and indicators for religious affiliation. See Online Appendix J for additional information about the variables.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
     p < 0.01.
or sending money or goods to other people in need. Across the different behavioral categories,
the point estimate is very consistent and implies that an increase in altruism by one standard
deviation is correlated with an increase in the probability of engaging in prosocial activities of
3.5–6.5 percentage points, which corresponds to an increase of roughly 15–20% compared to
the respective baseline probabilities.²³ Positive reciprocity is a significant correlate of helping
people in need (columns (5) through (8)), perhaps a manifestation of generalized reciprocity
in the sense that reciprocal people who have been helped before are also willing to help others.
In contrast, the negative reciprocity variable is virtually uncorrelated with all of the prosocial
activities in the first eight columns. As columns (9) and (10) show, however, negative reci-
procity is a significant predictor of whether people are willing to voice their opinion to a public
official. Columns (11) through (14) examine the relationship between social preferences and
respondents’ family and friendship relationships. We find that more altruistic and more posi-
tively reciprocal people are more likely to have friends they can count on when in need, and
that positive reciprocity correlates with being in a relationship.
    The overall pattern in Table 8 is that the social preference measures are related to a wide
range of behaviors in the social domain. As Online Appendix G.2 shows, these relationships
are not restricted to a small set of countries, but instead hold for most countries separately. For
instance, the correlation between altruism and donating is statistically significant at the 5%
level in 80% of all countries.
    Tables 16 and 17 in the Online Appendix provide a robustness check by showing that the
relationships between outcomes and the corresponding preferences, discussed above, remain
similar when controlling for all other preferences simultaneously. For example, regressing sav-
ings on all preferences, patience is still significantly related to savings (and has a larger point
estimate than other preferences).
    In sum, all of the GPS preference measures are significantly related to a broad range of
economic and social behaviors, in the expected directions based on conceptual frameworks or
models. Although the results are correlational, they are consistent with preference heterogene-
ity being important for understanding variation in economic outcomes. In addition, the fact that
the correlations are qualitatively similar across cultural backgrounds and development levels
provides reassuring evidence that the GPS survey items do indeed capture the relevant under-
lying preferences even in a heterogeneous sample. In this sense, the correlations provide an
important out-of-context validation check for the survey module.


5.2    Preferences and Country-Level Outcomes
This section explores the correlation between preferences and outcomes at the country level,
again focusing on outcomes that previous literatures have hypothesized might be endogenous
to particular preferences.


   ²³These baseline probabilities are 31.8%, 21.6%, 48.3%, and 23.7%, respectively (see Table 8,
columns (1) - (8), for the order of variables).


                                                28
                               Table 9: Economic development and preferences

                                                     Dependent variable: Log [GDP p/c]

                         (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)       (9)       (10)
                            ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗                                                              ∗∗∗
 Patience               2.63      1.73                                                            2.67       1.92∗∗∗
                        (0.26)    (0.27)                                                          (0.29)     (0.31)
 Trust                                      1.58∗∗    0.56                                         0.73       0.31
                                            (0.68)   (0.48)                                       (0.56)     (0.45)
 Risk taking                                                   -0.53    0.59∗                     -1.34∗∗∗    -0.53
                                                              (0.56)   (0.33)                      (0.50)    (0.39)
 Negative reciprocity                                                           1.30∗∗    0.51     0.54      0.092
                                                                                (0.51)   (0.50)   (0.52)     (0.45)
 Controls                 No        Yes      No        Yes     No       Yes      No       Yes       No        Yes
 Observations             76        73       76        73      76       73       76       73        76         73
 R2                      0.39      0.70     0.08      0.59    0.01     0.59     0.05     0.59      0.48       0.71
 OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Controls include distance to equator, average temperature,
average precipitation, the share of the population living in (sub-)tropical zones, terrain ruggedness, average dis-
tance to nearest waterway, and an island dummy. See Online Appendix J for additional information about the
variables. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


5.2.1 Patience, Trust and Economic Development

We begin by investigating whether variation in per capita income across countries is related to
variation in those preferences that previous literatures or models have highlighted as potential
drivers of development. This includes time preference, as many models of economic develop-
ment such as standard Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans models involve a key role for time preference.
Another literature, on social capital, has emphasized that trust may play an important role in
development (Knack and Keefer, 1997; La Porta et al., 1997; Algan and Cahuc, 2013). Research
in anthropology and behavioral economics has lead to the hypothesis that sanctioning of inef-
ficient behaviors, driven by negative reciprocity, may help sustain large scale cooperation and
hence generate efficient outcomes (Fehr and Gächter, 2002; Boyd et al., 2003; Henrich et al.,
2006). Finally, willingness to take risks has been found previously to be correlated with income
at the individual level (Barsky et al., 1997; Dohmen et al., 2011).
    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 provide evidence that patience is strongly correlated with
per capita income, in specifications with and without geographic controls. In a statistical sense,
patience “explains” 40% of the variation in income. Columns (3) and (4) establish that the GPS
trust measure is also significantly correlated with per capita income, yet this correlation is no
longer statistically significant once controls are accounted for. Columns (5) and (6) show that
willingness to take risks is uncorrelated with per capita income, but weakly positively corre-
lated once controls are accounted for (this correlation is not very robust across specifications).
Columns (7) and (8) document that between negative reciprocity and per capita income are
significantly correlated, yet this correlation loses significance once controls are accounted for.
    Finally, columns (9) and (10) show a “horse race” between the set of preferences that have
been linked conceptually to development. The results show that patience is the only variable


                                                        29
that is robustly correlated with per capita income. The insight that patience “outperforms” trust
in the GDP regressions is robust to using the standard WVS trust question as opposed to the
GPS trust variable. These results appear noteworthy given the strong emphasis in the previous
literature on the importance of trust, and provide a first piece of evidence for the potential of
the GPS in furthering understanding of the relationship between development and preference
or belief variables.²⁴
    Although the main focus of the analysis is investigating correlations, rather than maximizing
predictive power, it is noteworthy that patience contributes substantially to explained variation,
above and beyond standard geographic variables. This can be seen comparing the R2 with pref-
erences included, to the R2 from a regression on controls alone (0.58). Adding all preferences
increases explained variation by 13 percentage points and adding patience alone increases the
R2 by 12 percentage points.


5.2.2    Risk Taking and Risky Entrepreneurial Activities

Turning to risk preference, previous literatures have hypothesized that willingness to take risks
may drive entrepreneurship, and have also shown evidence of a link between risk preference and
self-employment at the individual level. Columns (1)–(6) of Table 10 investigate the relationship
between the GPS risk taking variable and different proxies for risky entrepreneurial activities at
the country level.²⁵ Specifically, as dependent variables, the analysis uses the number of patent
applications per capita, the number of scientific articles published in a given country per capita,
and total factor productivity as a measure of the stock of ideas and knowledge.
    The results reveal that risk taking is uncorrelated with patent applications, but risk taking is
significantly correlated with the number of scientific articles per capita and Total Factor Produc-
tivity (TFP), once the confounding effects of the geographic and climatic covariates are taken
into account. The increase in R2 from adding risk taking to the set of covariates is small, but
notable.²⁶


5.2.3    Social Preferences, Charitable Activities and Conflict

Finally, the analysis explores the country-level correlations between the social preferences and
outcomes that are conceptually linked to the respective preferences. A first dependent variable
is the dollar value of charitable donations and volunteering activities, as a fraction of GDP
(Salamon, 2004). Given the many studies showing that social preferences and charitable giving
are correlated at the individual level, it is natural to explore whether cross-country variation


    ²⁴The relationship of patience to GDP remains strong and significant with positive reciprocity and
altruism in the regression as additional controls.
    ²⁵Cross-country data on self-employment are not very meaningful for our purposes because self-
employment may refer to very different business concepts in developed and developing economies.
    ²⁶Online Appendix H shows that results are similar with social preferences included in the regression
as controls. Adding patience, however, causes risk taking to no longer be statistically significant, whereas
patience is significantly positively related to entrepreneurial activities.


                                                    30
                                  Table 10: Country-level outcomes and preferences

                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                              Entrepreneurship                                        Social outcomes

                         Patent applic. p/c   Scientific articles p/c          TFP           Volunt. & donat.   Armed conflicts
                           (1)        (2)      (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)      (7)      (8)       (9)       (10)
                                                                  ∗∗                    ∗∗
  Risk taking            -0.031      0.28     -0.013      0.094          0.11    0.22
                         (0.98)     (0.43)    (0.05)      (0.05)        (0.10)   (0.09)
  Prosociality                                                                                0.85    1.23∗∗
                                                                                             (0.57)   (0.48)
  Negative reciprocity                                                                                          1.59∗∗∗   1.20∗∗∗
                                                                                                                (0.41)    (0.41)
  Controls                 No         Yes       No          Yes          No          Yes      No       Yes        No       Yes
  Observations             64         61        69          67           60           59      32        32        76        73
  R2                      0.00       0.66      0.00        0.44         0.02         0.49    0.06      0.42      0.13      0.32
  OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variables in columns (1)–(2) and (3)–(4) are the
 logs of the number of patent applications p/c and the number of scientific articles p/c, respectively. In columns (7)–(8),
 the dependent variable is volunteering and donation as a fraction of GDP. Frequency of conflicts is measured by the log of
 conflicts according to PRIO, in the Quality of Government dataset. Prosociality is the first principal component of altruism,
 positive reciprocity, and trust. Controls include distance to equator, average temperature, average precipitation, the share
 of the population living in (sub-)tropical zones, terrain ruggedness, average distance to nearest waterway, and an island
 dummy. See Online Appendix J for additional information about the variables. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



in charitable activity might be related to variation in average pro-sociality at the population
level. Since altruism, positive reciprocity and trust are highly correlated at the country level,
we collapse these variables into a single “prosociality” variable by computing the first principal
component at the individual level and aggregating this score at the country level. Columns (7)
and (8) show that this score is significantly correlated with donations and volunteering once
the baseline set of controls is taken into account.
    Second, motivated by research at the individual level on how punishment can trigger con-
flict in the form of vengeful counter-punishment (Herrmann et al., 2008; Nikiforakis, 2008),
the analysis correlates average negative reciprocity of a country’s population with the log of
the frequency of armed conflicts. The conflict variable is based on the Peace Research Institute
Oslo (PRIO) dataset. Columns (9) and (10) show that countries with a higher degree of neg-
ative reciprocity have experienced significantly more armed conflicts, conditional on controls.
Here, the raw correlation is particularly pronounced (ρ = 0.37), and the inclusion of negative
reciprocity leads to an increase in R2 of seven percentage points relative to the set of controls.²⁷



6      Conclusion
The evidence in this paper shows that (i) preferences exhibit large heterogeneity across and
within countries, (ii) this variation is at least partly systematic and linked to both individual-
level characteristics and aggregate cultural or biogeographic endowments, and (iii) the survey
measures of preferences appear to capture heterogeneity that is relevant for explaining out-

   ²⁷Online Appendix H shows that prosociality and negative reciprocity are still significantly related to
charitable activities, and frequency of conflicts, when time and risk preference are included as controls.


                                                              31
comes. These findings are only a first step towards tapping the potential of the GPS. The data
are well suited for many potential research agendas, on the determinants and implications
of preference variation. One example is deepening understanding of the observed correlation
structure for preferences across countries, investigating which mechanisms could potentially
be involved in the co-evolution of different preference combinations. Another direction is ex-
ploring in more detail the nature of individual differences in preferences, for example, whether
gender differences in preferences are related to measures of the degree of female empowerment
across societies. Differences in how preferences relate to individual economic outcomes across
countries could potentially be understood from the perspective of how preferences interact with
institutional differences. Finally, the relationship between country-level preference profiles and
aggregate economic outcomes is essentially unchartered territory. In this respect, the paper has
provided evidence of some novel raw correlations, e.g., between per capita income and time
preference, or negative reciprocity and conflicts, which call for a more detailed analysis of the
underlying causal pathways.




                                               32
References
Ackerman, Phillip L. and Stacey D. Wolman, “Determinants and Validity of Self-Estimates of
  Abilities and Self-Concept Measures,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 2007, 13
  (2), 57–78.

Åkerlund, David, Bart H.H. Golsteyn, Hans Grönqvist, and Lena Lindahl, “Time Discounting
  and Criminal Behavior,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Science (PNAS), 2016, 113
  (22), 6160–6165.

Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano, “Family Ties,” Handbook of Economic Growth, 2013, 2,
  177.

  , Yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc, and Paola Giuliano, “Family Values and the Regulation of
  Labor,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015, 13 (4), 599–630.

Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review, 2010,
  100 (5), 2060–2092.

   and    , “Trust and growth,” Annu. Rev. Econ., 2013, 5 (1), 521–549.

Andreoni, James, “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equiv-
  alence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1989, pp. 1447–1458.

Apicella, Coren L., Eduardo M. Azevedo, Nicholas A. Christakis, and James H. Fowler,
  “Evolutionary Origins of the Endowment Effect: Evidence from Hunter-Gatherers,” American
  Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1793–1805.

Arrow, Kenneth J., “Gifts and Exchanges,” Philosophy & Public Affairs, 1972, 1 (4), 343–362.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor, “The Out of Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity,
  and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 1–46.

Barro, Robert, “Religion Adherence Data,” http://scholar.harvard.edu/barro/
  publications/religion-adherence-data 2003.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, “Prefer-
  ence Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
  and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112, 537–579.

Beauchamp, Jonathan, David Cesarini, and Magnus Johannesson, “The Psychometric and
  Empirical Properties of Measures of Risk Preferences,” Working Paper, 2015.

Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Who is ’Behavioral’? Cogni-
  tive Ability and Anomalous Preferences,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2013,
  11, 1231–1255.

                                             33
Bonin, Holger, Thomas Dohmen, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “Cross-
  Sectional Earnings Risk and Occupational Sorting: The Role of Risk Attitudes,” Labour Eco-
  nomics, 2007, 14 (6), 926–937.

Borghans, Lex, Bart H.H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman, and John Eric Humphries, “What
  Grades and Achievement Tests Measure,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  2016, 113 (47), 13354–13359.

Boyd, Robert, Herbert Gintis, Samuel Bowles, and Peter J. Richerson, “The Evolution of
  Altruistic Punishment,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2003, 100 (6), 3531–
  3535.

Byrnes, James P., David C. Miller, and William D. Schafer, “Gender Differences in Risk Taking:
  A Meta-Analysis.,” Psychological Bulletin, 1999, 125 (3), 367.

Chabris, Christopher F., David Laibson, Carrie L. Morris, Jonathan P. Schuldt, and Dmitry
  Taubinsky, “Individual Laboratory-Measured Discount Rates Predict Field Behavior,” Journal
  of Risk and Uncertainty, 2008, 37 (2-3), 237–269.

Chamorro-Premuzic, Tomas, Nicole Harlaar, Corina U. Greven, and Robert Plomin, “More
  Than Just IQ: A Longitudinal Examination of Self-Perceived Abilities As Predictors of Aca-
  demic Performance in a Large Sample of UK Twins,” Intelligence, 2010, 38 (4), 385–392.

Chen, Chia-Ching, I-Ming Chiu, John Smith, and Tetsuji Yamada, “Too Smart to be Self-
  ish? Measures of Cognitive Ability, Social Preferences, and Consistency,” Journal of Economic
  Behavior and Organization, 2013, 90, 112–122.

Chen, M. Keith, “The Effect of Language on Economic Behavior: Evidence from Savings Rates,
  Health Behaviors, and Retirement Assets,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (2), 690–
  731.

Cornsweet, Tom N., “The Staircase-Method in Psychophysics,” American Journal of Psychology,
  1962, 75 (3), 485–491.

Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy, “Gender Differences in Preferences,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 2009, 47, 448–474.

Diamond, Jared M., Guns, Germs, and Steel, National Geographic, 2005.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “Representative Trust and
  Reciprocity: Prevalence and Determinants,” Economic Inquiry, 2008, 46 (1), 84–90.

  ,   ,   , and   , “Homo Reciprocans: Survey Evidence on Behavioural Outcomes,” Economic
  Journal, 2009, 119 (536), 592–612.



                                             34
  ,   ,   , and   , “Are Risk Aversion and Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?,” American
  Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 1238–1260.

  ,   ,   ,   , Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G. Wagner, “Individual Risk Attitudes: Measurement,
  Determinants, and Behavioral Consequences,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
  2011, 9 (3), 522–550.

  , Falk Armin, Bart Golsteyn, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “Risk Attitudes across the
  Life Course,” Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Donkers, Bas, Bertrand Melenberg, and Arthur Van Soest, “Estimating Risk Attitudes Using
  Lotteries: A Large Sample Approach,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2001, 22 (2), 165–195.

Eckel, Catherine, Cathleen Johnson, and Claude Montmarquette, “Savings Decisions of the
  Working Poor: Short- and Long-Term Horizons,” in Jeff Carpenter, Glenn Harrison, and John
  List, eds., Research in Experimental Economics. Vol. 10: Field Experiments in Economics, Ams-
  terdam: Elsevier, 2005, pp. 219–260.

Engel, Christoph, “Dictator Games: A Meta Study,” Experimental Economics, 2011, 14 (4), 583–
  610.

Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, “The Pref-
  erence Survey Module: A Validated Instrument for Measuring Risk, Time, and Social Prefer-
  ences,” IZA Discussion Paper 9674, 2016.

Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter, “Altruistic Punishment in Humans,” Nature, 2002, 415 (6868),
  137–140.

Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
  Work, and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 146–177.

Frederick, Shane, “Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2005, 19 (4), 25–42.

Galor, Oded and Ömer Özak, “The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3064–3103.

  ,   , and Assaf Sarid, “Geographical Origins and Economic Consequences of Language Struc-
  tures,” Working Paper, 2017.

Giuliano, Paola, “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?,” Jour-
  nal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5 (5), 927–952.

Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L. Leonard, and John A. List, “Gender Differences in Competition: Evi-
  dence from a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1637–1664.



                                             35
Golsteyn, Bart H.H., Hans Grönqvist, and Lena Lindahl, “Adolescent Time Preferences Pre-
  dict Lifetime Outcomes,” Economic Journal, 2014, 120 (580), F739–F761.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Gerard Roland, “Individualism, Innovation, and Long-Run
  Growth,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2011, 108 (Supplement 4), 21316–
  21319.

Grosjean, Pauline, “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the US South,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (5), 1285–1316.

Guiso, Luigi and Monica Paiella, “Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk,” Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 2008, 6 (6), 1109–1150.

Henrich, Joseph, Jean Ensminger, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett, Alexan-
  der Bolyanatz, Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako, Natalie Henrich
  et al., “Markets, Religion, Community Size, and the Evolution of Fairness and Punishment,”
  Science, 2010, 327 (5972), 1480–1484.

  , Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Jean Ensminger, Clark Barrett, Alexander Bolyanatz,
  Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako, Natalie Henrich et al., “Costly
  Punishment across Human Societies,” Science, 2006, 312 (5781), 1767–1770.

  , Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, Herbert Gintis, and Richard
  McElreath, “In Search of Homo Economicus: Behavioral Experiments in 15 Small-Scale So-
  cieties,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2001, 91 (2), 73–78.

Herrmann, Benedikt, Christian Thöni, and Simon Gächter, “Antisocial Punishment across
  Societies,” Science, 2008, 319 (5868), 1362–1367.

Hofstede, Geert, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and Organi-
  zations across Nations, 2 ed., London: Sage, 2001.

Kihlstrom, Richard E. and Jean-Jacques Laffont, “A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial The-
  ory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion,” Journal of Political Economy, 1979, pp. 719–
  748.

Kirby, Kris N. and Nancy M. Petry, “Heroin and Cocaine Abusers Have Higher Discount Rates
  for Delayed Rewards than Alcoholics or Non-Drug-Using Controls,” Addiction, 2004, 99 (4),
  461–471.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A Cross-
  Country Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (4), 1251–1288.

Kosfeld, Michael and Devesh Rustagi, “Leader Punishment and Cooperation in Groups: Exper-
  imental Field Evidence from Commons Management in Ethiopia,” American Economic Review,
  2015, 105 (2), 747–783.

                                             36
Litina, Anastasia, “Natural Land Productivity, Cooperation and Comparative Development,”
  Journal of Economic Growth, 2016, 21 (4), 351–408.

Marsh, Herbert W., “Causal Ordering of Academic Self-Concept,” Journal of Educational Psy-
  chology, 1990, 82 (4), 646–656.

  , Ulrich Trautwein, Oliver Lüdtke, Olaf Köller, and Jürgen Baumert, “Academic Self-
  Concept, Interest, Grades, and Standardized Test Scores: Reciprocal Effects Models of Causal
  Ordering,” Child Development, 2005, 76 (2), 397–416.

Mata, Rui, Anika K. Josef, and Ralph Hertwig, “Propensity for Risk Taking Across the Life
  Span and Around the Globe,” Psychological Science, 2016, 27, 231–243.

Meier, Stephan and Charles Sprenger, “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrow-
  ing,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 193–210.

Niederle, Muriel, “Gender,” 2014. Mimeo, Stanford University Economics Department.

Nikiforakis, Nikos, “Punishment and Counter-Punishment in Public Good Games: Can We Re-
  ally Govern Ourselves?,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (1), 91–112.

Nisbett, Richard E. and Dov Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South,
  Westview Press, 1996.

Nordhaus, William D., “Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and New Findings,” Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2006, 103 (10),
  3510–3517.

Nunn, Nathan and Diego Puga, “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,” Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (1), 20–36.

Olsson, Ola and Douglas A. Hibbs, “Biogeography and Long-Run Economic Development,”
  European Economic Review, 2005, 49 (4), 909–938.

Porta, Rafael La, Florencio Lopez-De-Silane, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “Trust
  in Large Organizations,” American Economic Review, 1997, 87 (2), 333–38.

Putterman, Louis and David N. Weil, “Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run Deter-
  minants of Economic Growth and Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (4),
  1627–1682.

Rand, David G., Anna Dreber, Tore Ellingsen, Drew Fudenberg, and Martin A. Nowak,
  “Positive Interactions Promote Public Cooperation,” Science, 2009, 325 (5945), 1272–1275.

Rieger, Marc-Oliver, Mei Wang, and Thorsten Hens, “Risk Preferences Around the World,”
  Management Science, 2014, 61 (3), 637–648.


                                             37
Rustagi, Devesh, Stefanie Engel, and Michael Kosfeld, “Conditional Cooperation and Costly
  Monitoring Explain Success in Forest Commons Management,” Science, 2010, 330 (6006),
  961–965.

Salamon, Lester M., “Global Civil Society: Dimensions of the Nonprofit Sector (Vol. 2). The
  John Hopkins University Institute for Policy Studies,” Center for Civil Society Studies. Bloom-
  field, CT: Kumarian Press, Inc, 2004.

Schwartz, Shalom H., “An Overview of the Schwartz Theory of Basic Values,” Online Readings
  in Psychology and Culture, 2012, 2 (1), 11.

Spinath, Birgit, Frank M. Spinath, Nicole Harlaar, and Robert Plomin, “Predicting School
  Achievement From General Cognitive Ability, Self-Perceived Ability, and Intrinsic Value,” In-
  telligence, 2006, 34 (4), 363–374.

Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, “How Deep are the Roots of Economic Develop-
  ment?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2013, 51 (2), 325–369.

Sutter, Matthias and Martin G. Kocher, “Trust and Trustworthiness across Different Age
  Groups,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2007, 59 (2), 364–382.

  ,   , Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Stefan T. Trautmann, “Impatience and Uncertainty: Ex-
  perimental Decisions Predict Adolescents’ Field Behavior,” American Economic Review, 2013,
  103 (1), 510–531.

  , Silvia Angerer, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, and Philipp Lergetporer, “The Effects of Lan-
  guage on Children’s Intertemporal Choices,” Working Paper, 2014.

Tabellini, Guido, “Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008,
  6 (2-3), 255–294.

Talhelm, Thomas, X. Zhang, Shige Oishi, Chen Shimin, D. Duan, X. Lan, and S. Kitayama,
  “Large-Scale Psychological Differences within China Explained by Rice versus Wheat Agricul-
  ture,” Science, 2014, 344 (6184), 603–608.

Tanaka, Tomomi, Colin F. Camerer, and Quang Nguyen, “Risk and Time Preferences: Linking
  Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam,” American Economic Review, 2010,
  100 (1), 557–571.

Ventura, Luigi, “Direct Measures of Time Preference,” Economic and Social Review, 2003, 34
  (3), 293–310.

Vieider, Ferdinand M, Mathieu Lefebvre, Ranoua Bouchouicha, Thorsten Chmura, Rus-
  tamdjan Hakimov, Michal Krawczyk, and Peter Martinsson, “Common Components of
  Risk and Uncertainty Attitudes across Contexts and Domains: Evidence from 30 Countries,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015, 13 (3), 421–452.

                                                38
Vieider, Ferdinand M., Thorsten Chmura, Tyler Fisher, Takao Kusakawa, Peter Martinsson,
  Frauke Mattison-Thompson, and Adewara Sunday, “Within- versus Between-Country Dif-
  ferences in Risk Attitudes: Implications for Cultural Comparisons,” Theory and Decision, 2015,
  78 (2), 209–218.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joni Hersch, “Cigarette Smokers as Job Risk Takers,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2001, 83 (2), 269–280.

Wang, Mei, Marc Oliver Rieger, and Thorsten Hens, “How Time Preferences Differ: Evidence
  from 53 Countries,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 2016, 52, 115–135.

Weber, Max, The Protestant Ethic and the “Spirit” of Capitalism, New York: Charles Scribner’s
  Sons., 1930.




                                              39
ONLINE APPENDIX

A     Construction and Content of the Global Preference
      Survey

A.1    Overview
The cross-country dataset measuring risk aversion, patience, positive and negative reci-
procity, altruism, and trust, was collected through the professional infrastructure of the
Gallup World Poll 2012. The data collection process consisted of four steps. First, an
experimental validation procedure was conducted to select the survey items. Second,
the survey items were translated and quantitative amounts were adjusted to ensure
comparability across countries. Third, we implemented a pre-test of the selected sur-
vey items in a variety of countries to ensure implementability in a culturally diverse
sample. Fourth, the final data set was collected through the regular professional data
collection efforts in the framework of the World Poll 2012.


A.2    Survey Optimization Exercise
To maximize the behavioral validity of the preference measures, subject to constraints
of necessary brevity, all underlying survey items were selected through an initial (con-
strained) optimization procedure (see Falk et al., 2016, for details). To this end, a
sample of 409 German undergraduates completed standard state-of-the-art financially
incentivized laboratory experiments designed to measure risk aversion, patience, pos-
itive and negative reciprocity, altruism, and trust. The same sample of subjects then
completed a large battery of potential survey items. In a final step, for each prefer-
ence, those survey items were selected which jointly performed best in explaining the
behavior under real incentives observed in the choice experiments.


A.3    Cross-Cultural Pilot and Adjustment of Survey Items
Prior to including the preference module in the Gallup World Poll 2012, it was tested in
the field as part of the World Poll 2012 pre-test, which was conducted at the end of 2011
in 22 countries. The pre-test was run in 10 countries in central Asia (Armenia, Azer-
baijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan) 2 countries in South-East Asia (Bangladesh and Cambodia), 5 countries
in Southern and Eastern Europe (Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Turkey), 4 coun-
tries in the Middle East and North Africa (Algeria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Saudi-Arabia),

                                           40
and 1 country in Eastern Africa (Kenya). In each country, the sample size was 10 to 15
people. Overall, more than 220 interviews were conducted. In most countries, the sam-
ple was mixed in terms of gender, age, educational background, and area of residence
(urban/rural). The main goal of the pre-test was to receive feedback on each item from
various cultural backgrounds in order to assess potential difficulties in understanding
and differences in the respondents’ interpretation of items. Based on respondents’ feed-
back and suggestions, minor modifications were made to several items before running
the survey as part of the World Poll 2012.
   Participants in the pre-test were asked to state any difficulties in understanding the
items and to rephrase the meaning of items in their own words. If they encountered
difficulties in understanding or interpreting items, respondents were asked to make
suggestions on how to modify the wording of the item in order to attain the desired
meaning.
   Overall, the understanding of both the qualitative items and the quantitative items
was satisfactory. In particular, no interviewer received any complaints regarding dif-
ficulties in assessing the quantitative questions or understanding the meaning of the
probability used in the hypothetical risky choice items. When asked about rephrasing
the qualitative items in their own words, most participants seemed to have understood
the items in exactly the way that was intended. Nevertheless, some (sub-groups of) par-
ticipants suggested adjustments to the wording of some items. This resulted in minor
changes to four items, relative to the “original” experimentally validated items:

  1. The use of the term “lottery” in hypothetical risky choices was troubling to some
      Muslim participants. As a consequence, we dropped the term “lottery” and re-
      placed it with “draw”.

  2. The term “charity” caused confusion in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, so it
     was replaced it with “good cause”.

  3. Some respondents asked for a clarification of the question asking about one’s
     willingness to punish unfair behavior. This feedback lead to splitting the question
      into two separate items, one item asking for one’s willingness to punish unfair
      behavior towards others, and another asking for one’s willingness to punish unfair
      behavior towards oneself.

  4. When asked about hypothetical choices between monetary amounts today ver-
      sus larger amounts one year later, some participants, especially in countries with
      current or relatively recent phases of volatile and high inflation rates, stated that
      their answer would depend on the rate of inflation, or said that they would always


                                             41
        take the immediate payment due to uncertainty with respect to future inflation.
        Therefore, we decided to add the following phrase to each question involving
        hypothetical choices between immediate and future monetary amounts: “Please
        assume there is no inflation, i.e., future prices are the same as today’s prices.”


A.4      Sampling and Survey Implementation
A.4.1     Background

The collection of our preference data was embedded into the regular World Poll 2012.²⁸
The international polling company Gallup has conducted an annual World Poll since
2005, in which it surveys representative population samples in almost every country
– partly on a rotating basis – around the world on, e.g., economic, social, political,
and environmental issues. The GPS was conducted in a subset of countries that were
surveyed by Gallup in 2012.


A.4.2     Countries Included in the GPS and Selection Criteria

The goal when selecting countries was to ensure representative coverage of the global
population. Thus, countries from each continent and each region within continents
were chosen. Another goal was to maximize variation with respect to observables, such
as GDP per capita, language, historical and political characteristics, or geographical lo-
cation and climatic conditions. Accordingly, the selection process favored non-neighboring
and culturally dissimilar countries. This procedure resulted in the following sample of
76 countries:


   East Asia and Pacific: Australia, Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Philippines,
South Korea, Thailand, Vietnam
Europe and Central Asia: Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Czech Republic, Es-
tonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Kazakhstan, Lithua-
nia, Moldova, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
Latin America and Caribbean: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, Suriname, Venezuela
Middle East and North Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia, United Arab Emirates
North America: United States, Canada
South Asia: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka

  ²⁸See http://www.gallup.com/services/170945/world-poll.aspx.


                                             42
Sub-Saharan Africa: Botswana, Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Rwanda,
South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zimbabwe


A.4.3    Sampling within Countries

In general, samples are probability based and nationally representative of the resident
population aged 15 and older. The coverage area is the entire country including rural
areas, and the sampling frame represents the entire civilian, non-institutionalized adult
population of the country. Exceptions are noted in Table 11 and include areas where
the safety of the interviewing staff is threatened and scarcely populated areas.²⁹


Selecting Households and Respondents
In countries in which face-to-face interviews are conducted, the first stage of sampling
is the identification of primary sampling units (PSUs), consisting of clusters of house-
holds, which are stratified by population size and/or geography. Clustering is achieved
through one or more stages of sampling. Where population information is available,
sample selection is based on probabilities proportional to population size. If population
information is not available, Gallup uses simple random sampling. Next, households
are selected using a random route procedure. Unless an outright refusal occurs, inter-
viewers make up to three attempts to survey the sampled household. To increase the
probability of contact and completion, interviewers make attempts at different times
of the day, and when possible, on different days. If the interviewer cannot obtain an
interview at the initial sampled household, he or she uses a simple substitution method.
    In countries where telephone interviewing is employed, Gallup uses a random digit
dialing method or a nationally representative list of phone numbers. In select countries
where cellphone penetration is high, Gallup uses a dual sampling frame. In face-to-
face and telephone methodologies, random respondent selection within household is
achieved by using either the latest birthday or Kish grid method.³⁰ Gallup makes at
least three attempts to reach a person in each household.
    In a few Middle East and Asian countries, gender-matched interviewing is required,
and probability sampling with quotas is implemented during the final stage of selec-
tion. Gallup implements quality control procedures to validate the selection of correct

    ²⁹This paragraph is taken from www.gallup.com/178667/gallup-world-poll-work.aspx
    ³⁰The latest birthday method means that the person living in the household whose birthday among
all persons in the household was the most recent (and who is older than 15) is selected for interviewing.
With the Kish grid method, the interviewer selects the participants within a household by using a table
of random numbers. The interviewer will determine which random number to use by looking at, e.g.,
how many households he or she has contacted so far (e.g., household no. 8) and how many people live
in the household (e.g., 3 people, aged 17, 34, and 36). For instance, if the corresponding number in the
table is 7, he or she will interview the person aged 17.


                                                  43
samples and that the correct person is randomly selected in each household.

Sampling Weights
Ex post, data weighting is used to ensure a nationally representative sample for each
country and is intended to be used for calculations within a country. These sampling
weights are provided by Gallup. First, base sampling weights are constructed to account
for geographic oversamples, household size, and other selection probabilities. Second,
post-stratification weights are constructed. Population statistics are used to weight the
data by gender, age, and, where reliable data are available, education or socioeconomic
status.

Overview: Countries, Respondents and Interview Mode




                                           44
                        Table 11: GPS-countries: Sample size, interview mode, interview language, and sample exclusions



                                                                                                  Exclusions (Samples are nationally
     Country       # Obs.   Interview Mode                      Interview Language                representative unless noted otherwise)

     Afghanistan   1,000    Face-to-Face                        Dari, Pashto                      Gender-matched sampling was used during
                                                                                                  the final stage of selection.
     Algeria       1,022    Face-to-Face                        Arabic                            Sparsely populated areas in the far South
                                                                                                  were excluded, representing appr. 10% of
                                                                                                  the population.
     Argentina     1,000    Face-to-Face                        Spanish
     Australia     1,002    Landline and Cellular Telephone     English
     Austria       1,001    Landline and Cellular Telephone     German




45
     Bangladesh      999    Face-to-Face                        Bengali                           Three hill districts in Chittagong (Rangmati,
                                                                                                  Khagrachori, and Bandarban) were excluded for
                                                                                                  security reasons, representing appr. 1% of the
                                                                                                  population.
     Bolivia         998    Face-to-Face                        Bolivia
     Brazil        1,003    Face-to-Face                        Portuguese
     Cambodia      1,000    Face-to-Face                        Khmer
     Cameroon      1,000    Face-to-Face                        English, French, Fulfulde         The sample has a larger-than-expected proportion
                                                                                                  of respondents who report completing secondary
                                                                                                  education when compared with the data used for
                                                                                                  post-stratification weighting.
     Canada        1,001    Landline and Cellular Telephone     English, French                   Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut
                                                                                              were excluded from the sample.
     Chile            1,003   Face-to-Face                       Spanish
     China            2,574   Face-to-Face, Landline Telephone   Chinese                      Xinjiang and Tibet were excluded from the sample
                                                                                              representing less than 2% of the population.
     Colombia         1,000   Face-to-Face                       Spanish
     Costa Rica       1,000   Face-to-Face                       Spanish
     Croatia           992    Face-to-Face                       Croatian
     Czech Republic   1,005   Face-to-Face                       Czech
     Egypt            1,020   Face-to-Face                       Arabic
     Estonia          1,004   Face-to-Face                       Estonian, Russian
     Finland          1,000   Landline and Cellular Telephone    Finnish
     France           1,001   Landline and Cellular Telephone    French
     Georgia          1,000   Face-to-Face                       Georgian, Russian            South Ossetia and Abkhazia were not included for




46
                                                                                              the safety of interviewers, representing approx.
                                                                                              7% of the population.
     Germany           997    Landline and Cellular Telephone    German
     Ghana            1,000   Face-to-Face                       English, Ewe, Twi, Dagbani
     Greece           1,000   Face-to-Face                       Greek
     Guatemala        1,000   Face-to-Face                       Spanish
     Haiti             504    Face-to-Face                       Creole
     Hungary          1,004   Face-to-Face                       Hungarian
     India            2,539   Face-to-Face                       Hindi, Tamil, Kannada,       Excluded population living in Northeast states
                                                                 Telugu, Marathi, Gujarati,   and on remote islands, representing less than
                                                                 Bengali, Malayalam, Odia,    10% of the population.
                                                                 Punjabi, Assamese
     Indonesia     1,000   Face-to-Face                      Bahasa Indonesia
     Iran          2,507   Landline and Cellular Telephone   Farsi
     Iraq          1,000   Face-to-Face                      Arabic, Kurdish
     Israel         999    Face-to-Face                      Hebrew, Arabic               The sample does not include the area of East
                                                                                          Jerusalem.
     Italy         1,004   Landline and Cellular Telephone   Italian
     Japan         1,000   Landline Telephone                Japanese                     Excluded 12 municipalities near the nuclear
                                                                                          power plant Fukushima, representing less than
                                                                                          1% of the population of Japan.
     Jordan        1,000   Face-to-Face                      Arabic                       Excluded population living in Madaba, Mafraq,
                                                                                          Ajloun, Ma’an, Tafiliah, and Aqaba governorates,
                                                                                          representing approx. 14% of the population.
     Kazakhstan     999    Face-to-Face                      Kazakh, Russian




47
     Kenya         1,000   Face-to-Face                      English, Swahili
     Lithuania      999    Face-to-Face                      Lithuanian
     Malawi        1,000   Face-to-Face                      Chichewa, English, Tumbuka
     Mexico        1,000   Face-to-Face                      Spanish
     Moldova       1,000   Face-to-Face                      Romanian, Russian            Transnistria (Prednestrovie) was excluded for
                                                                                          safety of interviewers, representing approx.
                                                                                          13% of the population.
     Morocco       1,000   Face-to-Face                      Moroccan Arabic, French,     Excludes the Southern provinces, representing
                                                             Berber                       approx. 3% of the population.
     Netherlands   1,000   Landline and Cellular Telephone   Dutch
     Nicaragua     1,000   Face-to-Face                      Spanish
     Nigeria       1,000   Face-to-Face                      English, Yoruba, Hausa,
                                                              Igbo, Pidgin English
     Pakistan       1,004   Face-to-Face                      Urdu                           Did not include Azad and Jammu Kashmir (AJK),
                                                                                             representing approx. 5% of the population.
                                                                                             Gender-matched sampling was used during the
                                                                                             final stage of selection.
     Peru           1,000   Face-to-Face                      Spanish
     Philippines    1,000   Face-to-Face                      Filipino, Iluko, Hiligaynon,
                                                              Cebuano, Bicol, Waray,
                                                              Maguindanaon
     Poland          999    Face-to-Face                      Polish
     Portugal        998    Landline and Cellular Telephone   Portuguese
     Romania         994    Face-to-Face                      Romanian
     Russia         1,498   Face-to-Face                      Russian                        North Ossetia, Kabardino-Balkariya, and remote




48
                                                                                             small settlements in far-Eastern Siberia were
                                                                                             excluded, representing approx. 5% or less of
                                                                                             the population.
     Rwanda         1,000   Face-to-Face                      Kinyarwanda, French,
                                                              English
     Saudi Arabia   1,035   Face-to-Face                      Arabic                         Includes Saudis and Arab expatriates; non-Arabs
                                                                                             were excluded (representing approx. 20% of the
                                                                                             adult population). Gender-matched sampling was
                                                                                             used during the final stage of selection.
     Serbia         1,023   Face-to-Face                      Serbian
     South Africa   1,000   Face-to-Face                      Afrikaans, English, Sotho,
                                                              Zulu, Xhosa
     South Korea            1,000   Landline and Cellular Telephone   Korean
     Spain                  1,000   Landline and Cellular Telephone   Spanish
     Sri Lanka              1,000   Face-to-Face                      Sinhala, Tamil
     Suriname                504    Face-to-Face                      Dutch
     Sweden                 1,000   Landline and Cellular Telephone   Swedish
     Switzerland            1,000   Landline and Cellular Telephone   German, French, Italian
     Tanzania               1,000   Face-to-Face                      Swahili, English          The Tanga region was excluded, representing
                                                                                                approx. 5% of the population.
     Thailand               1,000   Face-to-Face                      Thai
     Turkey                 1,000   Face-to-Face                      Turkish
     Uganda                 1,000   Face-to-Face                      English, Luganda,
                                                                      Ateso, Runyankole
     Ukraine                1,000   Face-to-Face                      Russian, Ukrainian




49
     United Arab Emirates   1,000   Face-to-Face                      Arabic                    Includes only Emiratis and Arab expatriates;
                                                                                                non-Arabs were excluded (representing more than
                                                                                                half of the adult population).
     United Kingdom         1,030   Landline and Cellular Telephone   English
     United States          1,072   Landline and Cellular Telephone   English, Spanish
     Venezuela               999    Face-to-Face                      Spanish
     Vietnam                1,000   Face-to-Face                      Vietnamese
     Zimbabwe               1,000   Face-to-Face                      English, Ndebele, Shona
A.5     Survey Items of the GPS
A.5.1    Translation of Items

The items of the preference module were translated into the major languages of each target
country. The translation process involved three steps. As a first step, a translator suggested
an English, Spanish or French version of a German item, depending on the region. A second
translator, being proficient in both the target language and in English, French, or Spanish, then
translated the item into the target language. Finally, a third translator would review the item
in the target language and translate it back into the original language. If differences between
the original item and the back-translated item occurred, the process was adjusted and repeated
until all translators agreed on a final version.


A.5.2    Adjustment of Monetary Amounts in Quantitative Items

All items involving hypothetical monetary amounts were adjusted for each country in terms of
their real value. Monetary amounts were calculated to represent the same share of a country’s
median income in local currency as the share of the amount in Euro of the German median in-
come since the validation study had been conducted in Germany. Monetary amounts used in the
validation study with the German sample were “round” numbers to facilitate easy calculations
(e.g., the expected return of a lottery with equal chances of winning and losing) and to allow for
easy comparisons (e.g., 100 Euro today versus 107.50 in 12 months). To proceed in a similar
way in all countries, monetary amounts were always rounded to the next “round” number. For
example, in the quantitative items involving choices between a lottery and varying safe options,
the value of the lottery was adjusted to a round number. The varying safe options were then
adjusted proportionally as in the original version. While this necessarily resulted in some (very
minor) variations in the real stake size between countries, it minimized cross-country differ-
ences in the understanding the quantitative items due to difficulties in assessing the involved
monetary amounts.


A.6     Wording of Survey Items
In the following, “willingness to act” indicates the following introduction: We now ask for your
willingness to act in a certain way in four different areas. Please again indicate your answer on a
scale from 0 to 10, where 0 means you are “completely unwilling to do so” and a 10 means you are
“very willing to do so”. You can also use any numbers between 0 and 10 to indicate where you fall
on the scale, like 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    Similarly, “self-assessments” indicate that the respective statement was preceded by the
following introduction: How well do the following statements describe you as a person? Please
indicate your answer on a scale from 0 to 10. A 0 means “does not describe me at all” and a 10
means “describes me perfectly”. You can also use any numbers between 0 and 10 to indicate where
you fall on the scale, like 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.


                                                       50
A.6.1     Patience

  1. (Sequence of five interdependent quantitative questions:) Suppose you were given the
        choice between receiving a payment today or a payment in 12 months. We will now present
        to you five situations. The payment today is the same in each of these situations. The pay-
        ment in 12 months is different in every situation. For each of these situations we would like
        to know which you would choose. Please assume there is no inflation, i.e, future prices are
        the same as today’s prices. Please consider the following: Would you rather receive 100 Euro
        today or x Euro in 12 months?

        The precise sequence of questions was given by the “tree” logic in Figure 6.

  2. (Willingness to act:) How willing are you to give up something that is beneficial for you
        today in order to benefit more from that in the future?


A.6.2     Risk Taking

  1. (Similar to self-assessment:) Please tell me, in general, how willing or unwilling you are to
        take risks. Please use a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 means “completely unwilling to take
        risks” and a 10 means you are “very willing to take risks”. You can also use any numbers
        between 0 and 10 to indicate where you fall on the scale, like 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

  2. (Sequence of five interdependent quantitative questions:) Please imagine the following
        situation. You can choose between a sure payment of a particular amount of money, or a
        draw, where you would have an equal chance of getting amount x or getting nothing. We
        will present to you five different situations. What would you prefer: a draw with a 50 percent
        chance of receiving amount x, and the same 50 percent chance of receiving nothing, or the
        amount of y as a sure payment? The precise sequence of questions was given by the “tree”
        logic in Figure S7.



A.6.3     Positive Reciprocity

  1. (Self-assessment:) When someone does me a favor I am willing to return it.

  2. (Hypothetical situation:) Please think about what you would do in the following situation.
        You are in an area you are not familiar with, and you realize you lost your way. You ask a
        stranger for directions. The stranger offers to take you to your destination. Helping you costs
        the stranger about 20 Euro in total. However, the stranger says he or she does not want any
        money from you. You have six presents with you. The cheapest present costs 5 Euro, the most
        expensive one costs 30 Euro. Do you give one of the presents to the stranger as a “thank-you”-
        gift? If so, which present do you give to the stranger? No present / The present worth 5 / 10
        / 15 / 20 / 25 / 30 Euro.




                                                  51
                                                                       A   Patience=1
                                                                 215
                                                             A
                                                                       B   Patience=2
                                                       210
                                                                       A   Patience=3
                                                  A          B
                                                                 206
                                                                       B   Patience=4
                                           202
                                                                       A   Patience=5
                                                 B               197
                                                             A
                                                                       B   Patience=6
                                       A               193
                                                                       A   Patience=7
                                                             B
                                                                 189
                                                                       B   Patience=8
                           185
                                                                       A   Patience=9
                                                                 181
                                                             A
                                                                       B   Patience=10
                                   B                   177
                                                                       A   Patience=11
                                                  A          B
                                                                 173
                                                                       B   Patience=12
               A




                                           169
                                                                       A   Patience=13
                                                 B               165
                                                             A             Patience=14
                                                                       B
                                                       161
                                                                       A   Patience=15
                                                             B
                                                                 158
                                                                       B   Patience=16
    154
                                                                       A   Patience=17
                                                                 150
                                                             A
                                                                       B   Patience=18
                                                       146
                                                                       A   Patience=19
                                                  A          B
                                                                 143
                                                                       B   Patience=20
                                           139
               B




                                                                       A   Patience=21
                                                 B               136
                                                             A
                                                                       B   Patience=22
                                       A               132
                                                                       A   Patience=23
                                                             B
                                                                 129
                                                                       B   Patience=24
                           125
                                                                       A   Patience=25
                                                                 122
                                                             A
                                                                       B   Patience=26
                                   B                   119
                                                                       A   Patience=27
                                                  A          B
                                                                 116
                                                                       B   Patience=28
                                           112
                                                                       A   Patience=29
                                                 B               109
                                                             A
                                                                       B   Patience=30
                                                       106
                                                                       A   Patience=31
                                                             B
                                                                 103
                                                                       B   Patience=32


Figure 6: Tree for the staircase time task (numbers = payment in 12 months, A = choice of “100 euros
today”, B = choice of “x euros in 12 months”. The staircase procedure worked as follows. First, each
respondent was asked whether they would prefer to receive 100 euros today or 154 euros in 12 months
from now (leftmost decision node). In case the respondent opted for the payment today (“A”), in the
second question the payment in 12 months was adjusted upwards to 185 euros. If, on the other hand,
the respondent chose the payment in 12 months, the corresponding payment was adjusted down to 125
euros. Working further through the tree follows the same logic.



                                                 52
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=32
                                                                     310
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=31
                                                         300
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=30
                                                  A            B
                                                                     290
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=29
                                          280
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=28
                                                 B                   270
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=27
                                     A                   260
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=26
                                                               B
                                                                     250
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=25
                         240
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=24
                                                                     230
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=23
                                 B                       220
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=22
                                                  A            B
                                                                     210
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=21
              A




                                          200
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=20
                                                 B                   190
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=19
                                                         180
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=18
                                                               B
                                                                     170
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=17
    160
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=16
                                                                     150
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=15
                                                         140
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=14
                                                  A            B
                                                                     130
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=13
                                          120
              B




                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=12
                                                 B                   110
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=11
                                     A                   100
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=10
                                                                B
                                                                      90
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=9
                         80
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=8
                                                                      70
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=7
                                                         60
                                 B




                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=6
                                                  A            B
                                                                      50
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=5
                                          40
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=4
                                                 B                    30
                                                                A
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=3
                                                         20
                                                                           A    Will. to take risks=2
                                                               B
                                                                      10
                                                                           B    Will. to take risks=1


Figure 7: Tree for the staircase risk task (numbers = sure payment, A = choice of lottery, B = choice
of sure payment). The staircase procedure worked as follows. First, each respondent was asked whether
they would prefer to receive 160 euros for sure or whether they preferred a 50:50 chance of receiving
300 euros or nothing. In case the respondent opted for the safe choice (“B”), the safe amount of money
being offered in the second question decreased to 80 euros. If, on the other hand, the respondent opted
for the gamble (“A”), the safe amount was increased to 240 euros. Working further through the tree
follows the same logic.



                                                 53
A.6.4     Negative Reciprocity

   1. (Self-assessment:) If I am treated very unjustly, I will take revenge at the first occasion, even
        if there is a cost to do so.

   2. (Willingness to act:) How willing are you to punish someone who treats you unfairly, even
        if there may be costs for you?

   3. (Willingness to act:) How willing are you to punish someone who treats others unfairly,
        even if there may be costs for you?


A.6.5     Altruism

   1. (Hypothetical situation:) Imagine the following situation: Today you unexpectedly received
        1,000 Euro. How much of this amount would you donate to a good cause? (Values between
        0 and 1000 are allowed.)

   2. (Willingness to act:) How willing are you to give to good causes without expecting anything
        in return?


A.6.6     Trust

(Self-assessment:) I assume that people have only the best intentions.


A.7      Correction for Implementation Errors
The GPS survey items were implemented with errors in a few countries. While these errors are
minor, in this section we describe them in detail and explain how we recode the raw data to take
implementation errors into account. To illustrate the majority of implementation errors and how
we corrected them, consider Figures 8 and 9, which are the abstract versions of Figures 7 and 6,
respectively. A typical error is that the payouts at a given node were not implemented correctly.
In these cases, we still have unconfounded information about the preferences of respondents,
i.e., behavior up to the erroneous node. For example, suppose that an error exists at node 7 in
Figure 8. We then know that the willingness to take risks variable must assume a value between
1 and 4. We impute the midpoint of this interval, 2.5, for such respondents.


A.7.1     Staircase Risk

   1. Indonesia; interview language Bahasa: At node 12, respondents should have faced a safe
        payment of IDR 36,000 (consult the uploaded questionnaire to verify this), but actually
        faced a safe payment of IDR 26,000. We hence code all 20 respondents who arrived at a
        willingness to take risk of 9 or 10 as 9.5 (the midpoint of the interval).




                                                 54
  2. Pakistan, interview language Urdu: At node 26, respondents should have faced a safe
        payment of PKR 1040, but actually faced a safe payment of PKR 1140. We hence code
        all 101 respondents who arrived at willingness to take risk of 25-28 as 26.5.

  3. Ukraine, interview language Ukrainian: At node 16, respondents should have faced a safe
        payment of UAH 130, but actually faced a safe payment of UAH 140. We hence code all
        12 respondents who arrived at a willingnes to take risks of 13-14 as 13.5.

  4. Vietnam, interview language Vietnamese: At node 6, all respondents should have faced
        a safe payment of VND 100,000, but actually faced a safe payment of VND 140,000. We
        hence code all 32 respondents who arrived at a willingness to take risks of 5-6 as 5.5. In
        addition, at node 31, all respondents should have faced a safe payment of VND 620,000,
        but actually faced a safe payment of VND 580,000. We hence code all 118 respondents
        who arrived at a willingness to take risks of 31-32 as 31.5.

  5. Malawi, interview language Chichewa: At node 5, respondents should have faced a safe
        payment of MWK 175, but actually faced a safe payment of MWK 150. We hence code
        all 21 respondents who arrived at a willingness to take risks of 7-8 as 7.5.

  6. Iran, interview language Farsi: All stakes were multiplied by a factor of 10. We cannot
        correct for this in the coding procedure. (2,507 respondents)

  7. Uganda, interview language Ruanyankole: In all questions, the risky payoff was multi-
        plied by a factor of 10. We cannot correct for this in the coding procedure. (132 respon-
        dents)



A.7.2     Staircase Patience

  1. Vietnam; interview language Vietnamese: At node 14, respondents should have faced a
        future payment of VND 234,000, but actually faced a safe payment of VND 217,000. We
        hence code all 36 respondents who arrived at a patience of 17-20 as 18.5. In addition, at
        node 18, respondents should have faced a future payment of VND 323,000, but actually
        faced a future payment of VND 246,000. We hence code all 676 respondents who arrived
        at a patience of 1-8 as 4.5.

  2. Iran, interview language Farsi: All stakes were multiplied by a factor of 10. We cannot
        correct for this in the coding procedure. (2,507 respondents)



A.7.3     Donation Variable

  1. Iraq, interview language Kurdish: Respondents should have been asked how much of IQD
        300,000 they would like to donate, but were actually asked how much of IQD 30,000
        they would like to donate. Given that our “donation” variable is simply the fraction of

                                                55
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=32
                                                                         31
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=31
                                                            29
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=30
                                                    A             B
                                                                         30
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=29
                                            25
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=28
                                                   B                     27
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=27
                                      A                     26
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=26
                                                                  B
                                                                         28
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=25
                          17
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=24
                                                                         23
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=23
                                  B                         22
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=22
                                                    A             B
                                                                         24
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=21
              A




                                            18
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=20
                                                   B                     20
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=19
                                                            19
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=18
                                                                  B
                                                                         21
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=17
    1
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=16
                                                                         15
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=15
                                                            14
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=14
                                                    A             B
                                                                         16
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=13
                                            10
              B




                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=12
                                                   B                     13
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=11
                                  A




                                                            11
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=10
                                                                  B
                                                                         12
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=9
                          2
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=8
                                                                         5
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=7
                                                            4
                                  B




                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=6
                                                    A             B
                                                                         6
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=5
                                            3
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=4
                                                   B                     8
                                                                   A
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=3
                                                            7
                                                                              A     Will. to take risks=2
                                                                  B
                                                                         9
                                                                              B     Will. to take risks=1


Figure 8: Tree for the staircase risk task (A = choice of lottery, B = choice of sure payment). Node labeling
is for expository purposes only.




                                                       56
                                                                        A   Patience=1
                                                                   23
                                                               A
                                                                        B   Patience=2
                                                          22
                                                                        A   Patience=3
                                                    A          B
                                                                   24
                                                                        B   Patience=4
                                             18
                                                                        A   Patience=5
                                                   B               20
                                                               A
                                                                        B   Patience=6
                                        A                 19
                                                                        A   Patience=7
                                                               B
                                                                   21
                                                                        B   Patience=8
                            17
                                                                        A   Patience=9
                                                                   31
                                                               A
                                                                        B   Patience=10
                                    B                     29
                                                                        A   Patience=11
                                                    A          B
                                                                   30
                                                                        B   Patience=12
               A




                                             25
                                                                        A   Patience=13
                                                   B               28
                                                               A            Patience=14
                                                                        B
                                                          26
                                                                        A   Patience=15
                                                               B
                                                                   27
                                                                        B   Patience=16
    1
                                                                        A   Patience=17
                                                                   16
                                                               A
                                                                        B   Patience=18
                                                          14
                                                                        A   Patience=19
                                                    A          B
                                                                   15
                                                                        B   Patience=20
                                             10
               B




                                                                        A   Patience=21
                                                   B               13
                                                               A
                                                                        B   Patience=22
                                   A




                                                          11
                                                                        A   Patience=23
                                                               B
                                                                   12
                                                                        B   Patience=24
                            2
                                                                        A   Patience=25
                                                                   8
                                                               A        B   Patience=26
                                                          7
                                   B




                                                               B        A   Patience=27
                                                    A              9
                                                                        B   Patience=28
                                             3
                                                                        A   Patience=29
                                                   B               6
                                                               A        B   Patience=30
                                                          4
                                                               B        A   Patience=31
                                                                   5
                                                                        B   Patience=32


Figure 9: Tree for the staircase time task (A = choice of “100 euros today”, B = choice of “x euros in 12
months”. Node labeling is for expository purposes only.




                                                  57
      the monetary endowment that respondents were willing to donate, we divide the actual
      donation amount of all Kurdish-speaking Iraqis by 30,000 rather than 300,000.


A.8    Imputation of Missing Values
In order to efficiently use all available information in our data, missing survey items were im-
puted based on the following procedure:

   • If one (or more) survey items for a given preference were missing, then the missing items
      were predicted using the responses to the available items. The procedure was as follows:

         – Suppose the preference was measured using two items, call them a and b. For those
            observations with missing information on a, the procedure was to predict its value
            based on the answer to b and its relationship to a, which was estimated by regress-
            ing b on a for the sub-sample of subjects who had nonmissing information on both,
            a and b (on the world sample).

         – For the unfolding-brackets time and risk items, the imputation procedure was sim-
            ilar, but made additional use of the informational content of the responses of par-
            ticipants who started but did not finish the sequence of the five questions. Again
            suppose that the preference is measured using two items and suppose that a (the
            staircase measure) is missing. If the respondent did not even start the staircase
            procedure, then imputation was done using the methodology described above. On
            the other hand, if the respondent answered between one and four of the staircase
            questions, a was predicted using a different procedure. Suppose the respondent an-
            swered four items such that his final staircase outcome would have to be either x or
            y. A probit was run of the “x vs. y” decision on b, and the corresponding coefficients
            were used to predict the decision for all missings (note that this constitutes a pre-
            dicted probability). The expected staircase outcome was then obtained by applying
            the predicted probabilities to the respective staircase endpoints, i.e., in this case x
            and y. If the respondent answered three (or less) questions, the same procedure
            was applied, the only difference being that in this case the obtained predicted prob-
            abilities were applied to the expected values of the staircase outcome conditional
            on reaching the respective node. Put differently, the procedure outlined above was
            applied recursively by working backwards through the “tree” logic of the staircase
            procedure, resulting in an expected value for the outcome node.

         – If all survey items for a given preference were missing, then no imputation took
            place.

   • Across the 12 survey items, between 0% and 8% of all responses had to be imputed.




                                               58
A.9     Computation of Preference Indices at the Individual Level
For each of the traits (risk preferences, time preferences, positive reciprocity, negative reci-
procity, altruism, and trust), an individual-level index was computed that aggregated responses
across different survey items. Each of these indices was computed by (i) computing the z-scores
of each survey item at the individual level and (ii) weighing these z-scores using the weights re-
sulting from the experimental validation procedure of Falk et al. (2016). Formally, these weights
are given by the coefficients of an OLS regression of observed behavior in the experimental val-
idation study on responses to the respective survey items, such that the weights sum to one.
In practice, for almost all preferences, the coefficients assign roughly equal weight to all corre-
sponding survey items. The weights are given by:



        Patience = 0.7115185 × Staircase patience + 0.2884815 × Will. to give up sth. today
      Risk taking = 0.4729985 × Staircase risk + 0.5270015 × Will. to take risks
Pos. reciprocity = 0.4847038 × Will. to return favor + 0.5152962 × Size of gift
Neg. reciprocity = 0.5261938/2 × Will. to punish if oneself treated unfairly
                 + 0.5261938/2 × Will. to punish if other treated unfairly
                 + 0.3738062 × Will. to take revenge
        Altruism = 0.5350048 × Will. to give to good causes + 0.4649952 × Hypoth. donation
           Trust:The survey included only one corresponding item.

    As explained above, in the course of the pre-test, the negative reciprocity survey item asking
people for their willingness to punish others was split up into two questions, one asking for the
willingness to punish if oneself was treated unfairly and one asking for the willingness to punish
if someone was treated unfairly. In order to apply the weighting procedure from the validation
procedure to these items, the weight of the original item was divided by two and these modified
weights were assigned to the new questions.


A.10      Computation of Country Averages
In order to compute country-level averages, individual-level data were weighted with the sam-
pling weights provided by Gallup, see above. These sampling weights ensure that our measures
correctly represent the population at the country level.




                                               59
B                    Additional Descriptive Results

B.1                       Histograms by Preference
B.1.1                     Individual Level

                                             Patience                                                                 Risk taking




                                                                                            .08
               .1
               .08




                                                                                            .06
           .06
    Fraction




                                                                                     Fraction
                                                                                       .04
               .04




                                                                                            .02
               .02
               0




                                                                                            0
                          -1        0               1               2       3                        -2   -1             0                 1           2
                                              Patience                                                                  Risk taking



                                        Pos. reciprocity                                                            Neg. reciprocity
               .15




                                                                                            .1
                                                                                            .08
               .1




                                                                                               .06
    Fraction




                                                                                        Fraction
                                                                                     .04
               .05




                                                                                            .02
               0




                                                                                            0




                     -4        -3       -2             -1       0       1                            -2   -1              0                    1           2
                                         Positive reciprocity                                                       Negative reciprocity



                                             Altruism                                                                     Trust
               .06




                                                                                            .2
                                                                                            .15
               .04
    Fraction




                                                                                     Fraction
                                                                                     .1
               .02




                                                                                            .05
               0




                                                                                            0




                     -3        -2       -1               0      1       2                            -2        -1            0                     1           2
                                              Altruism                                                                     Trust




Figure 10: Distribution of preferences at individual level. The figure plots the distribution of standardized
preference measures at the individual level. All data are standardized at the level of the individual in the
full sample.




                                                                                60
B.1.2                   Country Level


                                               Patience                                                                         Risk taking
             .3




                                                                                               .4
                                                                                               .3
             .2
  Fraction




                                                                                          Fraction
                                                                                            .2
             .1




                                                                                               .1
             0




                                                                                               0
                             -.5           0                      .5        1                          -1         -.5                  0             .5             1
                                                Patience                                                                          Risk taking



                                         Pos. reciprocity                                                                     Neg. reciprocity



                                                                                               .25
             .25




                                                                                               .2
             .2




                                                                                                 .15
       .15
  Fraction




                                                                                          Fraction
                                                                                               .1
             .1




                                                                                               .05
             .05
             0




                                                                                               0




                        -1               -.5                      0         .5                              -.4     -.2          0           .2      .4   .6
                                           Positive reciprocity                                                               Negative reciprocity



                                               Altruism                                                                             Trust
             .4




                                                                                               .4
             .3




                                                                                               .3
  Fraction




                                                                                          Fraction
    .2




                                                                                            .2
             .1




                                                                                               .1
             0




                                                                                               0




                   -1              -.5               0                 .5        1                     -1               -.5                     0              .5
                                                Altruism                                                                             Trust




Figure 11: Distribution of preferences at country level. The figure plots the distribution of country aver-
ages of standardized preferences. All data are standardized at the level of the individual using the full
sample.




                                                                                     61
C       Correlations Among Preferences at the Individual Level
Table 12 reports the correlation structure among preferences at the individual level. The cor-
relations are computed conditional on country fixed effects to ensure that level differences in
preferences across countries do not spuriously generate the results. At the same time, the corre-
lation structure without country fixed effects is quantitatively very similar and is available upon
request.

Table 12: Partial correlations between preferences at individual level conditional on country fixed effects


                                Patience     Risk taking      Positive reciprocity      Negative reciprocity        Altruism      Trust
     Patience                       1
     Risk taking                0.210∗∗∗          1
     Positive reciprocity       0.084∗∗∗       0.068∗∗∗                1
     Negative reciprocity       0.112∗∗∗       0.228∗∗∗             0.010∗∗∗                      1
     Altruism                   0.098∗∗∗       0.106∗∗∗             0.329∗∗∗                   0.067∗∗∗                1
     Trust                      0.044∗∗∗       0.047∗∗∗             0.114∗∗∗                   0.075∗∗∗             0.151∗∗∗        1
    Notes. Pairwise partial correlations between preferences at individual level, conditional on country fixed effects.   ∗
                                                                                                                              p < 0.10,   ∗∗

    p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



     The next step in the analysis shows that the significant individual-level correlations among
preferences in the world sample are not driven by a few outlier countries only. To this end,
Table 13 shows the number of countries in which each pair of preferences is significantly corre-
lated at the 1% level. The results show that in most cases the correlations are significant in a
large fraction of the 76 countries.


                Table 13: Number of countries in which preferences are significantly correlated


                                Patience     Risk taking      Positive reciprocity      Negative reciprocity        Altruism      Trust
     Patience
     Risk taking                    71
     Positive reciprocity           40            30
     Negative reciprocity           53            73                    19
     Altruism                       47            50                    76                         32
     Trust                          21            24                    54                         37                 62
    Notes. Number of countries for which a given pair of preferences is significantly correlated at the 1% level.




                                                                   62
D     Discussion of Measurement Error and Within- versus
      Between-Country Variation
In the presence of measurement error, a simple variance decomposition as shown in Table 2
tends to overstate the relative importance of within-country variation in preferences. This is
because measurement error would be part of the within-country variation, whereas the ag-
gregation to country averages mitigates measurement error and thus removes this source of
variation. This section provides evidence that measurement error is unlikely to be large enough
to drive the result.
    To illustrate the impact of measurement error, consider a simple regression of an individual-
level preference measure M on a matrix of country dummies D

                                          M = D0 γ + ε.

In a setting without measurement error ε would be interpreted as individual specific effects that
are not explained by the variation between countries. The total variance of M is given by

                           Var(M ) = Var(δ) + Var(ε) + 2cov(δ, ε)

where δ = D0 γ. Note that the R2 from a regression of M on the country dummies (i.e., Var(δ)/Var(M ))
could be interpreted as the between country-variation, i.e., the fraction of total variation ex-
plained by country dummies, if individual effects are unrelated to country effects.
    If, however, the preference measure M measures the true preference parameter P with error,
denoted e, the residual variation of the regression above does not only capture individual effects.
Assume that M is a linear function of P and e, i.e.,

                                           M = P + e,

such that we can rewrite
                                          P +e =δ+ε

The total variance of the preference is hence

                             Var(P) = Var(δ) + Var(ε) − Var(e),

assuming that ε ⊥ δ and e ⊥ ε, δ, P.
    The regression model still allows identifying Var(δ), but the share of preference varia-
tion that is truly explained by the between-country variation is no longer given by the R2 ,
Var(δ)/Var(M ), but rather by Var(δ)/Var(P). To assess whether between-country or within-
country effects explain a larger share of total variation, one needs to compare Var(δ)/Var(P)
to Var(ε)/Var(P). Since Var(P) = Var(M ) − Var(e), Var(e) needs to be determined.
    The variance of measurement error, Var(e), is not directly observable, but estimates of test-


                                                63
retest correlations of relevant preference measures are available which can be used to gauge
the size of Var(e). Based on arguments of plausibility, the variance of the measurement error
does not appear to be large enough to invalidate the claim that the within-country variation is
smaller than the between-country variation. Consider how large the proportion of measurement
error in the total variation of M can be, with between-country effects still explaining a smaller
share of variation than individual-specific effects. Note that between- and within-country vari-
ation add up to total variation in preferences absent measurement error: Var(δ)/Var(P) = 1-
Var(ε)/Var(P). Thus, between-country effects explain a relatively smaller share of total varia-
tion if Var(δ)/Var(P) < 0.50. Letting q with 0 < q ≤ 1 be the fraction of measurement error
in M , this condition can be evaluated by scaling up the R2 from a regression of M on the set
of country dummies by 1/(1 − q). I.e., if Var(δ)/(Var(M )(1 − q)) < 0.5, the between-country
variation is smaller than the within-country variation, even accounting for measurement error.
   Take, as an example, the estimate for risk-taking in Table 3, for which the regression of the
risk measure on the set of country dummies yields an R2 of 0.09. Solving R2 < 0.5(1 − q) for
q shows that as long as q < 0.828, the within country variation exceeds the between country
variation. Previous work has shown that the test-retest correlation of the single components of
this particular risk measure is around 0.6 (Beauchamp et al., 2015). This implies that, in order
for measurement error alone to be able to explain the greater variation of preferences within-
country than between-country, measurement error would have to be twice as large as existing
evidence suggests.




                                               64
     E Additional Results on Individual-Level Determinants

     E.1   Robustness Check for Individual-Level Determinants

                                                                  Table 14: Correlates of preferences at individual level

                                                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                  Patience              Risk taking         Pos. reciprocity    Neg. reciprocity            Altruism                 Trust
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)      (10)       (11)        (12)
                    Age                    0.72∗∗∗      0.74∗∗∗      -0.083     0.47∗∗     1.02∗∗∗    0.90∗∗∗    -0.36∗      -0.19     -0.0061    0.041       0.37∗     -0.0022
                                           (0.17)       (0.18)       (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.17)     (0.17)     (0.19)     (0.19)      (0.14)    (0.15)     (0.21)      (0.15)

                    Age squared            -1.45∗∗∗    -1.40∗∗∗      -1.20∗∗∗   -1.74∗∗∗   -1.17∗∗∗   -1.06∗∗∗   -0.45∗∗    -0.66∗∗∗   0.015       -0.17     0.032        0.30∗
                                            (0.20)      (0.21)        (0.21)     (0.20)     (0.18)     (0.17)    (0.18)      (0.19)    (0.15)     (0.16)     (0.20)      (0.16)

                    1 if female           -0.056∗∗∗    -0.037∗∗∗     -0.17∗∗∗   -0.16∗∗∗   0.049∗∗∗   0.060∗∗∗   -0.13∗∗∗   -0.13∗∗∗   0.10∗∗∗    0.094∗∗∗   0.066∗∗∗   0.048∗∗∗
                                           (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.01)

                    Subj. math skills      0.028∗∗∗    0.023∗∗∗      0.046∗∗∗   0.040∗∗∗   0.038∗∗∗   0.037∗∗∗   0.040∗∗∗   0.037∗∗∗   0.044∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗   0.056∗∗∗   0.056∗∗∗




65
                                            (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)

                    Country FE               Yes             No        Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes           No

                    Region FE                No          Yes           No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No            Yes

                    Additional controls      No          Yes           No        Yes         No        Yes         No        Yes         No        Yes         No         Yes
                    Observations           78501        57616        78445      57588      78869      57867      77521      56973      78632      57675      77814       57110
                    R2                      0.17         0.21         0.17       0.24       0.13       0.23       0.11       0.19       0.13       0.20       0.11        0.17
                    Notes. OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. Coefficients are in terms of units of standard deviations of the re-
                   spective preference (relative to the individual world mean). Additional controls include age, age squared, gender, subjective math skills, log household
                   income, indicators for religious affiliation, a subjective institutional quality index, and a subjective health index. See Appendix J for additional informa-
                   tion about the variables.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
     F   Language and Preference Variation within Countries

                                                                  Table 15: Individual-level preferences and language

                                                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                      Patience             Risk taking         Pos. reciprocity    Neg. reciprocity            Altruism                 Trust
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)           (12)
                                                    ∗∗            ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
              1 if weak FTR                    0.20         0.16        0.084      0.063      0.55       0.31       0.23       0.24       0.43       0.43       0.41        0.44∗∗∗
                                               (0.09)       (0.04)      (0.05)     (0.07)     (0.12)     (0.07)     (0.10)     (0.06)     (0.12)     (0.12)     (0.08)      (0.07)
              Pronoun drop not allowed          0.17∗       0.12∗∗∗     0.083∗∗    0.11∗∗∗    0.35∗∗∗    0.21∗∗∗    0.071      0.13∗∗∗    0.24∗∗∗    0.22∗∗∗    0.016       -0.016
                                               (0.09)       (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.08)     (0.05)     (0.07)     (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.04)      (0.03)
              Age                              0.78∗∗∗      0.85∗∗∗      -0.18     -0.064     1.13∗∗∗    1.20∗∗∗    -0.52∗∗    -0.54∗∗∗   -0.082      -0.12      0.24        0.15
                                               (0.28)       (0.31)      (0.28)     (0.28)     (0.31)     (0.32)     (0.19)      (0.18)    (0.18)     (0.17)     (0.15)      (0.14)
              Age squared                      -1.56∗∗∗    -1.65∗∗∗     -1.13∗∗∗   -1.21∗∗∗   -1.27∗∗∗   -1.38∗∗∗    -0.36      -0.33     0.062      0.045       0.17        0.21
                                                (0.31)      (0.34)       (0.29)     (0.30)     (0.33)     (0.34)    (0.22)     (0.21)     (0.16)     (0.16)     (0.16)      (0.15)
              1 if female                     -0.067∗∗∗    -0.064∗∗∗    -0.19∗∗∗   -0.19∗∗∗   0.072∗∗∗   0.071∗∗∗   -0.13∗∗∗   -0.14∗∗∗   0.13∗∗∗    0.13∗∗∗    0.10∗∗∗    0.085∗∗∗




66
                                               (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)
              Subj. math skills               0.027∗∗∗     0.027∗∗∗     0.043∗∗∗   0.040∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗   0.038∗∗∗   0.034∗∗∗   0.028∗∗∗   0.043∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗   0.058∗∗∗   0.053∗∗∗
                                               (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
              Log [Household income p/c]      0.056∗∗∗     0.059∗∗∗     0.069∗∗∗   0.063∗∗∗   0.029∗∗∗   0.043∗∗∗   0.017∗     0.020∗     0.034∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗   -0.013∗∗   -0.0049
                                               (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)
              Constant                         -0.53∗∗∗    -0.62∗∗∗     -0.048     0.0034     -1.23∗∗∗   -1.51∗∗∗    0.19∗     -0.41∗∗∗   -0.48∗∗∗   -0.48∗∗∗   -0.52∗∗∗   -1.03∗∗∗
                                                (0.10)      (0.12)      (0.08)     (0.12)      (0.07)     (0.08)    (0.10)      (0.13)     (0.09)     (0.11)     (0.06)     (0.08)
              Country FE                         Yes             No       Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes           No
              Subnational region FE              No          Yes          No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No            Yes
              Religion FE                        No          Yes          No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No            Yes
              Observations                     53054        46327       53055      46356      53299      46549      52309      45768      53119      46398      52548       45916
              R2                               0.188        0.236       0.184      0.238      0.113      0.202      0.121      0.188      0.124      0.178      0.119       0.165
              Notes. OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at interview language level) in parentheses. The analyses exploit variation in interview language (and associated
             language structures) within countries or subnational regions. Coefficients are in terms of units of standard deviations of the respective preference (relative to the
             individual world mean). Age is divided by 100. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
G     Additional Results on Individual-Level Outcomes

G.1     Robustness Checks: All Preferences Simultaneously
Including all preferences simultaneously is not our preferred approach because it introduces
problems of multicollinearity. Still, to check robustness, Tables 16 and 17 pesent the results of
the individual-level outcomes regressions with all preferences as explanatory variables.




                                               67
              Table 16: Patience and accumulation decisions, risk preferences and risky choices: All preferences

                                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                            Accumulation decisions                                               Risky choices
                                Saved last year              Education level              Own business        Plan to start business       Smoking intensity
                                (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)          (9)        (10)
                                      ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗                                   ∗∗∗            ∗∗
      Patience                0.026          0.021         0.046         0.026         0.0034      0.0022     0.0062         0.0052        -0.0037     -0.0070
                               (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.01)      (0.01)
      Risk taking             0.030∗∗∗       0.014∗∗       0.068∗∗∗      0.021∗∗∗      0.026∗∗∗   0.023∗∗∗    0.019∗∗∗       0.016∗∗∗      0.051∗∗     0.030∗∗
                               (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.00)        (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)       (0.02)      (0.01)
      Positive reciprocity     0.013          0.0097       0.035∗∗∗      0.024∗∗∗      0.012∗∗∗   0.0083∗∗∗   0.0065∗∗       0.0073∗∗∗     0.0026      -0.0024
                               (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)       (0.01)       (0.01)
      Negative reciprocity    0.021∗∗         0.011        0.015∗∗∗      -0.0060       -0.0019    -0.0019      0.0038         0.0019       0.038∗∗∗    0.033∗∗∗
                              (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.01)      (0.01)




68
      Altruism                0.017∗∗        0.018∗∗∗      0.028∗∗∗      0.025∗∗∗      0.0041∗    0.0068∗∗∗   0.011∗∗∗       0.011∗∗∗      -0.020∗∗    -0.0055
                              (0.01)          (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.01)      (0.01)
      Trust                   -0.0052        -0.0024       -0.016∗∗∗     -0.016∗∗∗     -0.0021    -0.0018     0.00057         0.0020       -0.030∗∗∗   -0.011
                               (0.01)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.01)     (0.01)
      Country FE                Yes             No           Yes            No           Yes         No          Yes            No           Yes         No
      Region FE                 No             Yes            No           Yes           No          Yes         No             Yes           No         Yes
      Additional controls       No             Yes            No           Yes           No          Yes         No             Yes           No         Yes
      Observations             14436          13835         76442         66366        70149       60304       54821          49143         14452      13847
      R2                       0.082          0.187         0.225         0.365        0.065       0.138       0.111          0.170         0.033      0.233
      OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. For the purposes of this table, age is divided by 100. Saved last
     year is a binary indicator, while education level is measured in three categories (roughly elementary, secondary, and tertiary education,
     see Appendix J). Self-employment and planned self-employment are binary, while smoking intensity is measured in three categories
     (never, occasionally, frequently). Additional controls include age, age squared, gender, subjective math skills, log household income, and
     indicators for religious affiliation. See Appendix J for additional information about the variables.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                            Table 17: Patience and accumulation decisions, risk preferences and risky choices: All preferences

                                                                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                      Donated                  Volunteered                        Helped                Sent money / goods             Voiced opinion            Have friends / relatives            In a
                                       money                       time                          stranger                to other individual             to official                 I can count on              relationship
                                (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)          (12)           (13)        (14)
                                      ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
      Altruism                0.064          0.058          0.035         0.034         0.053          0.050            0.034         0.031          0.023         0.020         0.018         0.016         -0.0015      0.0029
                               (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)           (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)
      Positive reciprocity   0.000092         0.0038        0.0046        0.0013        0.037∗∗∗       0.034∗∗∗         0.018∗∗∗      0.019∗∗∗       -0.00044      -0.0024       0.017∗∗∗      0.016∗∗∗      0.012∗∗∗    0.0078∗∗∗
                              (0.00)          (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)           (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)
      Negative reciprocity   -0.0087∗∗∗      -0.0049∗       -0.0047       -0.0041       -0.00065       -0.0052          0.0046        0.00076        0.016∗∗∗      0.013∗∗∗      0.0043        -0.0015       -0.010∗∗∗   -0.00054
                               (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.01)         (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)
      Trust                  0.0085∗∗         0.0052        0.0076∗∗      0.010∗∗∗      -0.0082∗∗      -0.0069∗∗        0.0012         0.0016        0.0030        0.0021        0.00064       0.0020        0.010∗∗∗     0.0022
                              (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)       (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)




69
      Patience                0.012∗∗        0.0089∗∗       0.016∗∗∗      0.012∗∗∗      0.0086∗∗       0.0075∗∗         0.015∗∗∗      0.011∗∗∗       0.010∗∗∗      0.0077∗∗      0.0049∗       0.0011        0.0047      0.0070∗∗∗
                              (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)           (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)
      Risk taking             0.0065∗        0.0096∗∗∗      0.013∗∗∗      0.013∗∗∗      0.027∗∗∗       0.018∗∗∗         0.013∗∗∗      0.0092∗∗∗      0.021∗∗∗      0.019∗∗∗      0.021∗∗∗      0.012∗∗∗      -0.015∗∗∗   0.00019
                               (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)           (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)
      Country FE                Yes             No            Yes           No            Yes               No            Yes            No            Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes          No
      Region FE                 No              Yes           No            Yes            No               Yes           No             Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes            No          Yes
      Additional controls       No              Yes           No            Yes            No               Yes           No             Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes            No          Yes
      Observations             57091          51839          57080        51835          54887          51639           55184          52007          54846         51598        64690         57486          76360       66287
      R2                       0.179          0.242          0.087        0.140          0.087          0.150           0.113          0.180          0.050         0.107        0.094         0.170          0.053       0.237
      OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at country level) in parentheses. Saved last year is a binary indicator, while education level is measured in three categories (roughly elementary,
     secondary, and tertiary education, see Appendix J). Self-employment and planned self-employment are binary, while smoking intensity is measured in three categories (never, occasionally,
     frequently). Additional controls include age, age squared, gender, subjective math skills, log household income, and indicators for religious affiliation. See Appendix J for additional
     information about the variables.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
G.2     Distributions of Coefficients Across Countries
This section shows that the conditional correlations on the relationships between preferences
and individual-level behaviors that we reported on the global level in the main text, are not due
to a few outlier countries only. Instead, the results suggest that our preference measures predict
behavior across a broad set of countries. To show this, we regress the behaviors discussed in
Section 5.1 on the respective preference, separately for each country, and then plot the distri-
bution and statistical significance of the resulting coefficients. For instance, the top left panel
in Figure 12 shows that the positive correlation between patience and savings holds in virtually
all countries in our sample.
    While Figure 12 reports the results for patience and risktaking, Figure 13 visualizes the rela-
tionships between altruism and behaviors. Finally, Figure 14 presents the correlations between
positive and negative reciprocity and the behaviors discussed in Section 5.1 of the main text.




                                                70
Figure 12: Correlations separately by country. Each panel plots the distribution of correlations across
countries. That is, for each country, we regress the respective outcome on a preference and plot the
resulting coefficients as well as their significance level. In order to make countries comparable, each
preference was standardized (z-scores) within each country before computing the coefficients. Green
dots indicate countries in which the correlation is not statistically different from zero at the 10% level,
while red / blue / pink dots denote countries in which the correlation is significant at the 1% / 5% /
10% level, respectively. Positive coefficients imply that a higher preference measure is related to a higher
outcome measure.




                                                    71
Figure 13: Correlations separately by country. Each panel plots the distribution of correlations across
countries. That is, for each country, we regress the respective outcome on a preference and plot the
resulting coefficients as well as their significance level. In order to make countries comparable, each
preference was standardized (z-scores) within each country before computing the coefficients. Green
dots indicate countries in which the correlation is not statistically different from zero at the 10% level,
while red / blue / pink dots denote countries in which the correlation is significant at the 1% / 5% /
10% level, respectively. Positive coefficients imply that a higher preference measure is related to a higher
outcome measure.




                                                    72
Figure 14: Correlations separately by country. Each panel plots the distribution of correlations across
countries. That is, for each country, we regress the respective outcome on a preference and plot the
resulting coefficients as well as their significance level. In order to make countries comparable, each
preference was standardized (z-scores) within each country before computing the coefficients. Green
dots indicate countries in which the correlation is not statistically different from zero at the 10% level,
while red / blue / pink dots denote countries in which the correlation is significant at the 1% / 5% /
10% level, respectively. Positive coefficients imply that a higher preference measure is related to a higher
outcome measure.




                                                    73
H       Additional Results on Cross-Country Outcomes

                                 Table 18: Country-level outcomes and preferences

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                               Entrepreneurship                                          Social outcomes

                        Patent applic. p/c   Scientific articles p/c            TFP             Volunt. & donat.   Armed conflicts
                          (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)       (10)
 Risk taking             -0.11     -1.08     0.10∗∗      -0.12∗∗∗       0.20∗∗        0.055     1.74∗∗    0.86      -0.71     -0.92
                        (0.54)    (0.71)     (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.10)        (0.11)    (0.77)   (0.55)    (0.49)    (0.57)
 Prosociality            0.81∗     0.68      0.051       0.0079        -0.00031       -0.034    1.26∗∗    0.85∗    0.078     0.039
                        (0.44)    (0.41)     (0.05)      (0.04)         (0.07)        (0.07)    (0.53)   (0.48)    (0.39)    (0.41)
 Negative reciprocity    1.35∗     1.12      -0.035      -0.082         0.079         0.055      0.50    0.099     1.39∗∗∗   1.33∗∗∗
                        (0.79)    (0.74)     (0.08)      (0.05)         (0.11)        (0.09)    (0.93)   (0.85)    (0.43)    (0.43)
 Patience                         1.57∗∗∗                0.41∗∗∗                      0.25∗∗∗            1.57∗∗               0.38
                                  (0.50)                 (0.05)                       (0.07)             (0.70)              (0.43)
 Controls                 Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
 Observations             61        61         67          67             59            59       32        32        73        73
 R2                      0.70      0.74       0.45        0.78           0.49          0.57     0.56      0.65      0.35      0.35
 OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variables in columns (1)–(2) and (3)–(4) are the logs of
the number of patent applications p/c and the number of scientific articles p/c, respectively. In columns (7)–(8), the dependent
variable is volunteering and donation as a fraction of GDP. Frequency of conflicts is measured by the log of conflicts according
to PRIO, in the Quality of Government dataset. Prosociality is the first principal component of altruism, positive reciprocity,
and trust. Controls include distance to equator, average temperature, average precipitation, the share of the population living
in (sub-)tropical zones, terrain ruggedness, average distance to nearest waterway, and an island dummy. See Online Appendix
J for additional information about the variables. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                              74
I         Results on Candidate Preference Proxies in the WVS

                         Table 19: WVS preference proxies and individual-level determinants

                                                               Dependent variable:
                     WVS Long Term Orientation          WVS Value of stimulation   WVS altruism                       WVS trust
                         (1)            (2)                   (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)
                                                                ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                                   ∗∗∗
    Age                 0.35           -0.11            -2.71              -2.28             -0.47      -0.15     0.71         0.28
                       (0.26)         (0.17)             (0.31)             (0.27)          (0.38)     (0.25)     (0.26)      (0.17)
    Age squared        0.059          0.42∗∗∗           1.14∗∗∗            0.98∗∗∗           0.21       0.33      -0.35∗       -0.19
                       (0.22)         (0.14)            (0.27)             (0.23)           (0.34)     (0.25)     (0.20)      (0.14)
    Female             0.023∗∗       0.028∗∗∗           -0.25∗∗∗           -0.23∗∗∗        -0.0091     -0.011    -0.021∗∗∗   -0.021∗∗∗
                       (0.01)         (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)          (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.01)
    Constant         -0.21∗∗∗        -0.36∗∗∗           1.14∗∗∗            1.19∗∗∗          0.17∗∗     0.22∗∗∗   -0.26∗∗∗    -0.21∗∗∗
                      (0.06)          (0.05)            (0.07)             (0.08)           (0.08)     (0.06)     (0.07)      (0.05)
    Country FE           No             Yes                   No             Yes             No          Yes        No         Yes
    Observations     323270          323270             154729             154729           80881      80881     308162      308162
    R2                0.005           0.071              0.082              0.156           0.002      0.130      0.003       0.098
 OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients are in terms of units of standard deviations of the
respective preference (relative to the individual world mean). For the purposes of this table, age is divided by 100. ∗
p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



                           Table 20: WVS preference proxies and individual-level outcomes

                                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                  Saved last year              Education                Self employed
                                                  (1)               (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                          ∗                        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
              WVS Long Term Orientation         -0.0033         0.0016      -0.19        -0.13
                                                 (0.00)         (0.00)       (0.02)       (0.02)
              WVS Value of Stimulation                                                               0.0043∗∗∗   0.0045∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.00)      (0.00)
              Age                                               -0.42∗∗∗                  -0.46                   1.42∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.11)                  (0.73)                   (0.18)
              Age squared                                       0.33∗∗∗                  -2.16∗∗∗                 -1.25∗∗∗
                                                                (0.09)                    (0.58)                   (0.15)
              Female                                           -0.020∗∗∗                 -0.19∗∗∗                -0.072∗∗∗
                                                                (0.00)                    (0.03)                  (0.01)
              Constant                          0.42∗∗∗         0.100∗∗      5.18∗∗∗     3.83∗∗∗      0.11∗∗∗     -0.20∗∗∗
                                                (0.00)          (0.04)       (0.01)      (0.23)       (0.00)       (0.04)
              Country FE                          Yes               No         Yes         No           Yes         No
              Region FE                           No                Yes        No          Yes          No          Yes
              Additional Controls                 No                Yes        No          Yes          No          Yes
              Observations                      277317          220856      296130       230555      151767       131698
              R2                                 0.082           0.170       0.107        0.271       0.120        0.182
              OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Saved last year is a binary indicator, while
             education level is measured in eight categories. Self-employment is binary. For the purposes of this
             table, age is divided by 100. Additional controls include log of categorical income variable, and
             indicators for religious affiliation. See Appendix J for additional information about the variables. ∗
             p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                                      75
J     Description and Data Sources of Outcome Variables

J.1    Individual-Level Variables
Donated money. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent donated money in the
previous month. Included in Gallup’s background data.

Education level. Included in Gallup’s background data. Level 1: Completed elementary ed-
ucation or less (up to 8 years of basic education). Level 2: Secondary - 3 year tertiary education
and some education beyond secondary education (9-15 years of education). Level 3: Completed
four years of education beyond high school and / or received a 4-year college degree.

Have friends. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent has relatives or friends they
can count on to help them whenever needed. Included in Gallup’s background data.

Helped stranger. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent helped a stranger who
needed help in the previous month. Included in Gallup’s background data.

Household income per capita. Included in Gallup’s background data. To calculate income,
respondents are asked to report their household income in local currency. Those respondents
who have difficulty answering the question are presented a set of ranges in local currency and
are asked which group they fall into. Income variables are created by converting local currency
to International Dollars (ID) using purchasing power parity (PPP) ratios. Log household income
is computed as log (1+ household income).

In a relationship. Binary variable coded as zero if the respondents is single, separated, di-
vorced, or widowed, and as 1 if respondent is married or has a domestic partner. Included in
Gallup’s background data.

Own business. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent is self-employed. Included
in Gallup’s background data.

Plan to start business. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent is planning to
start their own business (only asked of those who are not self-employed). Included in Gallup’s
background data.

Saved last year. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent saved any money in the
previous year. Included in Gallup’s background data.

Sent help to individual. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent sent help (money
or goods) to another individual in the previous year. Included in Gallup’s background data.

Smoking intensity. Variable capturing how frequently a respondent smokes (0=never, 1=oc-
casionally, 2=frequently). Included in Gallup’s background data.




                                               76
Subjective law and order index. Included in Gallup’s Background data (0-1). Derived
from responses to three questions: “In the city or area where you live, do you have confidence
in the local police force?”; “Do you feel safe walking alone at night in the city or area where you
live?”; “Within the last 12 months, have you had money or property stolen from you or another
household member?”.

Subjective physical health index. Included in Gallup’s Background data (0-1). Derived
from responses to five questions: “Do you have any health problems that prevent you from doing
any of the things people your age normally can do?”; “Now, please think about yesterday, from
the morning until the end of the day. Think about where you were, what you were doing, who
you were with, and how you felt. Did you feel well-rested yesterday?”; “Did you experience
the following feelings during a lot of the day yesterday? How about physical pain?”; “Did you
experience the following feelings during a lot of the day yesterday? How about worry?”; “Did
you experience the following feelings during a lot of the day yesterday? How about sadness?”.

Subjective self-assessment of math skills. How well do the following statements describe
you as a person? Please indicate your answer on a scale from 0 to 10. A 0 means “does not describe
me at all” and a 10 means “describes me perfectly”. You can also use any numbers between 0 and
10 to indicate where you fall on the scale, like 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. I am good at math.

Voiced opinion to official. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent voiced their
opinion to a public official in the previous month. Included in Gallup’s background data.

Volunteered time. Binary variable capturing whether the respondent volunteered time to
an organization in the previous month. Included in Gallup’s background data.


J.2    Country-Level Variables
Number of patent applications Number of patent applications per capita, according to
the World Bank Development Indicators, averaged 2003–2012.

Scientific Articles The mean, over the period 1981-2000, of the annual number of scientic
articles per capita, calculated as the total number of scientific and technical articles published
in a given year divided by the total population in that year.


Total factor productivity TFP average 2003-2012, Penn World tables.

Conflicts The number of conflicts according to PRIO are taken from the Quality of Govern-
ment dataset.

Distance to equator, longitude. Source: the CEPII geo database.

GDP per capita. Average annual GDP per capita over the period 2003 – 2012, in 2005US$.
Source: World Bank Development Indicators.



                                                 77
Temperature. Average monthly temperature of a country in degree Celsius, 1961-1990,
taken from Ashraf and Galor (2013). Data originally based on geospatial average monthly tem-
perature data for this period reported by the G-ECON project (Nordhaus, 2006).

Terrain ruggedness. Taken from Nunn and Puga (2012).

Mean distance from nearest waterway. Distance from GIS grid cell to nearest icefree
coastline or sea-navigable river, averaged across cells. Taken from Ashraf and Galor (2013).

Percentage in (sub-)tropical zones. ercentage of area within a country which forms part
of each of the tropical or sub-tropical climatic zones. Data taken from John Luke Gallup, http:
//www.pdx.edu/econ/jlgallup/country-geodata.

Precipitation. Average monthly precipitation of a country in mm per month, 1961-1990,
taken from Ashraf and Galor (2013). Data originally based on geospatial average monthly pre-
cipitation data for this period reported by the G-ECON project (Nordhaus, 2006).

Volunteering and donation as fraction of GDP Dollar value of volunteering and giving
as a share of GDP by country, including gifts to religious worship organizations where available,
average over the period 1995-2002. Source: Salamon (2004).

Geographic and biological conditions Taken from Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013), orig-
inally based on Olsson and Hibbs (2005).

Crop suitability of land Taken from Galor and Özak (2016).

Family ties Constructed from WVS following Alesina and Giuliano (2013).

Future time reference Classification adapted from Chen (2013) with minor additions and
changes. First, we set Persian to missing after corresponding with him (he originally classified
Persian as strong FTR, which is open to discussion). Second, we managed to classify Moroccan
Arabic (strong), Fula (strong), and Khmer (weak).

Pronoun drop Classification based on World Atlas of Languages (WALS).




                                              78
