                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           A DOSE OF MANAGED CARE:
                     CONTROLLING DRUG SPENDING IN MEDICAID

                                       David Dranove
                                       Christopher Ody
                                        Amanda Starc

                                      Working Paper 23956
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23956


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable advice and suggestions provided by Craig
Garthwaite, Ben Jones, Victoria Marone, Brad Shapiro, Ashley Swanson, and Pietro Tebaldi and
would further like to thank workshop participants at Northwestern University, Haverford College,
and the University of Chicago for their comments and feedback. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Dranove, Christopher Ody, and Amanda Starc. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Dose of Managed Care: Controlling Drug Spending in Medicaid
David Dranove, Christopher Ody, and Amanda Starc
NBER Working Paper No. 23956
October 2017
JEL No. I11,I13,L10

                                        ABSTRACT

Effectively designed market mechanisms may reduce growth in health care spending. In this
paper, we study the impact of privatizing the delivery of Medicaid drug benefits on drug
spending. Exploiting granular data that allow us to examine drug utilization, we find that drug
spending would fall by 22.4 percent if the drug benefit was fully administered by Medicaid
Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), largely through lower point-of-sale prices and greater
generic usage. The effects are driven by MCOs’ ability to design drug benefits and steer
consumers toward lower cost drugs and pharmacies. MCOs do not appear to skimp on
performance, either by reducing overall drug consumption as measured by prescriptions per
enrollee or reducing utilization of drugs that offset other medical spending.

David Dranove                                  Amanda Starc
Department of Strategy                         Kellogg School of Management
Kellogg School of Management                   Northwestern University
Northwestern University                        2001 Sheridan Road
2001 Sheridan Road                             Evanston, IL 60208
Evanston, IL 60208                             and NBER
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu             amanda.starc@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Christopher Ody
Strategy Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
c-ody@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1    Introduction

    In this paper, we examine how market institutions and mechanisms can control health care costs. Within

the next decade, national health expenditures are expected to represent 20% of gross domestic product;

these costs strain household and government budgets alike (Keehan et al. [2017]). As a result, many payers

– ranging from states to employers – have explored various approaches to control costs and lower spending.

One such approach is managed competition among private managed care organizations (MCOs). Relative to

direct administration by government agencies, private firms may have better tools to reduce overall medical

consumption; MCOs may also be better able to “say no” to costly providers, including hospitals (Shepard

[2016]) and drug manufacturers (Duggan and Scott Morton [2010]). Many proponents further argue that

effectively designed market mechanisms are likely to produce better allocations of health care goods and

services than an administrative price system.

    Nowhere is the pattern of increased spending and experimentation with cost control mechanisms more

salient than in the market for prescription drugs. In recent years, price spikes among both generic and

branded drugs have led for calls for policies ranging from greater price transparency to trade liberalization.

We study one approach to reducing drug costs: the outsourcing of Medicaid pharmacy benefits to private

MCOs. Medicaid is a large program, covering one in five low-income Americans, and thus the impact

of privatization on both state budgets and enrollee health is critical from a policy perspective. States in-

creasingly rely on MCOs to provide insurance benefits to program enrollees: as of 2010, roughly half of

Medicaid beneficiaries were enrolled in comprehensive, risk-bearing private plans. We use plausibly exoge-

nous, policy-induced changes in contracting decisions to study the impact of privatization of drug benefits

within the Medicaid program.

    Historically, state Medicaid programs offered indemnity-style benefits that reimbursed providers, phar-

macies, and drug makers on a fee-for-service basis. Even as states shifted coverage for medical services to

private MCOs, they continued to maintain the public pharmacy benefit programs separately as states were

entitled to large drug rebates from drug manufacturers for beneficiaries enrolled in government provided

plans, but not private MCOs. A key policy change occurred in March 2010: the Affordable Care Act (ACA)

permitted states to also collect these drug rebates for MCO enrollees, making it weakly better to allow MCOs

to administer Medicaid drug benefits post-ACA. Many states responded by “carving-in” the pharmacy ben-

efit, either by adding it to the existing medical-only MCO plans, or by moving from full public coverage of


                                                      2
the combined drug and medical benefit to full coverage through an MCO. We argue that this “carving-in”

was a response to the exogenous ACA rule change. By leveraging variation in whether and when states

acted, we identify the causal impact of private provision of drug benefits on utilization and costs.

    We find that full privatization of a state’s Medicaid drug benefit decreases program drug spending by

22.4 percent. Utilization, as measured by prescriptions per enrollee, is unchanged. We find a large reduction

in the average price per prescription: one third of the overall effect is due to lower point-of-sale prices at

pharmacies for identical drugs. The remaining two thirds of the reduction in average price per prescription is

due to greater use of generic substitutes. These price differences reflect the ability of MCOs to negotiate drug

prices with pharmacies, rather than relying on administratively set prices, and the ability to steer patients

toward more cost-effective drugs.1 These savings are larger in states in which MCOs are allowed to create

their own formularies for Medicaid patients.

    Critically, we find no evidence to suggest that MCOs achieve savings by skimping on non-contractible

product attributes. Privatization does not lead to an overall decrease in the number of prescriptions that

enrollees are receiving, and the shift toward less expensive drugs is weaker among drugs believed a priori to

lower medical utilization. Finally, there are no systematic differences in our results between states that risk-

adjust payments to private MCOs and states that do not, and the patterns in the data are not easily explained

by MCOs cream-skimming profitable enrollees.

    Our paper adds to growing evidence on the important role of institutions and mechanisms for purchas-

ing health care goods and services. The within-drug price reductions we measure are similar in magnitude

to those in Duggan and Scott Morton [2010], indicating that private firms generate similar savings on pre-

scription drugs in both the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Curto et al. [2017] find substantial reductions

in medical utilization within privatized Medicare; in our setting, we do not find reductions in overall drug

utilization, though we do measure substantial substitution to lower cost alternatives.2

    Taken together, our results show that private firms lower the cost of providing prescription drugs in the

Medicaid program because they are better able to steer demand away from high cost branded drugs and

high cost pharmacies. Our results indicate that market mechanisms can control health care costs and lower

upstream prices. Furthermore, numerous policy interventions – such as price caps, limits on consumer out-
   1 Roughly  one third of the increased use of generics results from greater within-molecule use of generics, whereas the other
two thirds results from substitution from branded molecules not facing generic competition. Depending upon the assumptions
underlying our calculations, the greater use of generics is responsible for another one third to two thirds of decreased spending.
   2 There may also be less scope for aggressive price negotiation in the Medicare Advantage program, as out-of-network rates are

regulated to be equal to traditional Medicare rates.


                                                                3
of-pocket costs, and direct price negotiation between government programs and drug manufacturers – may

be less effective than the type of intervention we study. Therefore, our results also have broad implications

for the debates about the proper role of the public and private sectors in providing essential services; this

issue arises in settings as diverse as education, utilities, transportation, and prisons. Our setting – health care

– is especially salient: in the United States, Medicare and Medicaid account for nearly half of all health care

spending, and the market and administrative mechanisms used to allocate care have significant public policy

implications.

      The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of the relevant features of the

Medicaid program, particularly the role of managed care in Medicaid and the structure of pharmacy benefits.

Section 3 provides evidence on the quasi-experimental variation that underlies our analysis, describes the

data and our empirical strategy. Section 4 details the paper’s central results measuring the effect of privati-

zation on drug spending, utilization, and point-of-sale price. Section 5 explores the robustness of our results

and includes extensions. Section 6 concludes.

2      Setting

2.1     Medicaid Drug Benefits

As of December 2016, the Medicaid program enrolled over 68 million individuals – roughly one in five

Americans (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [2017]). Medicaid enrollees are diverse in their

reasons for eligibility and medical needs: Medicaid covers many infants, children, pregnant women, and

some parents of Medicaid eligible children, but also many people with disabilities, and elderly people with

very low incomes. The ACA expanded Medicaid coverage of low-income, non-disabled, childless adults.3

      States increasingly use MCOs to manage the provision of Medicaid beneficiary care. As of 2010,

roughly 50 percent of Medicaid enrollees were covered by an MCO that bore risk for most of an enrollee’s

medical spending.4 While MCOs cover a large percentage of Medicaid lives, they are responsible for a

relatively small share of spending. Duggan and Hayford [2013] note that 71.2 percent of Medicaid recipi-
    3 Medicaid spending is highly skewed, with the elderly and disabled accounting for roughly a quarter of enrollees, but nearly
two thirds of spending. Even this number substantially understates the degree to which spending in the Medicaid population is
skewed because many of the disabled and elderly also have Medicare coverage, which provides them with most medical and drug
coverage, leaving Medicaid to cover only services that are not covered by Medicare (such as non-acute long term care) or Medicare
premiums and/or cost sharing that these individuals are unable to afford (Young et al. [2013]).
   4 Roughly 16 percent more Medicaid patients are covered by a primary care case management (PCCM) program, which is

a managed care arrangement for primary care, but with providers bearing little risk for other care (Gifford et al. [2011]). The
comparable figure for Medicare Advantage is one third (Duggan et al. [2016]).



                                                               4
ents received some managed care in 2009, but that payments to managed care organizations were only 21.5

percent of program spending in that year.5 This is for two reasons: states are more likely to contract with

MCOs for lower-cost eligibility groups, and some expensive categories of spending are excluded from the

MCOs’ contracts.

    Though it is technically optional, all states provide Medicaid enrollees with drug coverage at minimal

cost sharing. Federal regulation limits cost sharing for individuals with incomes below 150 percent of the

federal poverty level to $4 for preferred drugs and $8 for non-preferred drugs, and states often set even lower

cost sharing (Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission [2017]). Drugs are a small, but growing

share of Medicaid spending, increasing from roughly 6 percent of spending to roughly 9 percent from 2010

to 2015.6

    Prior to 2010, prescription drug coverage was often excluded from MCO contracts. States directly

reimbursed pharmacies with a fixed fee for filling a prescription, as well as a payment to cover the estimated

ingredient cost, typically set as a percentage (85%-95%, depending on the state) of the average wholesale

price (AWP). However, ingredient costs have been calculated in multiple ways over time, including AWP,

wholesale acquisition costs (WAC), average manufacturer price (AMP), actual acquisition cost (AAC), and

National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC). Pharmacies could earn profits on the “spread” between

the estimated ingredient cost as reimbursed by state Medicaid programs and the actual acquisition cost,

which is often substantially lower. These reimbursement schemes give pharmacies no incentive to utilize

lower cost drugs, and Medicaid programs have experienced increased utilization of drugs with inflated

estimated ingredient costs (Alpert et al. [2013]).

    Meanwhile, drug manufacturers are obligated to provide rebates to states according to statutory formu-

las. Pre-ACA, rebates for branded drugs were either 15.1 percent of the average manufacturer price (AMP)

or the difference between AMP and the best price the manufacturer offered, whichever was higher. Criti-

cally, drug manufacturers were not required to provide rebates to states for drugs purchased by MCOs for

Medicaid patients. The presence of mandatory rebates for state drug purchases, but not MCO purchases,

provided a strong incentive for states to retain control of drug spending, and in 2010 under 15 percent of
   5 The main reason for the difference between the 71.2 percent of Medicaid recipients with some managed care and the 50 percent

with an MCO that bore meaningful risk is that some Medicaid enrollees receive only specific types of services from a managed care
organization (such as primary care or behavioral health benefits).
   6 Net of rebates, drugs increased from 3.6 percent of Medicaid spending in 2010 to 5.5 percent of Medicaid drug spending in

2015. Medicare-Medicaid dual eligible enrollees have their drug spending reimbursed by Medicare. The share of spending by
non-dual eligible Medicaid enrollees has therefore increased from roughly 6 to roughly 9 percent over this time period.



                                                               5
Medicaid drug spending was attributed to MCOs.7 Privatization likely has little impact on negotiations with

drug manufacturers: mandatory rebates from drug manufacturers to states are still based on the AMP, but

plans and states remain free to negotiate additional rebates.

      The ACA made two substantive changes to Medicaid drug reimbursements. First, the rebate amount for

branded drugs was increased to at least 23.1 percent of AMP. Second, the rebate benefit was extended to

drugs purchased by MCOs for Medicaid patients, even as MCOs remained free to negotiate supplemental

rebates with drug manufacturers. As a result, privatizing pharmacy benefits became weakly more attractive

than state administration of the Medicaid drug benefit post-ACA. The result was a dramatic shift of drug

benefits away from states to MCOs. By 2016, 13 states had transitioned from public provision to MCO

provision of Medicaid drug benefits, and over 55 percent of Medicaid drug spending was attributable to

MCOs.


2.2     Conceptual Framework and Literature

Public Medicaid administrators face two constraints that Medicaid MCOs do not; Medicare has historically

faced similar constraints. First, public Medicaid administrators are required to set point-of-sale prices for

drugs using administratively determined formulas that are meant to approximate average pharmacy costs.

Second, public Medicaid administrators have few tools to steer demand towards higher value drugs or phar-

macies. These constraints on public provision create scope for MCOs to lower costs without lowering

quality. Private firms could obtain lower point-of-sale drug prices in three key ways. First, MCOs plans can

negotiate point-of-sale prices with pharmacies by threatening to steer consumers away from high-cost phar-

macies or to exclude pharmacies from their networks. Anecdotally, exclusion is an important cost control

mechanism (Ross [2017]).8 Second, MCOs often set binding price ceilings known as maximum allowable

costs (MAC) above which they will not reimburse a pharmacy.9 Third, MCOs may shift the mix of drugs.

Pharmacies have incentives to dispense profitable drugs. Under administered prices (especially those based
   7 Interestingly, when states first privatized their Medicaid benefits, they often carved-in pharmacy benefits. However, over time
the value of the rebates that states receive for Medicaid patients increased, and this led states to move toward a carved-out model.
For example, from 2007 to 2009, five states switched from a carved-in to a carved-out model. Two of these states (Indiana and Ohio)
then switched back to carving-in after the 2010 policy change, whereas the other three (Connecticut, Missouri, and Wisconsin) are
in the control group in our analysis. No states privatized pharmacy benefits during the 2007 to 2009 time period (The Lewin Group
[2011]). We are unable to study the consequences of these earlier “carve-out” decisions because we lack carved-in pharmacy claims
prior to 2010.
    8 This could harm enrollee health if it reduces access or adherence; we will explore this margin in our empirical work.
    9 This is especially true for generic drugs. MCOs will not reimburse pharmacies for more than the MAC even in cases in which

a pharmacy claims that the MAC is below their ingredient costs, leaving the pharmacy to decide between not filling the prescription
or taking the MAC reimbursement.


                                                                 6
on AWP), drugs that are profitable for pharmacies to dispense may not be high-value or low cost. Alpert

et al. [2013] show that this system has led to a type of “perverse competition,” in which there are incentives

to inflate estimated drug costs and to fill prescriptions for drugs with inflated estimated costs. Furthermore,

in the case of binding MACs, pharmacies are incentivized to stock weakly cheaper drugs within a therapeu-

tic class. Taken together, these mechanisms suggest that negotiated prices may be lower than the previously

administered prices. These incentives exist despite the presence of Medicaid rebates, which we predict will

remain unchanged (Scott Morton [1997]).

    MCOs may also affect the utilization of drugs, either by simply skimping on the provision of drugs over-

all, altering the mix of drugs consumed, favoring more cost-effective drugs such as generics, or attempting

to increase the consumption of “high-value” drugs or those that have large medical offsets (Starc and Town

[2015]; Lavetti and Simon [2016]). Private firms will have incentives to design contracts so as to cream-

skim healthy enrollees – a relevant concern within our setting. Studies on both Medicare Part D (Lavetti

and Simon [2016]; Carey [2017]) and the health insurance marketplaces (Geruso et al. [2016]) find evidence

that screening incentives affect contract design; risk-adjustment systems can mitigate these incentives.

    Our paper is related to a growing literature exploring supply-side incentives in insurance markets, with

a particular focus on public programs. While a number of studies compare public and private provision in

Medicare (Town and Liu [2003]; Curto et al. [2014]; Curto et al. [2017]) and Medicaid (Duggan [2004],

Duggan and Hayford [2013]), researchers rarely observe details of the care received by enrollees once their

care is privately provided. This makes it difficult to examine what private providers are doing differently,

and to what effect.10 Other papers examine how managed care plans differ from fee-for-service health

insurance for the privately insured (Cutler et al. [2000]). Our analysis provides a view inside the “black

box” of managed care in an important and relatively understudied setting. A more recent literature argues

that a substantial portion of the private gains from the Medicare Advantage program accrue to insurers,

though the exact magnitude is a matter of debate (see Cabral et al. [2014]; Curto et al. [2014]; Duggan et al.

[2016]).We focus on how MCOs affect spending and the quality of care; a full analysis of the incidence of

this program is outside the scope of this paper.
  10 Curto et al. [2017], which compares healthcare utilization by traditional Medicare enrollees with that of Medicare Advantage

enrollees contained in the Health Care Cost Institute sample of the privately insured, is a notable exception.




                                                               7
3      Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1      Drug Benefit Privatization Decisions

      State Medicaid programs can be divided into three broad categories at any given point in time: (1)

non-MCO medical, non-MCO pharmacy (FFS/FFS); (2) MCO medical, non-MCO pharmacy (MCO/FFS);

and (3) MCO medical, MCO pharmacy (MCO/MCO). Privatization and carving-in of pharmacy benefits

are synonymous in our setting: states privatize pharmacy benefits by carving them into medical MCO con-

tracts. For this reason, there are no instances of states categorized as having a non-MCO medical benefit

but an MCO pharmacy benefit. After the implementation of the ACA, there are nine potential transitions as

described in Table 1.11

      We use two main rules when categorizing states. First, Medicaid programs may differ in how care is

provided in different parts of the state or to distinct eligibility groups; we categorize states with anything

beyond minimal use of MCOs as MCO states. Second, we treat only risk-bearing private firms providing

comprehensive medical coverage as MCOs.12

                                           Table 1: State transition types
                                                                      t=T
                            (medical / pharmacy) FFS/FFS MCO/FFS                         MCO/MCO
                                 FFS/FFS               11            0                      5
                            t=0 MCO/FFS                 1            4                      8
                                 MCO/MCO                0            0                     22
      Notes: States are classified as having an MCO if the state has a significant number of enrollees in an MCO that bears
      risk.


      In our baseline analysis, we use the 16 states that are FFS/FFS or MCO/FFS in both the pre-period and

the post-period as control states, and compare them against the 13 states which transitioned to MCO/MCO

in the post-period. There were 22 states that remained MCO/MCO throughout our time period; we exclude

these from our analysis. By the end of our sample period, almost all states are either FFS/FFS or MCO/MCO.

Excluding prescription drugs from MCO contracts is rare in the post-period, and therefore a state’s decision

about whether to use an MCO for a medical benefit is likely to predict the state’s decision for a pharmacy

benefit.
    11 Table
           A.27 contains the identities of the states undergoing each of the nine transition types.
    12 Almostall state Medicaid programs contract with private firms in more limited situations, such as for administering some fee
for service benefits or for providing some specific benefits (such as behavioral health). Most states without an MCO contract with
private firms to provide primary care case management (PCCM), which are primary care arrangements that involve some managed
care-type features, but no risk-sharing for other spending.


                                                                 8
      Of the 13 states in our sample that began MCO/FFS, eight transitioned to MCO/MCO, likely reflecting a

response to the ACA rule change, rather than a sudden change in preferences about drug benefit privatization.

Of the 16 states that began as FFS/FFS, only five privatized their drug benefits, and all of those states did so

as a part of a much larger decision to begin using MCOs for medical benefits. We argue that the drug benefits

are largely incidental to the privatization decision for these states; institutional details alleviate concerns that

the transition might be a function of unobservable (to the researcher) trends in drug costs. We examine the

robustness of our results to alternative ways of defining treatment and control groups.


3.2     Data

      The Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data contain information on the utilization of drugs paid for

through the Medicaid program. For each National Drug Code (NDC) in each state and in each quarter,

we observe the number of prescriptions filled as well as (pre-rebate) spending.13 Since the passage of the

ACA, MCO drug purchases have been collected and reported separately within the same dataset: our anal-

ysis covers the second quarter of 2010 (the first quarter for which MCO drug utilization was reported),

through the third quarter of 2016. Given that reimbursements and rebates rely on this data, both state and

federal governments have strong incentives to ensure that the drug utilization data is complete.14

      We obtain additional information from a number of sources. We compute per-enrollee Medicaid drug

spending using enrollment data from the Medicaid Enrollment Reports.15 Many states expanded Medicaid

as a result of the ACA; to account for the possibility that the medical needs of the average enrollee changed,

we collected data on the timing of the expansions. We obtained information on the active ingredients of the

drugs in the Medicaid State Drug Utilization data from current and historical versions of the Drugs @ FDA
   13 We also observe the total number of “units” of the drug that were dispensed. We rely upon the prescriptions rather than units

for two reasons. First, prescriptions are a more easily interpreted cross-drug measure of utilization. Second, there are many possible
ways in which units can be measured, and there is some evidence that units have been reported with inconsistent measurements.
Many of our results do not involve either the units or prescriptions measure. To investigate the robustness of our results to this
decision, we created an “average units per prescription” variable for each NDC code, and then divide units by this measure,
creating a variable that provides how many “normally sized” prescriptions worth of a drug were dispensed. Medicaid suppresses
data from infrequently filled NDC codes for privacy reasons. By comparing total state-year drug spending from our data to external
sources, we are able to confirm that minimal spending is missing.
   14 The Medicaid State Drug Utilization data are an input for collecting rebates from drug manufacturers, which are split between

the states and the federal government. Manufacturers pay rebates based upon these data, giving them an incentive to ensure that
no additional utilization is included. CMS has the ability to withhold federal Medicaid drug funds to states that are not collecting
rebate information.
   15 Medicare-Medicaid dual eligibles receive drug coverage from Medicare Part D, and therefore their prescription drug utilization

is not included in the Medicaid State Utilization Data. When constructing Medicaid enrollee drug spending, we exclude Medicare-
Medicaid dual eligibles from the denominator. The exact timing of the historical reports that we were able to locate varies across
years. We interpolate the enrollment data so as to make these available at the quarterly level.



                                                                  9
database and the FDA’s National Drug Code (NDC) Directory, which enables us to determine whether the

NDC is for a branded or generic version of the drug and its active ingredient.16

    We construct a number of dependent variables: share MCO provides the share of Medicaid drug spend-

ing in a state-quarter that is by MCOs, while drug spending per enrollee measures drug spending per

enrollee-quarter. In order to decompose the effect of privatization, we construct prescriptions per enrollee

and (point-of-sale) price per prescription, noting that drug spending per enrollee is equal to prescriptions

per enrollee times price per prescription.17 Drug utilization per enrollee replaces the NDC-state-quarter

point-of-sale price per prescription in the data with the average point-of-sale price per prescription for that

NDC-quarter, and then recalculates spending at the new (average) prices. In order to measure the use of

inexpensive generics, we created three variables: generic penetration is the share of prescriptions that are

filled with a generic; generic efficiency is the share of generic prescriptions filled when a generic is avail-

able; and generic accessibility is the share of prescriptions that are for drugs for which a generic is available.

Generic penetration is equal to generic efficiency times generic accessibility. To examine the effect of pri-

vatization on the mix of drugs, we create share high offset which is the share of drug spending that is for

drugs that have substantial offsets as described in Chandra et al. [2010] and in Starc and Town [2015].18

    Table 2 presents summary statistics for the second quarter of 2010 as well as the differences between

treatment and control states.1920 Drug spending per enrollee and drug utilization per enrollee are eco-

nomically similar and statistically indistinguishable for the treatment and control states. However, there

is evidence that the treatment and control states differ along several dimensions: Utilization of high offset

drugs is 3.6 percentage points lower in treatment states than in control states. These differences are relatively

small, but suggest slightly more room to increase these measures of efficiency in the states that privatized

drug benefits. Finally, treatment states were more likely than control states to expand Medicaid under the

ACA. We present all analyses both excluding and including a control for the Medicaid expansion, and find




                                                       10
                                             Table 2: Summary statistics
                                                              Treatment             Control               Difference
                                                             Mean    SD           Mean    SD             Mean      SD
Share MCO                                                    0.002        0.005   0.000        0.000       .002       0.001
Drug spending per enrollee                                    209           57     212           64         -3          23
Prescriptions per enrollee                                   3.162        0.892   2.947        0.800       .216       0.314
Price per prescription                                        66            8      73           15       -6.084         5
Price per generic prescription                                20            5      22           12       -2.664         3
Price per branded (no gen comp) prescription                  248           26     265           66     -16.695         20
Price per branded (w/ gen comp) prescription                  102           14     114           21    -11.926*          7
Drug utilization per enrollee                                 252           74     239           70         13          27
Generic penetration                                          0.661        0.037   0.668        0.032      -.007       0.013
Generic efficiency                                           0.788        0.025   0.793        0.019      -.005       0.008
Generic accessibility                                        0.838        0.028   0.842        0.023      -.004       0.010
Share high offset                                            0.419        0.038   0.455        0.040    -.036**       0.015
Share with Medicaid                                          0.164        0.054   0.156        0.043       .008       0.018
Share in medical MCO                                         0.307        0.319   0.179        0.313       .128       0.118
Expands Medicaid?                                            0.769        0.439   0.313        0.479     .457**       0.172
Share with Republican governor                               0.462        0.519   0.438        0.512       .024       0.192
Share with Republican legislature                            0.468        0.122   0.506        0.157      -.038       0.053
Observations                                                         13                   16

Notes: Unit of observation is the state-quarter for states in the second quarter of 2010. Drug spending per enrollee,
prescriptions per enrollee, and price per prescription are calculated for all spending. Price per generic prescription, price
per branded (no gen comp) prescription, and price per branded (w/ gen comp) prescription are calculated for those drugs
that match the FDA database. Therefore, their average does not exactly equal the average price per prescription.
Differences between the treatment and control states that are statistically significant are noted as: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                             11
that the inclusion of this control does not affect any of the paper’s results.

3.3       Estimation

For state s in quarter t, let Yst be one of the dependent variables of interest, αs be a state-specific fixed effect,

τt be a quarter fixed effect, privst be an indicator for whether a state has begun to privatize its Medicaid drug

benefit, and expst be an indicator for whether the state expanded Medicaid as under the ACA. Our estimating

equation is given by:



                                           Yst = αs + τt + β privst + λ expst + εst .                                              (1)

We also augment equation (1) by including lags and leads of the privatization indicator. We present plots

of these lag/lead coefficients to illustrate both how states moved prescriptions to MCOs, and the resulting

impact on drug spending.21 We weigh observations by each state’s Medicaid drug spending in the second

quarter of 2010, the first quarter of our analysis, and cluster standard errors by state.22 Finally, we winsorize

outliers of the dependent variables in the regression analyses.23

      We use equation (1) to perform a difference-in-differences (DID) analysis of the effect of privatizing

some pharmacy benefits on outcomes of interest. We also refer to this as the “reduced form” analysis. When

states begin privatizing some pharmacy benefits, they do not switch all pharmacy spending into MCOs.24

We therefore also create instrumental variable estimates of what the effect of privatization would be if all

of a state’s enrollees’ pharmacy benefits were administered by MCOs. To do this, we use equation (1) to
  16 In  analysis that rely upon the FDA data to classify drugs, we exclude drugs accounting for roughly 3 percent of revenues
because they fail to match the FDA data. Many of these appear to be non-prescription drugs.
  17 One limitation of the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data is that they do not account for the effect of rebates on the prices of

drugs. We discuss this issue further in the robustness section.
  18 To ensure that this measure captures differences in utilization rather than differences in pricing, we do not use state-quarter

specific prices to create spending, instead substituting in quarterly prices across all states.
  19 Figure A.7 presents these summary statistics in histogram form for treatment and control states.
  20 As the map in Figure A.6 illustrates, there is no obvious geographic clustering of our treatment and control states.
  21 The instrumental variable analyses substitute share MCO for priv in equation 1, and then instrument for share MCO with
                                                                           st
privst .
  22 We use this weighting scheme for all state-level analysis, so as to increase comparability across specifications. Counts of

prescriptions, enrollees, and measures of spending all have correlations above 0.9, so the decision is of little empirical consequence.
  23 Specifically, we run a regression with state and year fixed effects on the dependent variable, and obtain predicted residuals. We

then replace any residuals below the first percentile of residuals with the first percentile and any residuals above the ninety ninth
percentile of residuals with the ninety ninth percentile of residuals. The winsorized version of our variable is then the predicted
values from this regression plus these winsorized residuals.
  24 The enrollees that switch into MCOs are likely a non-random subset of enrollees. Specifically, many states move healthier

enrollees into MCOs. For this reason, we do not compare spending within a state of those with MCO drug benefits relative to those
with FFS drug benefits. Our estimates will represent a local average treatment effect for those switching into MCOs and therefore
our results might not generalize to other groups of enrollees.



                                                                 12
estimate the “first stage” relationship between privatizing some pharmacy benefits and share MCO. The

IV estimates of the effect of share MCO on our outcomes of interest effectively re-scale the reduced form

estimates by the first stage estimates.



4 Results

4.1     First Stage


                    Figure 1: Percent of Medicaid drug spending by MCOs for treatment states




      Notes: For each state, the dashed red line indicates the date upon which we record the state as beginning to privatize
      their prescription drug benefit. The y-axis shows the share of drug spending by MCOs.



Figure 1 plots the share of drug spending by MCOs in each of our 13 treatment states over time; the vertical

dashed line denotes the privatization date. For most states, there is a relatively sharp break in the share

of prescriptions to an MCO at the time of privatization.2526 Figure 2 confirms the presence of a break by
  25 All  of these dates were confirmed by comparison to external news sources. The only date that we were unable to confirm
perfectly is for the state of Illinois, which began privatizing some drug benefits for some elderly enrollees in May 2011. These
enrollees are likely to be Medicare-Medicaid dual-eligible and therefore excluded from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data.
Therefore, we instead use the third quarter of 2012, the first period for which there is private spending in our data for Illinois, as the
privatization date for Illinois.
   26 Figure A.8 illustrates that few prescriptions are reimbursed by MCOs in control states, and that the increase in the share of

prescriptions to an MCO increased much more gradually among the states that already privatized some drug benefits prior to the
ACA.



                                                                   13
plotting the coefficients on lags and leads of the privatization decision using the dependent variable MCO

share of prescriptions. In the first quarter after privatization begins, the share of prescriptions covered by

MCOs jumps to 50 percent and reaches 70 percent within two years.27 The clear break from the flat pre-trend

suggests that the DID estimates will capture a relatively stark increase in the use of MCOs.28

     Panel A of Table 3 presents estimates of a regression in which we collapse the lags and leads into a pre-

post indicator variable. The pooled coefficient of 0.607 in column (1) indicates that the share of prescriptions

written by MCOs in the privatization states rose by 60.7 percentage points. The IV estimates of the effect

of MCO drug benefit provision on our outcomes of interest will effectively re-scale the reduced form DID

estimates by these first stage estimates (by approximately 1/.607 = 1.65). In column (2) we include pre-post

indicators for states that expanded Medicaid, using the appropriate timing for each state, to control for any

changes in the composition of enrollees. The coefficient on Medicaid expansion is close to zero, and the

coefficient on the privatization indicator is unchanged and still highly significant.

               Figure 2: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and MCO penetration




     Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
     pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
     Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
     Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization are presented in the dark line, and a 95 percent confidence
     interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.


   27 The estimated coefficients are all near zero prior to privatization. Note that the coefficient is not identically zero for two reasons.

First, even if the MCO share of prescriptions was identically zero in the pre-period, the coefficient would not be zero because of
a general time trend towards greater privatization. Second, states such as Delaware, Utah, and Iowa had very limited experiences
with privatized pharmacy benefits prior to the broader adoption decision that we study.
   28 The existence of some pre-privatization spending by MCOs and some post-privatization spending by the state is evidence that

our binary privatization decision abstracts from the nuances of state programs. Within most states, whether enrollees are enrolled
in managed care and plan features (and whether enrollment in specific plans is voluntary or mandatory) can vary by geography and
by reason for Medicaid eligibility.




                                                                    14
4.2     Impact on Drug Use

4.2.1     Impact on drug consumption

We first explore the effect of privatization on drug consumption, as measured by prescriptions per enrollee.

Figure 3 shows that drug consumption is basically unchanged in the post-period. Therefore, any cost savings

must come for lower prices per prescription.

                     Figure 3: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and logged
                                         Prescriptions per enrollee-quarter




      Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
      pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
      Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
      Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization are presented in the dark line, and a 95 percent confidence
      interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.


      In Figure 4, we see that the average price per prescription is flat before privatization and falls immedi-

ately following privatization. This reduction in average price could be due to lower prices for the same drugs

or a shift towards less expensive drugs, or both. We will explore both mechanisms in order to decompose

our results and understand the mechanisms that drive them.


4.2.2     Impact on drug spending per enrollee

We next present the net effect of flat drug consumption and lower drug prices on overall drug spending per

enrollee. Figure 5 plots the coefficients on lags and leads of the privatization decision on the log of spending

per enrollee. Spending per enrollee (in logs) fluctuates prior to privatization, but then noticeably drops

following privatization. We pool the data and present regression results in Table 3. Column (1) in Panel

B of Table 3 shows the reduced form estimate of the effect of privatization on logged spending, where the

                                                                   15
          Figure 4: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and logged price per prescription




     Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
     pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
     Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
     Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization are presented in the dark line, and a 95 percent confidence
     interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.


predictor variable is the privatization indicator variable, priv. Column (2) presents the IV estimate, while

Columns (3) and (4) include a post-Medicaid expansion dummy as a robustness check. The estimate in

our preferred specification, column (4), suggests that administering the pharmacy benefits of all Medicaid

enrollees through MCOs would reduce drug spending by 22.4 percent.29

     Echoing the graphical presentation above, we decompose the effect by measuring the impact of pri-

vatization on prices and quantities. Panels C, D, and E of Table 3 are structured identically to Panel B,

except that the dependent variables are prescriptions per enrollee, price per prescription, and utilization per

enrollee, respectively.30 Focusing on the results in column (4), Panels C and D further illustrate that the

decrease in spending per enrollee is driven by a shift toward lower priced prescriptions, rather than by a

decrease in the number of prescriptions per enrollee. The price per prescription decreases by a statistically

significant 28 percent, more than offsetting a statistically insignificant 7.9 percent increase in the number of

prescriptions per enrollee. The point estimate in Panel E implies that privatization reduces utilization per

enrollee by 15.3 percent but is statistically indistinguishable from zero. We further explore the effect of

privatization on point-of-sale prices in Section 4.3. Utilization per enrollee measures what spending would

have been if prescriptions were re-priced to national averages: the effect of privatization on utilization per
  29 Ifthe coefficient estimate in the regression isβ and the dependent variable is logged, then the administering the pharmacy
benefits of all Medicaid enrollees through MCOs has a 100 × (eβ − 1) percent effect.
  30 The effect of lags and leads of the privatization decision on these variables is presented in Figure A.9.




                                                                  16
        Table 3: Reduced Form and IV relationship between MCOs and per enrollee spending
                                                 Panel A: Dep var = Share MCO
                                                                   (1)                                 (2)
               Priv                                               0.607                               0.596
                                                            [0.0757]***                          [0.0743]***
               Medicaid expansion                                                                    0.0374
                                                                                                     [0.0306]
               R-sq                                               0.934                               0.935
               Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                36.68                               37.16
               Share MCO mean                                                   0.148 (0.28)
               N                                                   741                                 741
                                     Panel B: Dep var = ln(Spending per enrollee quarter)
                                                     Reduced Form             IV        Reduced Form               IV
                                                          (1)                 (2)            (3)                   (4)
               Priv                                     -0.135                             -0.151
                                                      [0.0524]**                         [0.0658]**
               Share MCO                                                    -0.222                               -0.253
                                                                          [0.0896]**                            [0.116]**
               Medicaid expansion                                                          0.0551                0.0646
                                                                                          [0.0564]              [0.0637]
               R-sq                                     0.801               0.792         0.803                  0.793
               Spending per enrollee mean                                     221.79 (75.62)
                                   Panel C: Dep var = ln(Prescriptions per enrollee quarter)
               Priv                                     0.0708                             0.0452
                                                       [0.0411]*                          [0.0456]
               Share MCO                                                    0.117                                0.0759
                                                                           [0.0582]*                            [0.0704]
               Medicaid expansion                                                          0.0871                0.0842
                                                                                         [0.0410]**           [0.0404]**
               R-sq                                     0.767               0.778           0.773                0.781
               Prescriptions per enrollee mean                                  2.92 (0.86)
                                     Panel D: Dep var = ln(Average price per prescription)
               Priv                                     -0.206                             -0.196
                                                      [0.0470]***                        [0.0500]***
               Share MCO                                                    -0.339                               -0.329
                                                                          [0.0584]***                         [0.0693]***
               Medicaid expansion                                                         -0.0330               -0.0207
                                                                                          [0.0336]              [0.0361]
               R-sq                                     0.819               0.848          0.821                 0.849
               Price per prescription mean                                     76.76 (18.9)
                                    Panel E: Dep var = ln(Utilization per enrollee quarter)
               Priv                                    -0.0830                            -0.0988
                                                       [0.0540]                           [0.0680]
               Share MCO                                                    -0.137                               -0.166
                                                                           [0.0920]                              [0.119]
               Medicaid expansion                                                          0.0537                0.0599
                                                                                          [0.0560]              [0.0625]
               R-sq                                     0.819               0.812         0.821                  0.812
               Utilization per enrollee mean                                  223.23 (72.89)
               N                                         741                 741               741                741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls include state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in
which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of
2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01


                                                                 17
                    Figure 5: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and logged
                                         quarterly spending per enrollee




     Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
     pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
     Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
     Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization are presented in the dark line, and a 95 percent confidence
     interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.


enrollee is about two thirds of the effect on spending per enrollee, suggesting that roughly 33 percent of the

decrease in spending is due to price changes.31


4.2.3      Impact on generic penetration

Figure 6 highlights one potential driver of the decline in point-of-sale prices: substitution from branded to

generic drugs. We plot the coefficients on lags and leads of the privatization decision on generic penetration.

After a temporary bump in generic penetration about six quarters prior to privatization, generic penetration

remains flat for the next six quarters. Generic penetration begins to increase at the time of privatization and

rises steadily thereafter; two years after privatization, generic penetration has risen by roughly 5 percentage

points. Panel A of Table 4 presents pooled difference-in-differences and corresponding instrumental variable

estimates. The estimates in column (4) show that MCOs cause generic penetration to increase by 7.76

percentage points: an 11.7 percent increase on a base of 66 percent.

    There are two distinct mechanisms through which MCOs can increase generic penetration: within-

molecule and across-molecule substitution. MCOs may provide both physicians and pharmacies with in-
  31 The later analysis will study the effect on prices directly and find a similar magnitude estimated with a relatively high level of
precision. For simplicity in exposition, we treat both the 15.3 percent decrease and the 7.1 percent decrease as if they are precisely
estimated, with the understanding that there is of course uncertainty about the actual effect of each driver of spending.




                                                                  18
               Figure 6: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and generic penetration




     Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
     pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
     Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
     Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization are presented in the dark line, and a 95 percent confidence
     interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.


centives to prescribe more generics. Physicians may respond directly by prescribing more generics (both

within and across molecules). Pharmacists cannot normally switch prescriptions from one molecule to an-

other without the physician’s consent, but they can often unilaterally substitute a bio-equivalent generic

version in place of the branded drug. Many pharmacies have software that flags costly branded drugs, and

pharmacists may contact physicians to request generics.

    Panel B of Table 4 presents estimates from a model with generic efficiency (share of generic prescriptions

when a generic is available) as the dependent variable, while Panel C of Table 4 presents estimates from a

model with generic accessibility (share of prescriptions that are for drugs for which a generic is available) as

the dependent variable.32 The coefficients in column (4) for generic efficiency and generic accessibility are

both statistically significant, meaning that both within- and across-molecule substitution contribute to the

increase in generic penetration. The coefficient on generic accessibility is 0.0526, meaning prescriptions

filled for molecules for which no generic is available fell by 5.26 percentage points, or 29 percent (on a

pre privatization mean of 18.6 percent). We also estimate a 4.18 percentage point increase in the share

of prescriptions that are generic among molecules for which a generic is available. Our results imply that

roughly two thirds of the increase in generic penetration results from across-molecule shifts and roughly one

third is a result of within-molecule shifts from branded to generic.                 33

  32 In   the interests of space, the reduced form relationships for these two variables are presented in Figure A.10 and Figure A.11.
  33 Our    estimates imply that the share of prescriptions that are for branded drugs with no generic equivalent available decreased


                                                                  19
                               Table 4: Effect of MCOs on generic penetration
                                    Panel A: Dep var = Generic penetration
                                          Reduced Form               IV           Reduced Form               IV
                                               (1)                   (2)               (3)                   (4)
     Priv                                      0.0531                                 0.0463
                                             [0.0191]***                            [0.0168]**
     Share MCO                                                     0.0874                                 0.0776
                                                                 [0.0260]***                           [0.0246]***
     Medicaid expansion                                                               0.0232              0.0203
                                                                                    [0.0102]**         [0.00990]**
     R-sq                                       0.893               0.907          0.903                   0.914
     Generic penetration mean                                          0.733 (0.046)
                                      Panel B: Dep var = Generic efficiency
     Priv                                      0.0309                                 0.0249
                                             [0.0106]***                            [0.0101]**
     Share MCO                                                     0.0508                                 0.0418
                                                                 [0.0154]***                            [0.0160]**
     Medicaid expansion                                                               0.0202              0.0187
                                                                                   [0.00703]***        [0.00760]**
     R-sq                                       0.825               0.838          0.851                   0.861
     Generic efficiency mean                                           0.823 (0.026)
                                    Panel C: Dep var = Generic accessibility
     Priv                                      0.0333                                 0.0314
                                             [0.0143]**                             [0.0120]**
     Share MCO                                                     0.0548                                 0.0526
                                                                 [0.0191]***                           [0.0165]***
     Medicaid expansion                                                               0.00641            0.00444
                                                                                     [0.00826]           [0.00732]
     R-sq                                       0.892               0.906          0.894                   0.907
     Generic accessibility mean                                        0.889 (0.035)
     N                                           741                 741                741                 741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls include state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in
which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of
2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            20
    We performed a back of the envelope calculation, which suggests that increased use of generic and

generic accessible drugs decrease drug spending by 8.9 percent.34 We calculate a 7.5 percent decrease in

drug spending from reduced use of branded drugs for which no generic is available, a 3.6 percent decrease

from eliminating prescriptions for branded drugs for which generic drugs are available, and a 2.2 percent

increase from replacing all of these prescriptions with prescriptions for generics. We conclude that much

of the remaining decrease in spending (not attributable to lower point-of-sale prices) can be explained by

increased use of generics.35

    The generic accessibility result could be driven by patent expiration, rather than molecular substitution:

differences across states in the types of drugs used by Medicaid patients combined with patent expiration

could lead to changes in generic accessibility. We rule out this concern directly by creating a simulated

generic accessibility measure that calculates how generic accessibility would have changed over time (as

a result of patent expiration) if drug utilization patterns had remained fixed at the second quarter of 2010

levels. Figure A.12 presents the relationship between that measure and lags and leads of the privatization

decision. There is no break from trend in this variable at the time of privatization.


4.2.4    Impact on use of high offset drugs

MCOs reduce drug utilization; however, if this reduction is attributable to high-value drugs that offset other

spending, overall medical costs could increase. We examine the effect of privatization on consumption of

high offset drugs in Figure 7, which plots the coefficients on lags and leads of the privatization decision on

the variable share high offset. There is an immediate jump of roughly 3 percent in the share of spending for

high offset drugs post-privatization.36 In Panel C of Table 5, we present pooled versions of this analysis;

by 5.26 percentage points. The share of prescriptions that are for generics increased by 7.76 percentage points. It therefore follows
that the share of prescriptions that are for branded drugs for which a generic is available increased by 2.50 percentage points.
   34 This back-of-the-envelope calculation is described in Table A.9. The calculation assumes that shifts in demand are for aver-

age priced drugs within three groups of drugs: (i) branded drugs with no generic equivalents, (ii) branded drugs with a generic
equivalent, and (iii) generic drugs. Increased use of generics has such a large effect on spending because of the very large price
differentials between branded drugs and generic drugs. As a result, these numbers are relatively sensitive to assumptions about the
prices of the branded drugs that are being shifted to generic. We therefore assume in our preferred calculation that all of the shifting
from branded to generic drugs is away from branded drugs that are priced like branded drugs for which a generic is available.
   35 Within the same molecule, spending decreases from increased generic utilization are unlikely to have any potential adverse

consequences, but also have only a limited impact on spending. While beyond the scope of our paper, a deeper investigation into the
potential health consequences of cross-molecule substitution among Medicaid enrollees is an important direction for future public
health research. Table A.29 presents an alternative decomposition of the ways in which MCOs decrease prices per prescription. It
illustrates that while a number of channels contribute to the decrease, that the two more important are price decreases for identical
9 digit NDCs and across-molecule but within drug class substitution of branded drugs for generics.
   36 There is a marked increase in the share of spending that is high offset at least two years prior to privatization in states that

eventually privatize their medical benefit. After that, states that privatize do not have a different trend in the share of spending that



                                                                  21
we find that MCOs cause the share of utilization for high offset drugs to increase by 5.26 percentage points.

Prior to privatization of drug benefits, MCOs had incentives to promote the use of high offset drugs and

would have been relatively indifferent about the use of low offset drugs. Privatization might enhance the

MCO’s ability to promote high offset drugs while discouraging use of low-value drugs. Panels A and B of

Table 5 illustrate that there is no evidence of a change in the per enrollee utilization of high offset drugs after

privatization. Instead, the result is driven by decreased utilization of all other drugs.37 Lower utilization

– which holds prices constant – of non-high offset drugs decreased spending by roughly 13.4 percent.38

Additional decompositions are available in Table A.10.39

      We note that MCOs have particularly good incentives to keep enrollees using high offset drugs. In Table

A.28 we also find more muted changes for drugs in Medicare’s six protected drug classes. This provides

some additional evidence to assuage concerns that MCOs may not be providing sufficient coverage of drugs

deemed to be clinically valuable.40


4.3     Point-of-sale Drug Prices

State Medicaid programs reimburse pharmacies based on a measure of acquisition cost, while MCOs can

negotiate different point-of-sale prices with pharmacies. In this section, we estimate the effect of privatiza-

tion on drug pricing to explore the extent to which MCOs pay lower prices for identical drugs. We construct

a price per prescription for each NDC 9 code-state-quarter. The point-of-sale price measures the actual

reimbursements made to pharmacies, but does not fully capture payer costs or drug manufacturer revenues

because they do not account for rebates.

      For NDC d in state s in quarter t, let Ydst be the logged price per prescription. Let αds be an NDC9-state-

specific fixed effect, τdt be an NDC9-quarter fixed effect, privst be an indicator for whether a state has begun

to privatize its Medicaid drug benefit, and expst be an indicator for whether the state expanded Medicaid as

a result of the ACA. Our estimating equation is given by:
is for high offset drugs up until privatization occurs.
   37 In the interest of space, we relegate the figures with the effect of lags and leads of the adoption decision on these utilization

variables to Figure A.13 and Figure A.14.
   38 Privatization decreases utilization for non-high offset drugs by 22.7 percent. Non-high offset drugs are roughly 60 percent of

spending, suggesting that the lower utilization on non-high offset drugs lowers overall spending by roughly 13.4 percent. Utilization
of high offset drugs does not decrease, meaning lower prices for identical drugs decreased spending by the remaining 8 percent.
   39 The results are also presented graphically in Figure A.15 and Figure A.16.
   40 In unreported results, there is evidence of substitution towards generics and therefore spending decreases for three of the six

protected classes (antidepressants, antipsychotics, and immunosuppressants). By contrast, there is no evidence of changes for the
other three protected classes. Antidepressants, antipsychotics, and immunosuppressants have been flagged as the three protected
classes for which protected status may no longer be appropriate.


                                                                 22
                             Table 5: Effect of MCOs on use of high offset drugs
                Panel A: Dep var = ln(Utilization per enrollee quarter, high offset drugs)
                                     Reduced Form                IV          Reduced Form                IV
                                          (1)                    (2)              (3)                    (4)
        Priv                             -0.0224                                  -0.0116
                                         [0.0544]                                 [0.0642]
        Share MCO                                            -0.0369                                  -0.0195
                                                             [0.0905]                                  [0.108]
        Medicaid expansion                                                        -0.0368             -0.0361
                                                                                  [0.0542]            [0.0577]
        R-sq                              0.847                0.845               0.848               0.847
               Panel B: Dep var = ln(Utilization per enrollee quarter, not high offset drugs)
        Priv                              -0.126                                  -0.153
                                       [0.0606]**                                [0.0751]*
        Share MCO                                             -0.208                                   -0.257
                                                             [0.102]**                                [0.131]*
        Medicaid expansion                                                        0.0912               0.101
                                                                                  [0.0564]            [0.0647]
        R-sq                              0.820                0.810               0.825               0.812
                         Panel C: Dep var = Share of spending on high offset drugs
        Priv                             0.0237                                   0.0314
                                      [0.00676]***                             [0.00657]***
        Share MCO                                             0.0391                                  0.0526
                                                          [0.00869]***                             [0.00823]***
        Medicaid expansion                                                        -0.0261             -0.0281
                                                                               [0.00408]***        [0.00444]***
        R-sq                              0.936                0.939               0.950               0.954
        N                                  741                   741                741                 741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls include state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in
which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of
2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            23
                     Figure 7: Reduced form effect of privatization on the share of utilization
                                              on high offset drugs




     Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
     pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
     Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
     Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization are presented in the dark line, and a 95 percent confidence
     interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




                                         Ydst = αds + τdt + β privst + λ expst + εdst .                                             (2)

The inclusion of drug and time fixed effects implies that we are controlling for pricing differentials at a very

granular level.41

    Figure 8 presents leads and lags showing the movement of prices before and after privatization: prices

are relatively flat until privatization and then drop by 5.4 percent after privatization, consistent with our pre-

vious results. Analogous regressions are presented in Table 6; the IV regression indicates that full provision

of drug benefits by MCOs would decrease point-of-sale prices paid by 8.9 percent.42 Consistent with pre-

vious results, these estimates imply that roughly 40 percent of the overall decrease in spending per enrollee

could be driven by lower reimbursements to pharmacies. Since we lack drug-specific rebate data, these

results represent a lower bound on the potential savings by private firms. In addition, we observe realized

prices, rather than price schedules: we cannot account for any variation across consumers or pharmacies in

the price for a specific NDC code. In Section A.1, we break prices into two components – Medicaid’s per

prescription reimbursement to pharmacies and enrollee coinsurance – and examine heterogeneity in point-
  41 We also estimate versions with lags and leads of the decision to privatize, so as to check for pre-trends.
  42 This is similar but not identical to the 7.1 percent decrease in spending from price changes in Section 4.2.2. Factors such as
differences in weighting, the level of aggregation, and the controls included likely contribute to the (small) difference.



                                                                  24
of-sale price changes across different kinds of drugs. We find that price decreases are driven by lower prices

to pharmacies, while consumer cost sharing remains similar. Furthermore, we find that pharmacy reimburse-

ments from Medicaid are decreasing substantially for drugs that are neither generics nor high offset, while

reimbursements for generics remain similar.43

      Figure 8: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and logged price per prescription




    Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
    pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Includes NDC9-state fixed effects, NDC9-quarter
    fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted
    by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the first quarter in which it appears in the data. Point estimates
    for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization are presented in the dark line, and a 95 percent confidence interval for
    those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




                         Table 6: Effect of MCOs on privatization and logged Pharmacy prices
                                             Reduced Form                IV          Reduced Form               IV
                                                  (1)                    (2)              (3)                   (4)
                Priv                             -0.0532                                 -0.0555
                                               [0.0141]***                             [0.0140]***
                Share MCO                                            -0.0879                                 -0.0929
                                                                   [0.0286]***                              [0.0317]***
                Medicaid expansion                                                       0.00886              0.0120
                                                                                         [0.0132]            [0.0177]
                R-sq                               0.992                0.992             0.992               0.992
                N                                3220610             3220610            3220610              3220610
    Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
    pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Unreported controls includes NDC9-state fixed
    effects, and NDC9-quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are
    weighted by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the first quarter in which it appears in the data.
    Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01

  43 The   effect of privatization on the prices of non-generic drugs that are high offset is more mixed.


                                                                   25
4.3.1    Rebates

One potential concern with the analyses of point-of-sale drug prices is that the data do not capture drug

rebates. Section A.2 examines whether privatization affect the drug rebates that states receive. Note that in

our sample of states in 2010, roughly 92 percent of rebates were federally mandated, rather than any supple-

mental negotiated rebates. It is, therefore, perhaps unsurprising that we find no evidence that privatization

affects rebates.


4.4     Alternative hypotheses

In this section, we explore two alternative hypotheses. First, MCOs may cream-skim profitable patients.

Second, our results may be driven by an effort to reduce the deadweight loss associated with moral hazard,

as in Einav et al. [2016].

      Our results show that privatization leads to lower point-of-sale prices, to a shift in spending to high

offset drugs, and to the increased use of generics. These changes are more naturally explained by attempts

by private firms to control spending rather than by attempts to cream-skim. In addition, we do not find

evidence that the pattern in our results is systematically stronger in those states that do not risk adjust

Medicaid payments based upon enrollee health, or that the results are systematically different in markets

that include some of the largest Medicaid MCOs.44 We conclude that cream-skimming is unlikely to explain

our pattern of results.

      Private MCOs may be better equipped to reduce the deadweight loss associated with moral hazard.

In Section A.5, we explore additional heterogeneity in our effect across drugs. This analysis, which uses

elasticities estimated in Einav et al. [2016], does not find evidence that decreased utilization is concentrated

among drugs that are more price elastic. We also examine whether cost sharing increases more for more price

elastic drugs. Consistent with the very limited cost sharing that is allowed in Medicaid, we find no evidence

to suggest that MCOs increase coinsurance on drugs for which demand is more price elastic. We conclude

that the mechanisms underlying our results and previous studies exploring demand-side cost-sharing are

likely different.
 44 These results are presented in Table A.12. In unreported regressions, we also find that the results are qualitatively similar across

markets with greater degrees of insurer concentration, as measured by HHIs of Part D carriers.




                                                                  26
5      Robustness and Extensions

5.1     Heterogeneity

In this section, we examine three potential sources of heterogeneity in the effect of privatization. First,

we collect data from the Medicaid Drug Utilization Review (MDUR) to determining whether MCOs are

required to use the state’s formulary or whether the MCO has some leeway in creating its own formulary.45

If the formulary is an important tool for steering consumers, we anticipate larger effects in the states in which

MCOs have some control over formularies. Second, we consider whether a state risk adjusts based upon

enrollee health.46 Without perfect risk-adjustment, MCOs may have an incentive to under-provide coverage

that will be particularly attractive for sick enrollees, which could in turn affect utilization.47 Finally, we

separate treated states based on whether they privatized both the medical and prescription drug benefit at

the same time. We replicate our central analysis, adding interactions between privatization and indicators

for simultaneous MCO privatization, formulary requirements, and risk-adjustment.48 The results of these

analyses are presented in Table 7. In Panel A, we interact the privatization dummy and the three indicators.

In Panel B, we perform an IV specification in which we interact share MCO and the three indicators. In the

IV specifications, we instrument for the endogenous variables with interactions between priv and the three

binary variables. We focus on results including all three categorizations in Table 7.49                       50 Column    (1) of Panel

A presents the effect of the privatization when interacted with the three categorizations on the share of drug

spending by MCOs.51
    45 We follow the coding in the 2015 MDUR on whether MCOs had to adopt the state’s Preferred Drug List (i.e., formulary) for
all states except Iowa, which did not have a carved-in benefit at that time. We determined based on more recent information from
the Kaiser Family Foundation that Iowa requires MCOs to follow the state formulary. MCOs that are not required to use a state’s
formulary may still face some oversight in how they design their formulary.
   46 We construct this based upon whether a state is listed as risk adjusting MCO payments based upon enrollee health status

using responses in Gifford et al. [2011]. For the states that privatized medical benefits after 2010, we performed additional interest
searches to determine whether they risk adjust based upon health. We found evidence that all of the states moving to Medicaid
managed care since the publication of Gifford et al. [2011] are risk-adjusting based on health.
   47 We note that while this is an important concern for states, cream-skimming incentives are unlikely to affect utilization of

generics or a shift toward use of higher offset drugs.
   48 Table A.13 presents each states categorization for each of the binary variables.
   49 The coefficients in these analyses remain similar when we add the three interactions one at a time, rather than all together.

Doing so leads to a very large number of coefficients, so these specifications are presented in Tables A.14 - A.21.
   50 Given the very large number of coefficients in these analyses, we do not systematically present specifications that include lags

and leads of the privatization decision. However, Figure A.17 presents lags and leads of the privatization decision separating states
based on whether MCOs have flexibility in designing PDLs. These specifications confirm breaks in trend following privatization
for states with this flexibility, but not for states that lack it.
   51 We relegate the first stages for the four endogenous variables to Table A.22. We can, however, draw the same insights from

Table 7, panel A, column (1). In particular, privatization in the states that do not risk adjust based upon health led to a much smaller
increase in the share of spending by MCOs (i.e., the point estimate is 0.28 rather than 0.68). Furthermore, because the coefficient on
the interaction between privatization and not risk adjusting is very different from zero, the IV effect of priv*1(no risk adj) in the first


                                                                   27
                                                   Table 7: Heterogeneity in Effect of MCOs based on state characteristics
                                                                                    Panel A: Reduced Form
                                Share MCO      ln(Spending       ln(Prescriptions      ln(Price per      ln(Utilization      Generic         Generic        Generic      Share of utilization,
                                              ...per enrollee)   ...per enrollee)     ...prescription)   ...per enrollee)   accessibility    efficiency    penetration    high offset drugs
                                   (1)              (2)                (3)                  (4)                (5)              (6)             (7)           (8)                 (9)
     Priv                         0.681           -0.170             0.0598               -0.230             -0.121           0.0449          0.0379         0.0675            0.0341
                                [0.0643]***     [0.0574]***         [0.0283]**          [0.0549]***        [0.0503]**        [0.0184]**     [0.00961]***   [0.0215]***      [0.00832]***
     Medicaid expansion           0.0592          0.0774              0.114              -0.0374             0.0863           0.00490         0.0156         0.0178           -0.0252
                                 [0.0342]*       [0.0442]*         [0.0387]***           [0.0302]           [0.0449]*        [0.00650]      [0.00416]***   [0.00731]**      [0.00585]***
     Priv*1(Same PDL)             0.0318          0.196               0.109               0.0836             0.220            -0.0191         -0.0383       -0.0487           -0.00189
                                 [0.0493]       [0.0706]***        [0.0375]***           [0.0596]          [0.0702]***        [0.0176]      [0.00922]***   [0.0211]**         [0.0108]
     Priv*1(No prior MCO)         -0.105          -0.179             -0.0549              -0.120             -0.144          -0.00547         0.0107        0.00570           0.00434
                                 [0.0673]         [0.119]            [0.0785]            [0.0607]*          [0.0908]          [0.0136]       [0.00701]      [0.0156]          [0.00667]
     Priv*1(No risk adj)          -0.401         -0.0780             -0.206               0.128              -0.132           -0.0334         -0.0124       -0.0337           -0.0140
                                [0.0501]***      [0.0736]          [0.0537]***          [0.0615]**          [0.0684]*         [0.0201]        [0.0101]      [0.0239]          [0.0124]
     R-sq                         0.958           0.816               0.789               0.844              0.839             0.911           0.893         0.926              0.951




28
                                                                                          Panel B: IV
     Share MCO                                    -0.277             0.0673               -0.344             -0.206           0.0657          0.0579         0.101             0.0509
                                                [0.0718]***          [0.0493]           [0.0554]***        [0.0644]***      [0.0218]***     [0.00866]***   [0.0223]***      [0.00930]***
     Medicaid expansion                           0.107               0.122              -0.0162             0.115           0.000868         0.0107         0.0102           -0.0285
                                                 [0.0533]*          [0.0505]**           [0.0271]           [0.0561]*        [0.00655]      [0.00426]**     [0.00771]       [0.00577]***
     Share MCO*1(same PDL)                        0.315               0.167               0.144              0.349            -0.0319         -0.0610       -0.0788           -0.00554
                                                [0.0987]***         [0.0662]**           [0.0738]*         [0.0945]***        [0.0226]      [0.00874]***   [0.0238]***        [0.0155]
     Share MCO*1(no prior MCO)                    -0.328             -0.0524              -0.269             -0.248           0.00216         0.0255         0.0245            0.0160
                                                  [0.233]            [0.150]             [0.119]**           [0.182]          [0.0172]       [0.0102]**     [0.0198]        [0.00668]**
     Share MCO*1(no risk adj)                     -0.455             -0.463              0.00746             -0.515           -0.0296         0.0135        -0.00305           0.0171
                                                 [0.224]*           [0.185]**             [0.141]           [0.197]**         [0.0356]        [0.0140]      [0.0377]          [0.0341]
     R-sq                                         0.795               0.762               0.871              0.808             0.923           0.907         0.937              0.955

     N                                             741                 741                 741                741               741             741           741                 741
              Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed
              effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is
              omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: *
              0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01
      In Panel B, the coefficient on share MCO*1(Same PDL) often has the opposite sign of the effect of

share MCO in many of the columns, implying that the privatization effect is stronger in states that allow

their MCOs to design their own formularies. This suggests that MCO interactions with physicians, absent

changes in formulary design, are not sufficient to drive the same reductions in spending. Column (2) reveals

that the effect of MCOs on spending per enrollee is effectively zero in states in which MCOs cannot design

their own formulary. Columns (3) and (4) show that point-of-sale pharmacy prices went down by less in

places where MCOs must use the state’s formulary. Columns (6) through (8) show that the shift towards

generics is weaker in places where the MCO must use the state’s formulary. Even in the states in which

the MCOs must use the state’s formulary, MCOs shifted utilization to higher offset drugs (Column (9)) and

to substitution of non-bioequivalent generics for branded drugs; such shifts could not be achieved through

formulary design alone.

      We next examine heterogeneity in our main effect across the five states that privatized medical and

pharmacy benefits concurrently relative to the effect of MCOs for the eight states that carved pharmacy

benefits into existing MCO contracts. We do not find statistically significant differences across the two

groups of treated states. Finally, we examine the coefficient on share MCO*1(no risk adj), which gives the

differential effect of MCOs for the three states that do not employ health based risk-adjustment. In these

states, we observe slightly larger decreases in spending per enrollee, driven by decreases in the number of

prescriptions being written per enrollee.52 Overall, the results of this section suggest that formulary design

is an important tool with which MCOs affect prescription drug spending.


5.2     Robustness

Beginning with Table A.23, we estimate specifications analogous to those in Sections 4.2.2, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4

for different samples. To facilitate comparison, column (1) presents the paper’s central estimates. In column

(2), we report estimates from specifications that exclude control states, so that we rely on other treatment

states to serve as controls. In column (3), we use the sample of 16 states that begin without medical MCOs,

11 of which serve as control states and 5 of which convert both medical and drug spending to MCOs. In

stage relationships will be capturing both the effect of much lower levels of spending by MCOs and that there is no health-based
risk-adjustment. We therefore focus further discussion on Panel B which presents the IV estimates, but note that the effect of MCOs
in states with no risk-adjustment should be interpreted with additional caution.
   52 In Table A.26, we determine that the increased relative prices for generics relative to those for branded drugs are not concen-

trated among the states that allow MCOs to design their own formularies. This provides some evidence against the hypothesis that
the shifting relative prices for generics versus branded drugs are driving the increased use of generics.



                                                                29
column (4), we repeat the analysis for the sample of 13 states that begin with MCOs for medical but carved

out drug benefits, five of which serve as controls and eight of which begin to carve in drug spending to

MCOs. Column (5) of Table A.23 excludes the two states in our treatment sample (Indiana and North

Dakota) that privatized drug benefits and expanded Medicaid at the same time. The timing of privatization

decisions does not appear to be coincident with large changes in enrollment more broadly.53 In columns (6)

and (7), we split the sample based upon whether a state expanded Medicaid. Across these specifications,

many of the results remain quite similar. One exception is that when we restrict the analyses to only those

states that did not expand Medicaid (Mississippi, Texas, and Utah are the only states that privatized drug

benefits but did not expand Medicaid), we no longer find any evidence of overall per enrollee spending

decreases from privatization. In these states, there is still evidence of price decreases, increases in the use of

generics, and a shift towards high offset drugs. However, there are increases in the number of prescriptions

per enrollee that negate these sources of savings.

      Table A.24 illustrates the robustness of our results to excluding individual states from the central analyses

from Sections 4.2.2, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4. The results remain very similar when individual treatment states are

excluded.54 Finally, we replicate the central analyses utilizing variation across all states and replacing the

privatization variable with the share of pharmacy spending by MCOs (lagged by one quarter).55 We present

these results in Table A.25. The results remain quite similar to the baseline results.


5.3     Medicare Falsification Exercise

We next show that changes in prescription drug usage are not driven by contemporaneous state level factors

that are correlated with Medicaid pharmacy benefit privatization. We re-perform our central analyses using

Medicare (Part D) prescription drug usage to serve as a placebo test. More specifically, we began with

a 10 percent sample of Medicare beneficiaries for 2010 through 2014. We then restricted the sample to

beneficiaries that are greater than 65 and that never receive low income part D subsidies. We recalculate

each of our central measures for this sample of patients.56 For additional details on the structure of and
  53 We   examine the relationship between enrollment and drug benefit privatization in Figure A.18.
  54 When     New York state is excluded, the effect of privatization on spending per enrollee falls by about 20 percent and becomes
statistically insignificant. All of the estimates remain similar when New York state is excluded.
   55 We exclude DC, RI, HI, KS, and the second quarter of 2014 for VA. These states all have implausible data patterns.
   56 Whereas the Medicaid data gives the number of prescriptions filled, the Medicare data we used contains the number of days

of pills filled. The measures in this analysis are therefore slightly different, although such differences should not affect the results.
We also create the dependent variable Simulated generic accessibility for Medicare, which gives the change in generic accessibility
due to patent expiration but holding drug usage fixed at the levels of the second quarter of 2010. We illustrated in Figure A.12 that



                                                                  30
utilization in the Part D program, please see Einav et al. [2015, 2016], Duggan and Scott Morton [2010],

Starc and Town [2015], Abaluck et al. [2015], Dalton et al. [2015].

                  Figure 9: Lags and leads of relationship between Medicaid privatization and
                                       Medicare prescription drug usage




     Notes: Specifications are limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
     pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls include state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the
     state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations
     are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by state.
     Spending is computed for Medicare enrollees 65+ years old who never receive a low income subsidy during the years
     we have data. Data covers the second quarter of 2010 through the fourth quarter of 2014. Significance levels: *0.10
     **0.05 ***0.01



    Figure 9 presents the relationship between lags and leads of the Medicaid privatization decision and

Medicare Part D prescription drug usage. Table 8 presents pooled versions of this relationship. There is no

evidence of any relationship between Medicaid privatization and spending per enrollees, days supply per

enrollee (the analog of prescriptions per enrollee), price per days supply (the analog of price per prescrip-

tion), utilization per enrollee or generic efficiency for Medicare Part D enrollees. The pooled estimate for

share high offset is statistically significant, but small. Inspection of the lags and leads of the effect illustrate

that the break occurs long before privatization. For generic accessibility (and therefore also generic penetra-

tion), there is a noticeable break from trend at the time of privatization. The pooled estimate is statistically

significant with a magnitudes that is roughly 1/4th as large as for the Medicaid prescription drug sample.

However, the point estimate for the variable simulated generic accessibility is nearly identical to the generic

accessibility point estimation, implying that the increased use of generics in the Medicare Part D sample is

driven exclusively by patent expiration.57 Overall, the falsification exercise does not provide any evidence
privatization did not affect this variable for Medicaid patients.
   57 We previously ruled out this explanation for the Medicaid sample. For example, the entry of generic Lipitor – used heavily in



                                                                 31
                  Table 8: Relationship between Medicaid privatization and Medicare
                                prescription drug spending (falsification)
                                 Dependent Variable
                                 ln(Spending per enrollee)                   -0.00882
                                                                             [0.0164]
                                 ln(Days supply per enrollee)                -0.00815
                                                                             [0.00639]
                                 ln(Price per days supply)                  -0.000882
                                                                             [0.0132]
                                 ln(Utilization per enrollee)                -0.0144
                                                                             [0.0138]
                                 Generic accessibility                        0.0110
                                                                           [0.00493]**
                                 Simulated generic accessibility             0.00944
                                                                           [0.00431]**
                                 Generic efficiency                          -0.00127
                                                                             [0.00134]
                                 Generic penetration                         0.00843
                                                                            [0.00432]*
                                 Share high offset                           0.00409
                                                                           [0.00192]**
Notes: Specifications are limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls include state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the
state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations
are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by state.
Spending is computed for Medicare enrollees 65+ years old who never receive a low income subsidy during the years
we have data. Data covers the second quarter of 2010 through the fourth quarter of 2014. Significance levels: *0.10
**0.05 ***0.01




                                                            32
to suggest that our central results are driven by contemporaneous factors that are unrelated to Medicaid drug

benefit privatization.


5.4     Extensions

Privatization may affect other dependent variables of interest. Section A.3 examines the effect of privatiza-

tion on total state spending on Medicaid, which depends on both drug spending and any spillover effects on

other types of spending, as well as on how MCOs and states split any surplus that MCOs create. There is

no evidence that privatization affected total per enrollee spending by the state Medicaid program, although

the results are quite imprecise. Section A.4 looks for any spillover effects of drug benefit privatization on

Emergency Department use by Medicaid patients. We were only able to obtain data for four states that

privatized drug benefits and eight control states. There is no evidence that privatization affected Emergency

Department use by Medicaid patients, although again the estimates are imprecise.



6     Conclusions

State and federal officials have proposed a range of policies to combat rising drug prices. Some policies –

including price controls and caps on consumer expenditure – are likely to have serious unintended conse-

quences. By contrast, the policy change we study could save billions of dollars without reducing overall drug

utilization; the sheer ability of MCOs to control access leads to major reductions in price per prescription.

Furthermore, beyond calls for “Medicare-for-all,” many advocate for direct price negotiation between the

Medicare program and drug manufacturers. This debate overlooks the fact that private MCOs administer a

large percentage of both Medicare and Medicaid drug benefits; it is important to know whether outsourcing

to MCOs has been successful.

      Several prior studies compare the performance of government versus MCO-administered Medicaid

health benefits (Duggan and Hayford [2013], Duggan [2004]). Our approach allows us to go inside the

“black box” to break out the sources of observed performance differences. In this paper, we examine the

impact of a plausibly exogenous rule change that made it weakly preferable for states to use MCOs to ad-

minister Medicaid drug benefits. Based on our preferred specification, if states “carved in” 100 percent of

the Medicaid drug benefit, drug spending would fall by 22.4 percent.
the Medicare population but not the Medicaid population of interest – explains a substantial share of increased generic accessibility
among Medicare Part D patients.


                                                                33
     We use highly granular data to identify the sources of these savings and consider possible harmful

consequences. Our results suggest that MCOs achieve these spending cuts with a scalpel rather than a

hatchet. MCOs negotiate lower point-of-sale prices with pharmacies, accounting for approximately one

third of the savings. MCOs also shift utilization to generic drugs, explaining between one third and two

thirds of the reduction, depending on assumptions. We find that patients in MCOs use a higher share of

utilization on drugs with high medical offsets, a result driven by a decrease in utilization for drugs that do

not have high medical offsets, with little change in utilization for high offset drugs.

     It is unlikely that reducing point of sale pricing and increasing generic utilization would harm patients.

While we did find evidence of lower overall drug usage, the reduction did not apply to high offset drugs,

whose usage tends to lead to reduced spending elsewhere in the health system. This suggests, if not conclu-

sively, that MCOs are not shortchanging the use of drugs with large health benefits. Cream-skimming does

not appear to explain our pattern of results.

     Taken together, our findings suggest that the carving-in of drug benefits has reduced drug spending

without harming enrollee health. However, an alternative interpretation of our results is that policymakers

could focus on giving states greater latitude to design formularies and negotiate prices with pharmacies.

The Medicare and Medicaid programs increasingly rely on private MCOs to administer health benefits,

and our findings suggest that this trend could help to control costs. The U.S. model will likely continue

to entail a public/private partnership, where the government provides insurance but private MCOs procure

services. This may even entail allowing enrollees to choose among competing MCOs – the current practice

in Medicare and an essential component of the health insurance exchanges under Obamacare. Understanding

insurer behavior in these settings and how privatization affects costs and quality is therefore critical to the

health policy debate.



7     Bibliography

References

Jason Abaluck, Jonathan Gruber, and Ashley Swanson. Prescription Drug Use under Medicare Part D: A

    Linear Model of Nonlinear Budget Sets. NBER Working Paper No. 20976, 2015.




                                                      34
Abby Alpert, Mark Duggan, and Judith K Hellerstein. Perverse Reverse Price Competition: Average Whole-

  sale Prices and Medicaid Pharmaceutical Spending. Journal of Public Economics, 108:44–62, 2013.

Marika Cabral, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney. Do Larger Health Insurance Subsidies Benefit Patients

  or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage. NBER Working Paper No. 20470, 2014.

Colleen Carey. Technological Change and Risk Adjustment: Benefit Design Incentives in Medicare Part D.

  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(1):38–73, 2017.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. May 2017 Medicaid and Chip Application, Eligibility Deter-

  mination, and Enrollment Report. Issue Brief, available online at https://www.medicaid.gov, 2017.

Amitabh Chandra, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. Patient Cost-Sharing and Hospitalization Offsets

  in the Elderly. The American Economic Review, 100(1):193–213, 2010.

Vilsa Curto, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. Can Health Insurance Competition Work?

  Evidence from Medicare Advantage. NBER Working Paper No. 20818, 2014.

Vilsa Curto, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan D Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. Healthcare Spending

  and Utilization in Public and Private Medicare. NBER Working Paper No. 23090, 2017.

D. Cutler, M. McClellan, and J. Newhouse. How Does Managed Care Do It? RAND Journal of Economics,

  31(3):526–548, 2000.

Christina M. Dalton, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert Town. Salience, Myopia, and Complex Dynamic

  Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper No. 21104, 2015.

Mark Duggan. Does Contracting Out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs? Evidence from

  Medicaid HMOs. Journal of Public Economics, 88(12):2549–2572, 2004.

Mark Duggan and Tamara Hayford. Has the Shift to Managed Care Reduced Medicaid Expenditures?

  Evidence from State and Local-Level Mandates. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(3):

  505–535, 2013.

Mark Duggan and Fiona Scott Morton. The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical Prices and Uti-

  lization. American Economic Review, 100(1):590–607, 2010.


                                                  35
Mark Duggan, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson. Who Benefits when the Government Pays More? Pass-

  Through in the Medicare Advantage Program. Journal of Public Economics, 141:50–67, 2016.

Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf. The Response of Drug Expenditures to Non-Linear

  Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2):841–899,

  2015.

Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Maria Polyakova. Private Provision of Social Insurance: Drug-Specific

  Price Elasticities and Cost Sharing in Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper No. 22277, 2016.

Michael Geruso, Timothy J. Layton, and Daniel Prinz. Screening in Contract Design: Evidence from the

  ACA Health Insurance Exchanges. NBER Working Paper No. 22832, 2016.

Kathy Gifford, Julia Paradise, Vernon Smith, and Dyke Snipes. A Profile of Medicaid Managed Care

  Programs in 2010: Findings From a 50-State Survey. Issue Brief, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,

  available online at http://www.kff.org, 2011.

S. P. Keehan, D. A. Stone, J. A. Poisal, G. A. Cuckler, A. M. Sisko, S. D. Smith, and J. M. Lizonitz. National

  Health Expenditure Projections, 201625: Price Increases, Aging Push Sector to 20 Percent of Economy.

  Health Affairs, 36(3):553–563, 2017.

Kurt Lavetti and Kosali Simon. Strategic Formulary Design in Medicare Part D Plans. NBER Working

  Paper No. 22338, 2016.

Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission. Medicaid Payment for Outpatient Prescription

  Drugs. Issue Brief, available online at https://www.macpac.gov, 2017.

Jim Ross.    Small Pharmacies Fight to Stay in Medicaid.           Ocala Star-Banner, available online at

  http://www.ocala.com/news/20170402/small-pharmacies-fight-to-stay-in-medicaid, 2017.

Fiona Scott Morton. The Strategic Response by Pharmaceutical Firms to the Medicaid Most-Favored-

  Customer Rules. RAND Journal of Economics, 28(2), 1997.

Mark Shepard. Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the Massachusetts

  Health Insurance Exchange. NBER Working Paper No. 22600, 2016.



                                                     36
Amanda Starc and Robert J Town. Internalizing Behavioral Externalities: Benefit Integration in Health

  Insurance. NBER Working Paper No. 21783, 2015.

The Lewin Group. Projected Impacts of Adopting a Pharmacy Carve-In Approach Within Medicaid Capi-

  tation Programs. Issue brief, available online at http://www.lewin.com, 2011.

Robert Town and Su Liu. The Welfare Impact of Medicare HMOs. RAND Journal of Economics, pages

  719–736, 2003.

Katherine Young, Rachel Garfield, Musumeci MaryBeth, Lisa Clemens-Cope, and Emily Lawton. Medi-

  caid’s Role for Dual Eligible Beneficiaries. Issue Brief, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, available

  online at http://www.kff.org, 2013.




                                                    37
A      Appendices (For Online Publication Only)

A.1     Point-of-Sale Drug Prices

We first estimate a variant of the regression in equation 2, including interactions between privatization and

whether the NDC was high offset, generic, or neither. We plot the coefficients from these regressions

in Figure A.1. Panels A and C plot coefficients from the same regression in which Medicaid’s price per

prescription was the dependent variable. Panel B and D plot the coefficients from the same regression

in which coinsurance per prescription is the dependent variable. In Panel A, the red line plots out the

coefficients on lags and leads of the privatization decision interacted with a drug being a generic, whereas

the black line plots out the coefficients on lags and leads of the privatization decision interacted with a drug

being neither a generic nor a high offset drug. In Panel C, the red line plots out the coefficients on lags

and leads of the privatization interacted with a drug being high offset, whereas the black line plots out the

coefficients on lags and leads of the privatization decision interacted with a drug being neither a generic nor

a high offset drug. Thus, the black lines in Panel A and Panel C are identical. Based on Panel A, pharmacy

reimbursements from Medicaid are decreasing substantially for drugs that are neither generics nor high

offset. By contrast, reimbursements for generics remain similar. Based upon Panel C, the drop in Medicaid

per prescription reimbursements is smaller for high offset drugs than for drugs that are neither generic nor

high offset.

     We present a pooled versions of this analysis in Table A.1. We present the differential effect for generics

and the differential effect for high offset drugs. The pooled results confirm that the decrease in prices to

pharmacies is $6 less for generics than for other drugs.58 When pooled, there is no evidence of differential

pharmacy prices post-privatization for high offset drugs.59
   58 A back of the envelope calculation suggests that paying an additional $6 for all generic prescriptions (i.e., both the marginal

and infra-marginal prescriptions) in return for increasing generic penetration by 7.68 percentage points would be profitable for the
MCO.
   59 There are at least two possible reasons for this pattern in results. First, it could be that MCOs are choosing this pricing structure,

so as to provide pharmacies with stronger incentives to steer consumers towards generics. Perhaps pharmacies have fewer tools
to push consumers to use high offset drugs, and therefore MCOs have little reason to provide pharmacies with incentives to steer
consumers towards these drugs. Alternatively, this pattern of results may simply reflect differences in where pharmacies extract
their rents from MCOs versus states, but may not be tied to shifting demand.




                                                                    38
          Table A.1: Reduced Form relationship between privatization and Pharmacy prices
                             Panel A: Dep var = Medicaid price per prescription
                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)                         (4)
      Priv                                               -3.986          -4.127         -7.737          -8.070
                                                       [0.904]***     [0.923]***      [1.705]***      [1.748]***
      Medicaid expansion                                                 0.483                           1.272
                                                                        [0.766]                         [1.827]
      Priv*1(High offset)                                                               -0.921          -0.770
                                                                                        [1.770]         [1.848]
      Priv*1(Generic)                                                                    5.965           6.215
                                                                                      [1.975]***      [2.018]***
      (Medicaid expansion)*1(High offset)                                                               -0.531
                                                                                                        [1.589]
      (Medicaid expansion)*1(Generic)                                                                   -0.986
                                                                                                        [1.902]
      R-sq                                               0.999           0.999           0.999           0.999
                              Panel B: Dep var = Cost sharing per prescription
      Priv                                               0.488           0.386           1.046           0.764
                                                         [0.348]        [0.359]         [0.956]         [0.977]
      Medicaid expansion                                                 0.352                           1.094
                                                                        [0.299]                         [0.874]
      Priv*1(High offset)                                                                0.140           0.174
                                                                                        [0.749]         [0.784]
      Priv*1(Generic)                                                                   -0.889          -0.632
                                                                                        [0.975]         [1.002]
      (Medicaid expansion)*1(High offset)                                                               -0.130
                                                                                                        [0.578]
      (Medicaid expansion)*1(Generic)                                                                   -1.003
                                                                                                        [0.839]
      R-sq                                               0.992           0.992           0.992           0.992
      N                                                 3220610        3220610         3220610         3220610
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Unreported controls include NDC9-state fixed effects
and NDC9-quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted
by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the first quarter in which it appears in the data. Standard errors
are clustered by state. * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                           39
              Figure A.1: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and Medicaid’s price




      Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
      pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Includes NDC9-state fixed effects, NDC9-quarter
      fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted
      by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the first quarter in which it appears in the data. Point estimates
      for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence interval for those
      coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.


A.2      Rebates

The preceding analysis ignores the existence of drug rebates paid by drug manufacturers to states. To exam-

ine the importance of this limitation, we collected supplemental data from the Medicaid Financial Manage-

ment Report. These reports provide state-year level summary information on all Medicaid expenditures. We

construct rebate share as the share of prescription drug spending that is returned in rebates. The rebate data

in the numerator is constructed from the Medicaid Financial Management Reports, while the denominator

is constructed from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data. On average, rebates reduce drug spending by

fifty percent.

    We replicate our central analyses using rebate share as the dependent variable to explore whether priva-

tization affected rebates. The reduced form of this analysis is presented in Figure A.2 and in Table A.2.60 We

find no evidence that rebates change as a result of privatization. Perhaps, this should be unsurprising. Prior

to the ACA, the absence of MCOs offering drug coverage suggests that they were unable to obtain rebates

as generous as states. For example, roughly 92 percent of rebates in our samples states were the federally

mandated rebates in our sample states in 2010. Given that there is no relationship between aggregate state

level rebates and the decision to privatize drug benefits, and that we lack any information on rebates for spe-
  60 Notethat the Medicaid State Drug Utilization data is only reported at the annual level, so the regressions that use it are also at
the annual level)


                                                                   40
cific drugs, we do not attempt to adjust drug prices or drug spending for rebates. Proportional adjustments

would not affect any of our analyses in which the dependent variable is in logs rather than levels.

Figure A.2: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and rebates as a share of gross drug spend-
ing




      Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
      pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
      Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in quarter 2 through 4 of 2010.
      Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence
      interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




A.3      Impact on overall state spending on Medicaid

Figure A.3 presents the relationship between privatization and total spending per enrollee. There is an

increase in spending at least two years prior to privatization, followed by spending levels that are relatively

flat, with no noticeable break around the time of privatization. Unsurprisingly, given that prescription drug

spending is only a small share of overall Medicaid spending and the aggregated nature of our data, we are

unable to rule out very economically large total spending increases or total spending decreases. Table A.3

confirms this fact.


A.4      Impact on Emergency Department use

To investigate whether there were any spillover effects of drug privatization on enrollee health or non-drug

spending, we investigated whether there was any effect of privatization on Emergency Department usage

using data downloaded from HCUP on Emergency Department Utilization by Medicaid enrollees. This

data is only available for a limited part of our time period (i.e., the data ends at the end of 2015) and only


                                                                   41
                   Table A.2: Effect of MCOs on rebates as share of gross drug spending
                                        Reduced Form              IV        Reduced Form              IV
                                             (1)                  (2)            (3)                  (4)
            Priv                             -0.0108                            0.0118
                                            [0.0506]                           [0.0356]
            Share MCO                                         -0.0177                               0.0194
                                                              [0.0845]                             [0.0568]
            Medicaid expansion                                                  -0.117              -0.118
                                                                             [0.0386]***         [0.0378]***
            R-sq                              0.502              0.501           0.573              0.575
            N                                  151               151              151                 151
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls include state fixed effects and year fixed effects. The transition year in which a
state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in quarter 2 through 4 of 2010.
Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                       Table A.3: Effect of MCOs on logged total spending per enrollee
                                          Reduced Form             IV        Reduced Form             IV
                                               (1)                 (2)            (3)                 (4)
              Priv                             -0.0351                            -0.0217
                                               [0.0387]                           [0.0329]
              Share MCO                                          -0.0575                           -0.0357
                                                                 [0.0616]                          [0.0533]
              Medicaid expansion                                                  -0.0696          -0.0690
                                                                                  [0.0434]         [0.0435]
              R-sq                              0.935             0.934               0.940         0.940
              N                                  151               151                151             151
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. The transition year in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state
Medicaid drug spending in quarter 2 through 4 of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: *
0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            42
  Figure A.3: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and logged total spending per enrollee




     Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
     pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
     Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by drug spending for the second to fourth quarters of 2010. Point
     estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence interval
     for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.


covers four treatment states (IL,NY, ND, UT) and eight control states (ME, MO, NC, NE, SD, TN, VT,

WI).61 Given the more limited sample and time frame, we view this analysis with an additional degree

of caution. Nonetheless, we examine whether there were changes in Medicaid Emergency Department

utilization, finding no evidence to suggest that there were increases after privatization. Figure A.4 presents

lags and leads of the privatization decision on Medicaid ED utilization. There is a downward trend that

precedes the policy change and that shows no sign of a break. The pooled point estimate, presented in Table

A.4, is negative, marginally statistically significant, driven by the existence of a pre-trend, and the magnitude

of the point estimate is economically somewhat sensitive to controlling for the Medicaid expansion. The

mean of ED visits per enrollee is 0.185 in our sample, suggesting we can rule out large increases in ED use

from privatization.
   61 HCUP reports more limited data from a number of other states that we exclude. We excluded IN and IA, both of which are

treatment states but are treated after the end of the data. We also excluded AR, MT, and WY, all of which are control states and
only had data available for very limited time periods. Finally, we exclude NY prior to the first quarter of 2011 because of a change
in how Medicaid managed care enrollees are coded. Other than excluding the coding changes in NY, these restrictions have little
impact on the analysis.




                                                                  43
                        Table A.4: Effect of Privatization on ED usage for Medicaid enrollees
                                                                    (1)                         (2)
                            Priv                               -0.000416                    -0.00803
                                                                [0.00417]                  [0.00418]*
                            Medicaid expansion                                                0.0191
                                                                                             [0.0128]
                            R-sq                                  0.934                       0.941
                            N                                      254                          254
      Notes: Unit of observation is the state x quarter. Specification is restricted to the four treatment states (IL, NY, ND, UT)
      and eight control states   (ME, MO, NC, NE, SD, TN, VT, WI) for which ED data was available. Unreported
      controls includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted.
      Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered
      by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01



   Figure A.4: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and Medicaid ED visits per enrollee




      Notes: Unit of observation is the state x quarter. Specification is restricted to the four treatment states (IL, NY, ND, UT)
      and eight control states   (ME, MO, NC, NE, SD, TN, VT, WI) for which ED data was available. Includes state
      fixed effects and quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA.
      Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence
      interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




A.5      Moral Hazard

We obtained data on 160 molecule-generic combinations for which Einav, Finkelstein, and Polykova pub-

lished their price elasticities. We created a sample where the unit of observation is the state-molecule-generic

status-quarter for these drugs. Drug utilization patterns are quite different for Medicare and Medicaid pa-

tients. For example, within the sample of 160 drugs, Atorvastatin Calcium (a statin) is roughly 10 percent

of Medicare spending, but only 1 percent of Medicaid spending. By contrast, Quetiapine Fumarate (an an-


                                                                   44
tipsychotic) is nearly 9 percent of Medicaid spending within this sample, but is only 1 percent of Medicare

spending. The correlation in spending shares is under 0.06, and only roughly a quarter of Medicaid spending

is on these drugs. As a result, the results on this subsample of Medicaid spending will not perfectly match

our central results. Furthermore, if demand patterns are very different across these two populations, demand

elasticities may be quite different as well. We proceed nonetheless.

    We split drugs into a “more elastic” sample and a “less elastic” sample by the revenue weighted median

of these drugs (the results are similar when we use a continuous measure of elasticity). For each observation,

we calculated the number of prescriptions per Medicaid enrollee, the Medicaid price per prescription, and

cost sharing per prescription. We examined the effect of privatization on each of these dependent variables.

We also included interactions between privatization and four drug categories: (i) whether the drug is a

generic, (ii) whether the drug is relatively price elastic, (iii) whether it is a maintenance drug, and (iv)

whether the drug treats a chronic condition.

    Tables A.5-A.7 present results from this analysis. Table A.5 presents additional evidence that Medicaid

price per prescription decreases after privatization, but that prices for generics do not decrease. More elastic

drugs have slightly larger price decreases. One possible explanation for this result might be that pharmacies

have stronger incentives to reduce prices for drugs for which demand is price elastic (if this in some way

filters through to consumer prices). The result may also be coincidental or due to some omitted variable

bias. There is little heterogeneity in the effect of privatization on Medicaid price per prescription for the

remaining drug categories.

    Turning to Table A.6, there is no evidence of relationship between privatization and cost sharing per

prescription, either on average or for any of these specific drug types. In particular, it does not appear that

Medicaid MCOs are raising cost sharing on drugs for which demand is particularly price elastic. Given the

limited role of cost sharing, this is perhaps unsurprising. In Table A.7, we examine the relationship between

privatization and logged prescriptions per enrollee for each of these drugs. The interaction term between

privatization and being elastic is near zero and statistically insignificant. There is some evidence (although

no longer statistically significant) that use of generics increases after privatization. Furthermore, there is

marginally statistically significant evidence that use of maintenance drugs (which likely overlap with our

high offset sample) increases after privatization.

    Overall, we conclude that the mechanism they identify is not driving our results.



                                                      45
     Table A.5: Reduced Form relationship between prices and quantities and privatization and
                         Einav, Finkelstein, Polykova’s drug elasticities
                                   Dep var = Medicaid price per prescription
                                                       (1)          (2)                     (3)            (4)
     Priv                                                  -5.305         -4.998          -10.21         -9.642
                                                         [0.955]***     [1.016]***     [2.327]***      [2.774]***
     Medicaid expansion                                                   -0.924                         -2.160
                                                                          [0.811]                        [2.608]
     Priv*1(Generic)                                                                      9.634           9.136
                                                                                       [2.260]***      [2.667]***
     Priv*1(Elastic)                                                                      -3.427         -3.222
                                                                                        [1.398]**       [1.378]**
     Priv*1(Maintenance)                                                                  -2.423         -2.207
                                                                                         [1.701]         [1.821]
     Priv*1(Chronic)                                                                      2.535           1.873
                                                                                         [2.078]         [2.382]
     (Medicaid expansion)*1(Generic)                                                                      1.930
                                                                                                         [2.395]
     (Medicaid expansion)*1(Elastic)                                                                     -0.601
                                                                                                         [1.584]
     (Medicaid expansion)*1(Maintenance)                                                                 -0.594
                                                                                                         [1.489]
     (Medicaid expansion)*1(Chronic)                                                                      1.967
                                                                                                         [1.979]
     R-sq                                                   0.994         0.994           0.994           0.994
     N                                                      67545         67545           67545          67545
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Unreported controls include NDC9-state fixed effects
and NDC9-quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted
by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the first quarter in which it appears in the data. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            46
     Table A.6: Reduced Form relationship between prices and quantities and privatization and
                         Einav, Finkelstein, Polykova’s drug elasticities
                                    Dep var = Cost sharing per prescription
                                                           (1)        (2)                  (3)          (4)
          Priv                                                   0.490       0.443       1.027        0.891
                                                              [0.245]**    [0.247]*      [0.704]      [0.723]
          Medicaid expansion                                                 0.140                    0.529
                                                                            [0.181]                   [0.576]
          Priv*1(Generic)                                                                -0.848       -0.652
                                                                                         [0.761]      [0.760]
          Priv*1(Elastic)                                                               -0.0639       -0.166
                                                                                         [0.249]      [0.226]
          Priv*1(Maintenance)                                                            0.152        0.115
                                                                                         [0.460]      [0.465]
          Priv*1(Chronic)                                                                0.193        0.209
                                                                                         [0.617]      [0.650]
          (Medicaid expansion)*1(Generic)                                                             -0.707
                                                                                                      [0.613]
          (Medicaid expansion)*1(Elastic)                                                             0.304
                                                                                                      [0.231]
          (Medicaid expansion)*1(Maintenance)                                                         0.108
                                                                                                      [0.252]
          (Medicaid expansion)*1(Chronic)                                                            -0.0367
                                                                                                      [0.481]
          R-sq                                                   0.891       0.891       0.892        0.892
          N                                                      67545      67545        67545        67545
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Unreported controls include NDC9-state fixed effects
and NDC9-quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted
by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the first quarter in which it appears in the data. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            47
     Table A.7: Reduced Form relationship between prices and quantities and privatization and
                         Einav, Finkelstein, Polykova’s drug elasticities
                                    Dep var = ln(Prescriptions per enrollee)
                                                      (1)            (2)                    (3)              (4)
   Priv                                                    0.104          0.0889          -0.123          -0.0572
                                                       [0.0312]***     [0.0330]***       [0.0894]         [0.0973]
   Medicaid expansion                                                     0.0465                           -0.215
                                                                         [0.0316]                       [0.0817]***
   Priv*1(Generic)                                                                         0.178          0.0873
                                                                                        [0.0883]**        [0.0943]
   Priv*1(Elastic)                                                                        0.0153          0.00966
                                                                                         [0.0304]         [0.0306]
   Priv*1(Maintenance)                                                                     0.111           0.101
                                                                                        [0.0539]**       [0.0597]*
   Priv*1(Chronic)                                                                         0.116          0.0540
                                                                                         [0.0741]         [0.0837]
   (Medicaid expansion)*1(Generic)                                                                         0.285
                                                                                                        [0.0736]***
   (Medicaid expansion)*1(Elastic)                                                                        0.0195
                                                                                                          [0.0379]
   (Medicaid expansion)*1(Maintenance)                                                                    0.0271
                                                                                                          [0.0545]
   (Medicaid expansion)*1(Chronic)                                                                         0.175
                                                                                                        [0.0745]**
   R-sq                                                    0.968          0.968            0.968           0.969
   N                                                      67545           67545           67545            67545
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Unreported controls include NDC9-state fixed effects
and NDC9-quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted
by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the first quarter in which it appears in the data. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            48
A.6    Impact of rebate law change on states that had already privatized pharmacy benefits

Only four states (AZ, GA, MD, and PA) had relatively extensive privatization of their drug programs prior

to the ACA and had relatively stable levels of privatization after the ACA (most other states privatized

benefits for large numbers of additional beneficiaries after the ACA). We use these four states as a sample

that should have been affected by the ACA by providing states with rebates for existing MCO enrollees that

they were not previously receiving.62 We compare these four states with the sample of control states in our

main analysis, states that did not have privatized drug benefits. Because we lack Medicaid state utilization

data prior to the ACA, this analysis relies upon annual variables from the Medicaid Financial Management

Report data. In particular, we construct four dependent variables: rebates per enrollee (both logged and

unlogged), MCO premiums per enrollee (which includes premiums for both pharmacy and medical) and

logged spending per enrollee. We include separate time trends (τte and τt−e ) for states depending upon

whether they already privatized most pharmacy benefits. Thus, our estimation equation is:



                                         Yst = αs + τte + τt−e + λ expst + εst .                                       (3)

    In Figure A.5, we plot the year coefficients. Coefficients for states that always had privatized drug

benefits are plotted in red, whereas the coefficients for states that never had privatized drug benefits are

plotted in black. There is clear evidence of a break from trend in rebates in states that always had privatized

benefits relative to rebates in states that never had privatized benefits in 2011. For MCO premiums per

enrollee and logged spending per enrollee, there is no clear evidence of a break from trend. We examined

versions of these regressions where we pool the years 2011 and later in Table A.8. To attempt to improve

the precision of our estimates, we also scaled the intensity of any effect of the policy change across the four

states by their share of prescription drugs that were privatized in the second quarter of 2010 (the first quarter

for which we have data), recognizing that doing so may introduce some endogeneity concerns. Across

these specifications, we find evidence that state governments captured more in rebates in these four states

than in states with no privatized drug benefits after the ACA. However, our estimates are too imprecise to

distinguish whether these were fully offset by premium changes from MCOs, and as we noted earlier, it is

difficult to rule out other possible reasons for premium changes.
  62 Michigan  had also privatized pharmacy benefits for many enrollees. However, we exclude Michigan because of systematic
errors in Medicaid’s reporting of enrollment for the state.




                                                            49
                   Table A.8: Effect of ACA change allowing collection of MCO rebates on
                                 states already outsourcing pharmacy benefits
                                          Panel A: Dep var = ln(Rebate per enrollee)
                                                       (1)                     (2)                     (3)                      (4)
Early adopts*(Year>2010)                              0.513                  0.507
                                                    [0.277]*                [0.283]*
Ehare MCO 2010Q2*(Year>2010)                                                                         1.486                     1.486
                                                                                                  [0.110]***              [0.128]***
Medicaid expansion                                                           0.0562                                        0.00147
                                                                             [0.120]                                           [0.104]
R-sq                                                  0.879                  0.879                   0.921                     0.921
                                           Panel B: Dep var = ln(Spend per enrollee)
Early adopts*(Year>2010)                            -0.0566                 -0.0490
                                                    [0.0550]                [0.0573]
Share MCO 2010Q2*(Year>2010)                                                                        -0.0735                -0.0545
                                                                                                    [0.112]                    [0.115]
Medicaid expansion                                                          -0.0514                                        -0.0527
                                                                            [0.0528]                                       [0.0536]
R-sq                                                  0.914                  0.916                   0.912                     0.914
                                             Panel C: Dep var = Rebate per enrollee
Early adopts*(Year>2010)                              43.95                  45.01
                                                     [53.21]                 [57.43]
Share MCO 2010Q2*(Year>2010)                                                                         130.1                     137.4
                                                                                                    [79.91]                    [84.12]
Medicaid expansion                                                           -7.161                                            -19.97
                                                                             [37.48]                                           [34.54]
R-sq                                                  0.850                  0.850                   0.861                     0.862
                                       Panel D: Dep var = MCO premiums per enrollee
Early adopts*(Year>2010)                              103.1                  181.9
                                                     [505.7]                 [497.1]
Share MCO 2010Q2*(Year>2010)                                                                         160.8                     360.3
                                                                                                    [1128.9]               [1086.6]
Medicaid expansion                                                           -531.8                                            -552.3
                                                                             [314.7]                                       [293.8]*
R-sq                                                  0.934                  0.937                   0.934                     0.937
N                                                      160                     160                    160                       160
    Notes: Specification is limited to states which had already privatized a substantial share of pharmacy benefits prior ot
    2010 and to control states with no MCO pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Excludes
    2010. Observations are weighted by 2007 Medicaid enrollment. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance
    levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                                50
                Figure A.5: Effect of rebate law change on states already privatizing drug benefits




      Notes: Specification is limited to states which had already privatized a substantial share of pharmacy benefits prior ot
      2010 and to control states with no MCO pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and year fixed effects, and an
      indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by 2007 Medicaid
      enrollment.Point estimates for the time varying effect of each year for treatment and control states are presented in the
      dark line and a 95 percent confidence interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by
      state, are presented with the dotted lines.


A.7      Appendix Exhibits


                         Figure A.6: Map of states by Medicaid drug MCO status, 2010-2016




      Notes: Excludes Alaska (no MCO) and Hawaii (carve-in).




                                                                  51
                            Table A.9: Effect of increased generic utilization on spending per enrollee
                 Drug type                    P       Q         4Q         %4spend per enrollee          %4spend per enrollee(Version
                                                                              (Version 1)                         2)
     branded with no generic equivalent      248    0.162     -0.0526              -18.26%                         -7.51%
      branded with a generic equivalent      102    0.177      -0.025               -3.57%                         -3.57%
                  generic                    20     0.661     0.0776                2.17%                          2.17%
                  Overall                                                          -19.65%                         -8.91%




52
              Notes: The average prices (P), average quantity shares (Q), and changes in quantities (4Q) for these three
              groups of drugs in this table are based upon the summary statistics for treatment states in Table 2 and the
              point estimates in Table 4. Version 1 of the calculation assumes that shifts in demand from privatization are
              for average priced drugs within three groups of drugs: (i) branded drugs with no generic equivalents, (ii)
              branded drugs with a generic equivalent, and (iii) generic drugs. Version 2 assumes that branded drugs with
              no generic equivalent (but which are being substituted cross-molecule for a generic) have average prices of
              102 rather than 248.
Table A.10: Heterogeneity in IV estimates of effect of MCOs on high offset vs non-high offset drugs
                                                                 Non-high offset      High offset
                       Dependent Variable                             (1)                (2)
                       ln(Spending per enrollee)                       -0.321            -0.138
                                                                      [0.129]**         [0.101]
                       ln(Prescriptions per enrollee)                  0.0529            0.143
                                                                      [0.0733]         [0.0732]*
                       ln(Price per prescription)                      -0.376            -0.283
                                                                   [0.0838]***        [0.0559]***
                       ln(Utilization per enrollee)                    -0.257           -0.0195
                                                                      [0.131]*          [0.108]
                       Generic accessibility                           0.0591           0.0483
                                                                   [0.0245]**         [0.0120]***
                       Generic efficiency                              0.0517           0.0191
                                                                   [0.0189]**           [0.0141]
                       Generic penetration                             0.0919           0.0557
                                                                   [0.0338]**         [0.0118]***
Notes: Specifications are limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether
the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is omitted.
Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered
by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




           Table A.11: State characteristics for heterogeneity in Centene + Molina presence
                                       State     Has Centene + Has Molina
                                        DE                        0
                                        IA                        0
                                        IL                        1
                                        IN                        1
                                        LA                        1
                                        MS                        1
                                        ND                        0
                                        NH                        1
                                        NY                        1
                                        OH                        2
                                        TX                        2
                                        UT                        1
                                        WV                        0
             Notes: States with Centene and Molina are determined by examining company annual reports.




                                                            53
                                    Table A.12: Heterogeneity in effect of MCOs based on presence of Molina and Centene
                                                                             Panel A: Reduced Form
                                     MCO share of    ln(Spending     ln(Prescriptions     ln(Price per    ln(Utilization    Generic        Generic         Generic       Share of utilization,
                                     prescriptions   per enrollee)    per enrollee)       prescription)   per enrollee)    accessibility   efficiency     penetration     high offset drugs
                                          (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)                (9)
     Priv*1(Centene+Molina=0)            0.321          -0.203          -0.0165             -0.188           -0.206          0.0252        0.00778         0.0283              0.0423
                                        [0.101]***     [0.0890]**        [0.0521]          [0.0460]***       [0.0945]**     [0.00996]**     [0.00627]      [0.0130]**         [0.0151]***

     Priv*1(Centene+Molina=1)            0.578          -0.219           0.0121             -0.230           -0.170          0.0423         0.0369         0.0649              0.0327
                                        [0.115]***     [0.0507]***       [0.0546]          [0.0635]***      [0.0419]***      [0.0162]**    [0.00885]***    [0.0188]***        [0.00881]***

     Priv*1(Centene+Molina=2)            0.697         0.00586           0.130              -0.125           0.0768         0.00947        0.00313         0.0104              0.0262
                                       [0.0209]***      [0.0465]        [0.0410]***        [0.0188]***        [0.0658]       [0.00798]      [0.00836]       [0.00615]         [0.00397]***

     Medicaid expansion                 0.0602          0.0861           0.104              -0.0192          0.0890         0.00223         0.0162         0.0165             -0.0272
                                       [0.0197]***      [0.0517]        [0.0372]***          [0.0337]        [0.0490]*       [0.00805]     [0.00489]***    [0.00841]*         [0.00480]***

     R-sq                                0.941          0.815            0.779               0.830            0.837           0.908          0.884          0.924               0.951




54
                                                                                        Panel B: IV
     Share MCO*1(Centene+Molina=0)                      -0.565          -0.0303             -0.539           -0.555          0.0752         0.0300         0.0893               0.116
                                                         [0.358]          [0.140]           [0.240]**         [0.372]        [0.0413]*       [0.0223]       [0.0531]           [0.0662]*

     Share MCO*1(Centene+Molina=1)                      -0.374           0.0231             -0.397           -0.290          0.0722         0.0626          0.111              0.0567
                                                       [0.106]***        [0.0884]          [0.0633]***      [0.0943]***     [0.0148]***    [0.00734]***    [0.0138]***        [0.00706]***

     Share MCO*1(Centene+Molina=2)                     -0.0162           0.176              -0.193           0.0841          0.0172        0.00792         0.0207              0.0391
                                                        [0.0685]        [0.0553]***        [0.0258]***        [0.0931]       [0.00952]*      [0.0118]      [0.00798]**        [0.00612]***

     Medicaid expansion                                 0.106            0.102             0.00336            0.104         -0.00160        0.0131         0.0108             -0.0308
                                                        [0.0574]*       [0.0391]**           [0.0343]        [0.0548]*       [0.00810]     [0.00497]**      [0.00840]         [0.00480]***

     R-sq                                               0.801            0.781               0.864            0.822           0.928          0.902          0.943               0.953

     N                                                   741              741                 741              741             741            741            741                 741
         Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed
         effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes is
         omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: *
         0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01
                         Table A.13: State characteristics for heterogeneity analysis
                            State     No prior MCO?           Same PDL?         No risk adj?
                            IN                No                   No                No
                            OH                No                   No                No
                            UT                No                   No                No
                            NY                No                   No                No
                            IL                No                   No                Yes
                            DE                No                   Yes               No
                            TX                No                   Yes               No
                            WV                No                   Yes               Yes
                            LA                Yes                  No                No
                            ND                Yes                  No                No
                            NH                Yes                  Yes               No
                            IA                Yes                  Yes               No
                            MS                Yes                  Yes               Yes
Notes: Same PDL is an indicator for whether MCOs are required to use the state’s formulary or whether the
MCO has some leeway in creating its own formulary is from the Medicaid Drug Utilization Review
(MDUR). No prior MCO is an indicator for whether a state concurrently privatized medical and pharmacy
benefits or already had privatized medical benefits prior to privatizing pharmacy benefits. No risk adj is an
indicator for whether a state risk adjusts MCO payments based upon enrollee health status is based using
responses in Gifford et al. [2011]. For the states that privatized medical benefits after 2010, we performed
additional internet searches to determine whether they risk adjust based upon health.




                                  Figure A.7: Histogram of summary statistics




Notes: Unit of observation is the state-quarter for states in the second quarter of 2010.




                                                            55
       Table A.14: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on per enrollee spending
                                Panel A: Dep var = MCO share of prescriptions
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)                            (4)               (5)
Priv                                        0.596             0.589             0.609            0.675             0.681
                                         [0.0743]***       [0.101]***       [0.0855]***       [0.0488]***      [0.0643]***
Medicaid expansion                          0.0374           0.0410            0.0300            0.0626           0.0592
                                           [0.0306]          [0.0301]         [0.0307]         [0.0314]*         [0.0342]*
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                             0.0216                                               0.0318
                                                             [0.134]                                              [0.0493]
Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                          -0.0879                              -0.105
                                                                              [0.0921]                            [0.0673]
Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                              -0.396            -0.401
                                                                                              [0.0496]***      [0.0501]***
R-sq                                        0.935             0.935             0.935            0.957             0.958
                       Panel B: Dep var = ln(Spending per enrollee) (Reduced Form)
Priv                                        -0.151            -0.213           -0.123            -0.138            -0.170
                                          [0.0658]**       [0.0537]***        [0.0635]*        [0.0748]*       [0.0574]***
Medicaid expansion                          0.0551           0.0878            0.0395            0.0593           0.0774
                                           [0.0564]          [0.0530]         [0.0478]          [0.0539]         [0.0442]*
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                              0.197                                                0.196
                                                           [0.0864]**                                          [0.0706]***
Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                           -0.185                              -0.179
                                                                               [0.149]                            [0.119]
Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                             -0.0654           -0.0780
                                                                                                [0.0828]          [0.0736]
R-sq                                        0.803             0.811             0.807            0.804             0.816
                              Panel C: Dep var = ln(Spending per enrollee) (IV)
Share MCO                                   -0.253            -0.359           -0.207            -0.215            -0.277
                                          [0.116]**        [0.102]***         [0.105]*          [0.110]*       [0.0718]***
Medicaid expansion                          0.0646            0.111            0.0422            0.0799            0.107
                                           [0.0637]         [0.0581]*         [0.0517]          [0.0662]         [0.0533]*
Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                         0.312                                                0.315
                                                            [0.151]**                                          [0.0987]***
Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                      -0.358                              -0.328
                                                                               [0.251]                            [0.233]
Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                         -0.431            -0.455
                                                                                                [0.227]*          [0.224]*
R-sq                                        0.793             0.799             0.805            0.778             0.795
N                                             741              741               741               741              741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01



                                                            56
     Table A.15: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on prescriptions per enrollee
                    Panel A: Dep var = ln(Prescriptions per enrollee) (Reduced Form)
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                                 (5)
 Priv                                        0.0452           0.0124          0.0528          0.0849            0.0598
                                             [0.0456]        [0.0489]         [0.0513]      [0.0338]**        [0.0283]**
 Medicaid expansion                          0.0871            0.104          0.0828          0.0998             0.114
                                           [0.0410]**      [0.0375]***       [0.0409]*      [0.0402]**       [0.0387]***
 Priv*1(Same PDL)                                              0.104                                             0.109
                                                             [0.0704]                                        [0.0375]***
 Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                         -0.0503                           -0.0549
                                                                              [0.0771]                         [0.0785]
 Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                           -0.200           -0.206
                                                                                            [0.0694]***      [0.0537]***
 R-sq                                         0.773            0.777           0.774           0.785             0.789
                            Panel B: Dep var = ln(Prescriptions per enrollee) (IV)
 Share MCO                                   0.0759           0.0228          0.0857           0.115            0.0673
                                             [0.0704]        [0.0788]         [0.0748]      [0.0496]**         [0.0493]
 Medicaid expansion                          0.0842            0.108          0.0795          0.0999             0.122
                                           [0.0404]**      [0.0376]***       [0.0403]*      [0.0476]**        [0.0505]**
 Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                         0.157                                             0.167
                                                             [0.0962]                                         [0.0662]**
 Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                    -0.0756                           -0.0524
                                                                              [0.123]                           [0.150]
 Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                      -0.442           -0.463
                                                                                             [0.211]**         [0.185]**
 R-sq                                         0.781            0.780           0.784           0.762             0.762
 N                                             741               741            741             741               741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            57
       Table A.16: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on price per prescription
                      Panel A: Dep var = ln(Price per prescription) (Reduced Form)
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)                                  (5)
Priv                                        -0.196            -0.225           -0.177            -0.223            -0.230
                                         [0.0500]***       [0.0634]***      [0.0513]***       [0.0500]***      [0.0549]***
Medicaid expansion                         -0.0330           -0.0180          -0.0440           -0.0415           -0.0374
                                           [0.0336]          [0.0356]         [0.0246]*         [0.0336]          [0.0302]
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                             0.0906                                               0.0836
                                                             [0.0676]                                             [0.0596]
Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                           -0.130                              -0.120
                                                                               [0.101]                           [0.0607]*
Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                              0.135             0.128
                                                                                               [0.0568]**       [0.0615]**
R-sq                                        0.821             0.828             0.828            0.833             0.844
                              Panel B: Dep var = ln(Price per prescription) (IV)
Share MCO                                   -0.329            -0.380           -0.293            -0.330            -0.344
                                         [0.0693]***       [0.0704]***      [0.0582]***       [0.0702]***      [0.0554]***
Medicaid expansion                         -0.0207           0.00179          -0.0379           -0.0211           -0.0162
                                           [0.0361]          [0.0380]         [0.0246]          [0.0360]          [0.0271]
Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                         0.150                                                0.144
                                                             [0.0912]                                            [0.0738]*
Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                      -0.276                              -0.269
                                                                              [0.161]*                           [0.119]**
Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                         0.0107          0.00746
                                                                                                 [0.123]          [0.141]
R-sq                                        0.849             0.862             0.858            0.849             0.871
N                                             741              741               741               741              741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            58
     Table A.17: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on utilization per enrollee
                      Panel A: Dep var = ln(Utilization per enrollee) (Reduced Form)
                                            (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)                             (5)
    Priv                                       -0.0988         -0.168         -0.0765       -0.0752          -0.121
                                               [0.0680]     [0.0441]***       [0.0713]      [0.0761]      [0.0503]**
    Medicaid expansion                         0.0537          0.0900         0.0412        0.0613          0.0863
                                               [0.0560]      [0.0508]*        [0.0523]      [0.0526]       [0.0449]*
    Priv*1(Same PDL)                                            0.219                                        0.220
                                                             [0.0961]**                                   [0.0702]***
    Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                       -0.148                        -0.144
                                                                              [0.123]                       [0.0908]
    Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                      -0.119          -0.132
                                                                                            [0.0772]       [0.0684]*
    R-sq                                        0.821           0.833          0.824         0.824           0.839
                             Panel B: Dep var = ln(Utilization per enrollee) (IV)
    Share MCO                                   -0.166         -0.281          -0.129        -0.123          -0.206
                                               [0.119]      [0.0884]***       [0.118]       [0.111]       [0.0644]***
    Medicaid expansion                         0.0599           0.111         0.0423        0.0769           0.115
                                               [0.0625]      [0.0552]*        [0.0563]      [0.0650]       [0.0561]*
    Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                       0.343                                        0.349
                                                             [0.155]**                                    [0.0945]***
    Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                  -0.282                        -0.248
                                                                              [0.205]                        [0.182]
    Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                 -0.480          -0.515
                                                                                           [0.202]**       [0.197]**
    R-sq                                        0.812           0.819          0.821         0.793           0.808
    N                                            741             741            741           741             741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            59
       Table A.18: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on generic accessibility
                         Panel A: Dep var = Generic accessibility (Reduced Form)
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)                                 (5)
Priv                                        0.0314           0.0377            0.0318            0.0381           0.0449
                                          [0.0120]**       [0.0165]**        [0.0142]**        [0.0141]**       [0.0184]**
Medicaid expansion                         0.00641           0.00309          0.00615           0.00857          0.00490
                                          [0.00826]         [0.00722]         [0.00702]        [0.00745]         [0.00650]
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                             -0.0200                                              -0.0191
                                                             [0.0185]                                             [0.0176]
Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                          -0.00302                           -0.00547
                                                                              [0.0185]                            [0.0136]
Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                             -0.0340           -0.0334
                                                                                               [0.0195]*          [0.0201]
R-sq                                        0.894             0.899             0.894            0.906             0.911
                                  Panel B: Dep var = Generic acessibility (IV)
Share MCO                                   0.0526           0.0636            0.0523            0.0556           0.0657
                                         [0.0165]***       [0.0192]***      [0.0186]***       [0.0182]***      [0.0218]***
Medicaid expansion                         0.00444         -0.000426          0.00462           0.00565          0.000868
                                          [0.00732]         [0.00726]         [0.00627]        [0.00680]         [0.00655]
Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                        -0.0326                                              -0.0319
                                                             [0.0225]                                             [0.0226]
Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                     0.00279                            0.00216
                                                                              [0.0267]                            [0.0172]
Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                        -0.0340           -0.0296
                                                                                                [0.0348]          [0.0356]
R-sq                                        0.907             0.915             0.907            0.915             0.923
N                                             741              741               741               741              741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            60
            Table A.19: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on generic efficiency
                                 Panel A: Dep var = Generic efficiency (Reduced Form)
                                            (1)            (2)             (3)                            (4)                (5)
Priv                                          0.0249             0.0372             0.0230             0.0277             0.0379
                                            [0.0101]**        [0.00863]***         [0.0114]*         [0.0122]**        [0.00961]***
Medicaid expansion                            0.0202             0.0138             0.0213             0.0211             0.0156
                                           [0.00703]***       [0.00473]***       [0.00617]***       [0.00693]***       [0.00416]***
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                                 -0.0389                                                  -0.0383
                                                              [0.00960]***                                             [0.00922]***
Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                                0.0130                                0.0107
                                                                                    [0.0173]                             [0.00701]
Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                                    -0.0142            -0.0124
                                                                                                       [0.0127]           [0.0101]
R-sq                                           0.851              0.888              0.853              0.855              0.893
                                        Panel B: Dep var = Generic efficiency (IV)
Share MCO                                     0.0418             0.0625             0.0381             0.0413             0.0579
                                            [0.0160]**        [0.00823]***        [0.0167]**         [0.0169]**        [0.00866]***
Medicaid expansion                            0.0187            0.00952             0.0205             0.0185             0.0107
                                           [0.00760]**         [0.00478]*        [0.00665]***        [0.00775]**        [0.00426]**
Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                            -0.0613                                                  -0.0610
                                                              [0.0104]***                                              [0.00874]***
Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                           0.0289                                0.0255
                                                                                    [0.0279]                            [0.0102]**
Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                              0.00627             0.0135
                                                                                                       [0.0191]           [0.0140]
R-sq                                           0.861              0.907              0.864              0.860              0.907
N                                               741                741                741                741                741
    Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
    pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
    is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
    are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                                61
        Table A.20: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on generic penetration
                           Panel A: Dep var = Generic penetration (Reduced Form)
                                         (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)                                  (5)
Priv                                        0.0463            0.0621            0.0448            0.0533            0.0675
                                          [0.0168]**       [0.0189]***        [0.0195]**        [0.0204]**       [0.0215]***
Medicaid expansion                          0.0232            0.0149            0.0240            0.0255            0.0178
                                          [0.0102]**        [0.00833]*      [0.00826]***        [0.00977]**      [0.00731]**
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                             -0.0499                                               -0.0487
                                                            [0.0216]**                                            [0.0211]**
Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                           0.00954                             0.00570
                                                                               [0.0280]                            [0.0156]
Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                               -0.0357          -0.0337
                                                                                                  [0.0243]         [0.0239]
R-sq                                         0.903            0.919              0.903             0.910             0.926
                                   Panel B: Dep var = Generic penetration (IV)
Share MCO                                   0.0776            0.104             0.0739            0.0787             0.101
                                         [0.0246]***       [0.0187]***        [0.0268]**        [0.0270]***      [0.0223]***
Medicaid expansion                          0.0203           0.00844            0.0221            0.0208            0.0102
                                         [0.00990]**        [0.00858]        [0.00819]**         [0.0102]*         [0.00771]
Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                        -0.0794                                               -0.0788
                                                           [0.0245]***                                           [0.0238]***
Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                       0.0284                              0.0245
                                                                               [0.0432]                            [0.0198]
Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                          -0.0129          -0.00305
                                                                                                  [0.0375]         [0.0377]
R-sq                                         0.914            0.936              0.914             0.916             0.937
N                                             741               741               741               741               741
 Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
 pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
 is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
 are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                             62
        Table A.21: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization across states on use of high offset drugs
                   Panel A: Dep var = Share of utilization to high offset drugs (Reduced Form)
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)          (4)                                   (5)
Priv                                          0.0314             0.0322             0.0306             0.0342             0.0341
                                           [0.00657]***       [0.00864]***       [0.00751]***       [0.00621]***       [0.00832]***
Medicaid expansion                            -0.0261            -0.0265            -0.0257            -0.0252            -0.0252
                                           [0.00408]***       [0.00525]***       [0.00435]***       [0.00424]***       [0.00585]***
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                                -0.00244                                                 -0.00189
                                                                 [0.0103]                                                 [0.0108]
Priv*1(No prior MCO)                                                               0.00508                                0.00434
                                                                                   [0.00693]                             [0.00667]
Priv*1(No risk adj)                                                                                    -0.0142            -0.0140
                                                                                                       [0.0123]           [0.0124]
R-sq                                           0.950              0.950              0.950              0.951              0.951
                           Panel B: Dep var = Share of utilization to high offset drugs (IV)
Share MCO                                     0.0526             0.0545             0.0505             0.0511             0.0509
                                           [0.00823]***       [0.00799]***       [0.00873]***       [0.00792]***       [0.00930]***
Medicaid expansion                            -0.0281            -0.0289            -0.0270            -0.0287            -0.0285
                                           [0.00444]***       [0.00598]***       [0.00459]***       [0.00399]***       [0.00577]***
Share MCO*1(Same PDL)                                           -0.00551                                                 -0.00554
                                                                 [0.0175]                                                 [0.0155]
Share MCO*1(No prior MCO)                                                           0.0168                                0.0160
                                                                                 [0.00697]**                            [0.00668]**
Share MCO*1(No risk adj)                                                                               0.0174             0.0171
                                                                                                       [0.0338]           [0.0341]
R-sq                                           0.954              0.954              0.955              0.954              0.955
N                                               741                741                741                741                741
    Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
    pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
    is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
    are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                                63
 Table A.22: First Stage relationship for analysis on heterogeneity in effect of MCOs across states
                                   Share MCO          Share MCO                Share MCO                Share MCO
                                                     *1(Same PDL)           *1(No prior MCO)           *1(No risk adj)
                                        (1)               (2)                      (3)                      (4)
  Priv                                 0.681              0.0180                  -0.00654                  -0.0228
                                   [0.0643]***            [0.0186]                [0.00958]                 [0.0205]
  Priv*1(Same PDL)                    0.0318               0.660                  0.00237                   0.00647
                                     [0.0493]           [0.0606]***                [0.0176]                 [0.0181]
  Priv*1(No prior MCO)                -0.105              -0.0326                   0.565                   0.0276
                                     [0.0673]             [0.0339]              [0.0352]***                 [0.0201]
  Priv*1(No risk adj)                 -0.401               -0.104                 -0.00951                   0.350
                                   [0.0501]***            [0.0814]                 [0.0122]               [0.0165]***
  Medicaid expansion                  0.0592              -0.0236                 -0.00900                  0.0200
                                     [0.0342]*            [0.0171]                 [0.0179]                 [0.0334]
  R-sq                                 0.958               0.966                    0.849                    0.753
  N                                     741                 741                      741                      741
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in which a state privatizes
is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors
are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                      Figure A.8: Share MCO by state type




Notes: This Figure excludes DC, MA, and RI because of data limitations.




                                                            64
                                       Table A.23: IV estimate of effect of MCOs (robustness of results to sample decisions)
                                        Full Sample       Exclude         Limit to states without      Limit to states with     Exclude IN      Limit to states     Limit to states
                                                        Control states      medical MCOs at             medical MCOs at          and ND           expanding        never expanding
                                                                             start of sample             start of sample                          Medicaid            Medicaid
     Dependent Variable                      (1)                 (2)                (3)                         (4)                 (5)              (6)                  (7)
     ln(Spending per enrollee)             -0.253               -0.422             -0.476                     -0.271               -0.248           -0.380              0.0576
                                         [0.116]**         [0.102]***              [0.253]*                 [0.112]**            [0.118]**        [0.118]***            [0.0637]
     ln(Prescriptions per enrollee)        0.0759           -0.0544                 0.103                     0.0155              0.0801            -0.0180              0.251
                                          [0.0704]          [0.0799]               [0.114]                   [0.0835]             [0.0703]          [0.0883]          [0.0536]***
     ln(Price per prescription)            -0.329               -0.369             -0.576                     -0.287               -0.328           -0.360               -0.196
                                        [0.0693]***       [0.0822]***            [0.173]***                [0.0697]***          [0.0728]***       [0.0782]***         [0.0323]***
     ln(Utilization per enrollee)          -0.166               -0.280             -0.322                     -0.181               -0.162           -0.301               0.182




65
                                           [0.119]         [0.107]**               [0.197]                    [0.126]             [0.119]          [0.109]**          [0.0540]***
     Generic accessibility                 0.0526           0.0437                 0.0601                     0.0572              0.0558            0.0456              0.0343
                                        [0.0165]***        [0.0144]**            [0.0209]**                [0.0162]***          [0.0172]***       [0.0166]**         [0.00488]***
     Generic efficiency                    0.0418           0.0319                 0.0785                     0.0284              0.0436            0.0500            -0.000665
                                         [0.0160]**        [0.0148]*             [0.0248]***                 [0.0184]           [0.0163]**       [0.00670]***          [0.00487]
     Generic penetration                   0.0776           0.0612                  0.117                     0.0681              0.0816            0.0804              0.0247
                                        [0.0246]***        [0.0229]**            [0.0365]***                [0.0274]**          [0.0253]***       [0.0149]***        [0.00518]***
     Share of spending to                  0.0526           0.0562                 0.0664                     0.0465              0.0505            0.0667              0.0330
     high offset drugs                 [0.00823]***      [0.00940]***            [0.0113]***               [0.0102]***         [0.00823]***      [0.00827]***        [0.00744]***
           Notes: Full Sample specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO pharmacy benefits. Unreported
           controls includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in
           which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by
           state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01
                                       Table A.24: IV estimate of effect of MCOs (robustness of results to excluding states one at a time)
                              Full                                                                                                  Excluding
                            Sample            DE             IA             IL             IN            LA             MS             ND             NH             NY             OH             TX             UT             WV
     Dependent Variable        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)           (11)           (12)           (13)           (14)

         ln(Spending         -0.253         -0.255         -0.243         -0.219         -0.247         -0.190         -0.271         -0.254         -0.247         -0.199         -0.273         -0.358         -0.252         -0.240
         per enrollee)      [0.116]**       [0.118]**     [0.117]**       [0.116]*      [0.118]**       [0.103]*      [0.118]**      [0.116]**      [0.117]**       [0.165]       [0.126]**      [0.103]***     [0.118]**      [0.115]**


       ln(Prescriptions     0.0759          0.0761        0.0846          0.123         0.0804         0.0893         0.0637         0.0756         0.0816         0.0860         0.0738         0.0222         0.0746         0.0808
         per enrollee)       [0.0704]       [0.0708]       [0.0697]      [0.0535]**      [0.0702]       [0.0731]       [0.0726]       [0.0705]       [0.0710]       [0.109]        [0.0772]       [0.0736]       [0.0714]       [0.0705]


         ln(Price per        -0.329         -0.332         -0.328         -0.342         -0.327         -0.281         -0.333         -0.330         -0.328         -0.287         -0.347         -0.380         -0.327         -0.321
         prescription)     [0.0693]***     [0.0705]***   [0.0705]***    [0.0696]***    [0.0727]***    [0.0569]***    [0.0702]***    [0.0694]***    [0.0704]***    [0.0903]***    [0.0723]***    [0.0699]***    [0.0707]***    [0.0694]***


        ln(Utilization       -0.166         -0.168         -0.160         -0.128         -0.162         -0.118         -0.180         -0.166         -0.161         -0.105         -0.177         -0.286         -0.169         -0.150
         per enrollee)       [0.119]         [0.120]       [0.120]        [0.118]        [0.119]        [0.115]        [0.121]        [0.119]        [0.120]        [0.169]        [0.131]      [0.0903]***      [0.121]        [0.118]




66
           Generic          0.0526          0.0534        0.0520         0.0553         0.0556         0.0496         0.0529         0.0528         0.0535         0.0305         0.0573         0.0602         0.0535         0.0514
         accessibility     [0.0165]***     [0.0167]***   [0.0164]***    [0.0178]***    [0.0171]***     [0.0180]**    [0.0167]***    [0.0165]***    [0.0167]***     [0.0111]**    [0.0166]***    [0.0170]***    [0.0166]***    [0.0170]***


           Generic          0.0418          0.0420        0.0425         0.0413         0.0436         0.0356         0.0422         0.0418         0.0421         0.0280         0.0431         0.0588         0.0427         0.0418
          efficiency        [0.0160]**     [0.0163]**     [0.0161]**     [0.0168]**     [0.0163]**     [0.0159]**     [0.0163]**     [0.0160]**     [0.0162]**      [0.0181]      [0.0176]**    [0.00828]***    [0.0162]**     [0.0161]**


           Generic          0.0776          0.0783        0.0776         0.0786         0.0815         0.0696         0.0781         0.0777         0.0785         0.0500         0.0820         0.0987         0.0790         0.0764
         penetration       [0.0246]***     [0.0249]***   [0.0246]***    [0.0267]***    [0.0252]***     [0.0255]**    [0.0250]***    [0.0246]***    [0.0249]***     [0.0220]**    [0.0265]***    [0.0173]***    [0.0249]***    [0.0250]***


      Share of spending,    0.0526          0.0539        0.0527         0.0536         0.0508         0.0521         0.0521         0.0524         0.0524         0.0463         0.0537         0.0577         0.0535         0.0508
       high offset drugs   [0.00823]***   [0.00821]***   [0.00841]***   [0.00834]***   [0.00822]***   [0.00884]***   [0.00818]***   [0.00825]***   [0.00834]***   [0.00946]***   [0.00872]***   [0.00762]***   [0.00827]***   [0.00810]***


             Notes: Full Sample specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO pharmacy benefits. Unreported
             controls includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in
             which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by
             state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01
            Table A.25: Robustness to including states with Pharmacy MCOs prior to 2010Q2 and to using all variation in Pharmacy MCO share
                                ln(Spending       ln(Prescriptions           ln(Price          ln(Utilization       Generic           Generic           Generic             Share of utilization,
                                per enrollee)       per enrollee)        per prescription)      per enrollee)     accessibility       efficiency       penetration           hgh offset drugs
                                     (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                (5)              (6)                (7)                     (8)
     Lagged share MCO              -0.110               0.139                 -0.245              -0.0467            0.0443            0.0335            0.0643                   0.0285
                                  [0.0847]          [0.0465]***            [0.0476]***            [0.0843]         [0.0182]**       [0.0114]***       [0.0230]***              [0.00888]***




67
     Medicaid expansion            0.0450              0.0754                -0.0348               0.0544           0.00755            0.0113            0.0168                   -0.0240
                                  [0.0540]            [0.0441]*              [0.0232]             [0.0484]          [0.00601]       [0.00456]**       [0.00611]***             [0.00437]***
     R-sq                          0.783                0.769                  0.857                0.802             0.896             0.878             0.916                    0.919
     N                              1174                1174                   1174                 1174              1174              1174              1174                     1174
            Notes: Specification includes all states, except for DC, RI, HI, KS, and the second quarter of 2014 for VA. These are excluded because of implausible spending
            patterns. Unit of observation is the state-quarter. Unreported controls are state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. Observations are weighted by state
            Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01
            Table A.26: Reduced Form relationship between privatization and Pharmacy prices
                         (heterogeneity by whether MCOs must use state PDL)
                                                           Dep var =                                  Dep var =
                                                 Medicaid price per prescription             Cost sharing per prescription
                                                              (1)                                         (2)
Priv                                                             -7.623                                     1.952
                                                               [1.944]***                                  [1.044]*
Priv*1(High offset)                                              -0.547                                     0.285
                                                                 [2.118]                                    [0.866]
Priv*1(Generic)                                                   6.397                                     -1.733
                                                               [2.333]***                                   [1.081]
Medicaid expansion                                                1.041                                     0.500
                                                                 [1.617]                                    [0.789]
(Medicaid expansion)*1(High offset)                              -0.624                                     -0.187
                                                                 [1.381]                                    [0.547]
(Medicaid expansion)*1(Generic)                                  -1.044                                     -0.446
                                                                 [1.688]                                    [0.768]
Priv*1(Same PDL)                                                 -1.427                                     -3.859
                                                                 [3.752]                                 [0.845]***
Priv*1(Same PDL)*1(High offset)                                  -0.935                                     -0.577
                                                                 [3.527]                                    [0.773]
Priv*1(Same PDL)*1(Generic)                                      -0.504                                     3.646
                                                                 [4.019]                                 [0.906]***
R-sq                                                             0.999                                     0.992
N                                                               3220610                                   3220610
  Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
  pharmacy benefits. Unit of observation is the NDC9-state-quarter. Includes NDC9-state fixed effects, NDC9-quarter
  fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded Medicaid under the ACA. The transition quarter in
  which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by drug spending for each NDC9-state combination in the
  first quarter in which it appears in the data. Standard errors are clustered by state. Significance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05
  *** .01




                                                               68
                                Table A.27: State identities by transition type
                                                                  t=T
(medical / pharmacy)                 FFS/FFS                  MCO/FFS                 MCO/MCO
     FFS/FFS                   AK, AL, AR, ID, ME,                  -            IA, LA, MS, NH, ND
t=0                            MT, NC, OK, SD, VT,
                                       WY
       MCO/FFS                          CT                 NE, MO, WI, TN IL, UT, TX, WV, NY, IN,
                                                                                       DE, OH
       MCO/MCO                           -                          -            AZ, CA, CO, DC, FL,
                                                                                 GA, HI, KS, KY, MA,
                                                                                 MD, MI, MN, NJ, NM,
                                                                                NV, OR, PA, RI, SC, VA,
                                                                                         WA
Notes: States are classified as having an MCO if the state has a significant number of enrollees in an MCO that bears
risk. We list VT in the FFS/FFS category, although VT Medicaid enrollees are in an MCO because the MCO is a unique,
state run MCO.




   Table A.28: Heterogeneity in Effect of MCOs on Medicare’s 6 protected class vs other drugs
                                                       Any protected class         Not protected class
               Dependent Variable                             (1)                          (2)
               ln(spending per enrollee)                         -0.0469                   -0.335
                                                                 [0.101]                  [0.124]**
               ln(prescriptions per enrollee)                    0.122                     0.0719
                                                               [0.0791]                   [0.0723]
               ln(price per prescription)                        -0.171                    -0.407
                                                             [0.0640]**                 [0.0797]***
               ln(utilization per enrollee)                    0.00989                     -0.236
                                                                 [0.105]                  [0.126]*
               Generic Accessibility                             0.0531                    0.0560
                                                             [0.0178]***                [0.0157]***
               Generic Efficiency                                0.0332                    0.0441
                                                             [0.0134]**                  [0.0167]**
               Generic Penetration                               0.0674                    0.0828
                                                             [0.0206]***                [0.0245]***
Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in
which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of
2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




                                                            69
                Table A.29: Decomposition of source of decreases in price per prescription
                  NDC 9         molecule-generic        molecule       VA class-generic        VA class      All prescriptions
                   (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)                (6)
Share MCO         -0.0878             -0.0182            -0.0265            -0.0390             -0.109             -0.0535
                [0.0238]***          [0.0104]*           [0.0174]           [0.0367]          [0.0507]**          [0.0291]*
 Notes: To determine what is leading to the decreases in price per prescription, we reprice the prescriptions using coarser
 and coarser drug classifications. Each column presents the contribution of further repricing to the decrease in price per
 prescription from MCOs. For example, column (1) implies that the price decreases from MCOs would have been 8.4
 percentage points smaller if there was no price variation within 9 digit NDC. The coefficient in column (2) implies that
 the price decrease from MCOs would have been 1.8 percentage points smaller if there was no price variation within
 molecule-generic versus than it would have been if there was no price variation within 9 digit NDC. The large
 coefficients in columns (1) and (5) imply that the main was in which MCOs obtain a lower price per prescription by
 obtaining lower prices for identical 9 digit NDCs and by engaging in generic substitution within-VA class but
 across-molecule. Drug sample is limited to drugs matched to both the FDA and VA data. Unit of observation is the
 state-quarter. Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
 pharmacy benefits. Unreported controls includes state fixed effects and quarter fixed effects. The transition quarter in
 which a state privatizes is omitted. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of
 2010. Standard errors are clustered by state. * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** .01




     Figure A.9: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and spending per enrollee
                             (decomposing into prices and quantities)




 Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
 pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
 Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
 Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence
 interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




                                                              70
      Figure A.10: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and generic efficiency




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence
interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




     Figure A.11: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and generic accessibility




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence
interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




                                                             71
                  Figure A.12: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and
                                     Simulated generic accessibility




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Observations are weighted by state Medicaid drug spending in the second quarter of 2010.
Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and a 95 percent confidence
interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented with the dotted lines.




                  Figure A.13: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and
                                 ln(High offset utilization per enrollee)




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and
a 95 percent confidence interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented
with the dotted lines.




                                                             72
                  Figure A.14: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and
                               ln(Non-high offset utilization per enrollee)




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and
a 95 percent confidence interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented
with the dotted lines.




                          Figure A.15: Effect of privatization for high offset drugs




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and
a 95 percent confidence interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented
with the dotted lines.




                                                            73
                         Figure A.16: Effect of privatization for non-high offset drugs




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and
a 95 percent confidence interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented
with the dotted lines.




      Figure A.17: Heterogeneity in effect of privatization by whether MCOs can design PDLs




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. There are more lags and leads than states (which we cluster standard errors by). Therefore,
the lags and leads for the two groups of states are from separate regressions. When we include lags and leads of the
privatization decision for those states where MCOs do not need to use the state’s PDL, we include a pooled indicator for
privatization for those states where MCOs must use the state’s PDL (and visa versa). Point estimates for the effect of
quarter pre-post privatization for states in which the MCO can design its own PDL is presented in the dark line and a 95
percent confidence interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented
with the dotted lines.




                                                            74
  Figure A.18: Lags and leads of relationship between privatization and ln(Medicaid enrollment)




Notes: Specification is limited to treatment states that privatize pharmacy benefits and control states with no MCO
pharmacy benefits. Includes state fixed effects, quarter fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the state has expanded
Medicaid under the ACA. Point estimates for the effect of quarter pre-post privatization is presented in the dark line and
a 95 percent confidence interval for those coefficients, based upon standard errors that are clustered by state, is presented
with the dotted lines.




                                                            75
