                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
                                 OF NOISE TRADERS




                               J. Bradford De Long

                                 Andrei Shleifer

                               Lawrence H. Summers

                               Robert J. Waldmann




                             Working Paper No. 2395




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1987




We would like to thank the National Science, Russell Sage and Alfred P. Sloan
Foundations for financial support. We have benefitted from discussions with Robert
Barsky, Fischer Black, Andrew Caplin, Miles Kimball, Bruce Lehniann, Kevin Murphy,
Charles Perry, Robert Vishny, and Michael Woodford among others. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                          The Economic Consequences of Noise Traders




                                                 ABSTRACT



              The claim that financial markets are efficient is backed by an implicitargument that misin-
     formed "noise traders" can have little influence on asset prices in equilibrium. If noise traders'
     beliefs are sufficiently different from those of rational agents to significantly affectprices, then noise
     traders will buy high and sell low. They will then lose money relative to rational investors and even-
     tually be eliminated from the market.
              We present a simple overlapping-generations model of the stock market in which noise
     traders with erroneous and stochastic beliefs (a) significantly affect prices and (b) earn higher returns
     than do rational investors. Noise traders earn high returns because they beara large amount of the
     market risk which the presence of noise traders creates in the assets that they hold: theirpresence
     raises expected returns because sophisticated investors dislike bearing the risk that noise traders may
     be irrationally pessimistic and push asset prices down in the future.
              The model we present has many properties that correspond to the "Keynesian" view of
     financial markets. (i) Stock prices are more volatile than can be justified on the basis ofnews about
     underlying fundamentals. (ii) A rational investor concerned about the short run may be better off
     guessing the guesses of others than choosing an appropriate J3portfolio. (iii) Asset prices diverge
     frequently but not permanently from average values, giving rise to patterns of mean reversion in
     stock and bond prices similar to those found directly by Fama and French (1987) for the stock mar-
     ket and to the failures of the expectations hypothesis of the term structure. (iv) Since investors in
     assets bear not only fundamental but also noise trader risk, the average prices of assets will be below
     fundamental values; one striking example of substantial divergence between market and fundamental
     values is the persistent discount on closed-end mutual funds, and a second example is Mehra and
     Prescott's (1986) finding that American equities sell for much less than the consumption capital asset
     pricing model would predict. (v) The more the market is dominated by short-term traders as
     opposed to long-term investors, the poorer is its performance as a social capital allocation mecha-
     nism. (vi) Dividend policy and capital structure can matter for the value of the firm even abstracting
     from tax considerations. And (vii) making assets illiquid and thus no longer subject to the whims of
     the market -- as is done when a firm goes private -- may enhance their value.




J. Bradford De Long                                                  Andrei Shielfer
Department of Economics                                              Graduate School of Business
Boston University                                                    University of Chicago
270 Bay State Road                                                   1101 East 58th Street
Boston, MA 02215                                                     Chicago, IL 60637

Lawrence H. Summers                                                  Robert J. Waldmann
Department of Economics                                              Department of Economics
Harvard University                                                   Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                   iii                               10/8/87




"People who argue that speculation is generally destabilizing seldom realize that this is largely equi-
valent to saying that speculators lose money, since speculation can be destabilizing in general only if
speculators on the average sell when the [asset]... is low in price and buy when it is high. It does
not, of course, follow that speculation is not destabilizing; professional speculators might... make
money while a changing body of amateurs regularly lost larger sums. But, while this may happen...
the presumption is rather the opposite."
                                                        --Milton Friedman (1953), p. 175.



"If the reader interjects that there must surely be large profits to be gained.., in the long run by a
skilled individual who.,. purchase[s] investments on the best genuine long-term expectation he can
frame, he must be answered... that there are such serious-minded individuals and that it makes a vast
difference to an investment market whether or not they predominate... But we must also add that
there are several factors which jeopardise the predominance of such individuals in modem invest-
ment markets. Investment based on genuine long-term expectation is so difficult... as to be scarcely
practicable. He who attempts it must surely... run greater risks than he who tries to guess better than
the crowd how the crowd will behave."
                                                         -- John Maynard Keynes (1936), p. 157.




                              "If you're so rich, why aren't you smart?"
                                                               -- Anonymous
                                                            1                                      10/8/87

         There is considerable evidence that many investors do not follow economists' advice that the
market portfolio should be bought and held. Individual investors typically fail to diversify, holding
instead a single stock or a small number of stocks (Lewellen, Lease, and Schlarbaum (1974)). They
often pick stocks on advice of the likes of Joe Granville, or of Louis Rukeyser on Wall Street Week.

When investors do diversify, they entrust their money to stock-picking mutual funds which charge
them high fees while failing to beat the market (Jensen (1968)), and turn their portfolios over as often
as twice a yeas. Institutional investors are more prone to churn portfolios than individual investors,
and are notoriously reluctant to pursue a passive investment strategy.

         Many prominent market participants see asset markets as little more than casinos. Wojnilower
(1980) fmds the fact "that so many major financial institutions... try to outperform the market on a
monthly or even weekly basis... particularly indicative of a gambling mentality...." Keynes (1936)
saw the stock market as a beauty contest in which the judges selected the winners by trying to match as

closely as possible the judgments of others. And Graham and Dodd (1934) dwelled on the persistence
of deviations of market prices from their fundamental values and argued that the pmdent investor

should purchase assets that possessed a substantial "margin of safety," that is, were so undervalued
that one could achieve more than satisfactory returns either through dividends or through liquidation
even if the market valuation were to decline further.

         Despite the concern of many participants that irrational noise trading makes financial markets

function poorly in spreading risk and allocating capital, fmancial economists, with the notable excep-

tions of Shiller (1984), Kyle (1985), Campbell and Kyle (1987), and especially Black (1986), have
been reluctant to assign any role to noise traders in studying the behavior of asset prices.' Their skep-
ticism Stems from the idea that even if many investors do trade irrationally, sophisticated arbitrageurs

would trade against them and drive prices close to fundamental values (Fama (1965)). And in the
course of such trading, those whose judgments of asset values were sufficiently mistaken to affect
prices would lose money to rational, sophisticated investors and so would be driven out of the market
(Friedman (1953)).2

'See Merton (1985), Miller (1986), and Kleidon (1986).
2Hart and Kreps (1986) have challenged Friedmans analysis in a fully rational model. Several other studies have
explored the effects of irrational behavior. Haltiwanger and Waidman (1985) study the effects of irrational behavior on
prices in the presence of externalities, and Thaler and Russell (1985) examine the same question in a market where
                                                           2                                      10/8/87

        This paper demonstrates that even if noise traders have substantial effects on asset prices eco-

nomic selection may still work in their favor. Optimistic noise traders might well invest a large share
of their wealth in risky assets, and as long as risk taking is rewarded they will earn a higher expected

return than sophisticated investors. The wedge between utility and wealth maximization is large
enough to allow irrational investors to earn high expected returns even while substantially distorting
prices. Moreover, noise traders make the assets they trade more risky by subjecting them to changes
in their whims. Risk-averse sophisticated investors then avoid these assets unless compensated for
bearing not only fundamental risk but also noise trader created risk.1 As a consequence,noise traders
may depress the prices of and raise the returns on the assets they buy and so provide a further reason
for economic selection to operate in their favor. The demise of noise traders is not as certain as has

been supposed even by their advocates.
        There is a second set of objections to the introduction of irrational noise traders into models of
asset prices. It is suggested that they are a kind of deus ex machina who serve to explain only the
 questionable proposition that asset prices are excessively volatile, and that economists should not
 sacrifice their traditional presumption in favor of rational behavior in order to account for one single

 fact. We demonstrate to the contrary that the introduction of noise traders sheds light on several

 anomalies in the behavior of asset prices. Examining optimal responses to noise traders also helps to
 illuminate a number of aspects of the behavior of sophisticated investors and firms.
         A fmancial market in which noise trader risk is significant invites a qualitative description often

 heard from managers, investment advisors, and other observers -- many of whom depend for their
 livelihood on a competitive market's placing a high monetary value on their insights into the future
 behavior of asset prices. If noise trading accounts for a large part of the variation in asset prices, it is
 rational for traders to focus attention on possible predictors of noise traders' future moves. Optimal
 trading strategies are likely to take the form of market timing, and will not necessarily bear close

 resemblance to buy and hold. Sophisticated investors trying to take advantage of noise traders will

 also pick stocks.

 arbitrage is restricted. Neither of the latter studies a competitive market without restrictions on trade.
 1Noise trader-created risk is present in Campbell and Kyle (1987), although they do not emphasize this particular
 effect. Very similar effects exist in Stein's (1987) model of heterogeneously informed investors; he observes that noise
 traders reduce the informational content of prices and in this way drive out sophisticated investors.
                                                    3                                  10/8/87

       Noise trading can also give rise to a number of observed properties of asset prices. If noise

trading were prevalent and frequently pushed prices away from fundamental values, firms with market
values high relative to their earnings, dividends, book value, or any other size measure would tend to
perform poorly, while firms with market values low relative to these benchmarks would do well. In
addition, one would expect to find discrepancies between asset prices and fundamental values such as
can be seen in the persistent underpricing of closed end mutual fund shares and are suggested by the
calculations of Mehra and Prescott (1986) on the relationship between the variability of consumption
and the equity risk premium.

       The presence of noise traders also makes coherent some of the fears of corporate managers that
the short time horizon of the typical American investor harms the economy. Investors with short hori-
zons increase asset price volatility and investors with long horizons stabilize the market and push asset

prices closer to fundamental values. Managers are right to complain that the market is short-sighted
and undervalues their firms (Donaldson (1984)) and that the short time horizon of investors forces
investment projects to pass excessively high rate of return hurdles.
        A firm operating in a market full of noise traders will take their presence into account. Its
managers wifi try to reduce the noise trader risk to which their firm's securities are subject by paying

dividends, altering the debt equity ratio, and otherwise "packaging" claims to the firm's cash flows to
reduce their vulnerability to noise trader risk. If the discount of equity caused by noise traders gets to
be so large that it outweighs the benefits of public ownership, managers will find it profitable to take

their companies private. As pointed out by Black (1986), leveraged buyouts of undervalued firms
make sense in a world where noise traders matter.
        We develop our two central arguments -- that market selection may well work for, not against,

noise traders and that models with noise traders yield predictions that seem to fit well with many stan-
dard financial anomalies -- in five sections and two appendices. Section I below presents a model with

two assets which have identical riskless fundamentals, and one of the assets, but not the other, is
subject to noise traders' misperceptions. While the only risk in this model comes from changes in
noise traders' opinions, prices nevertheless diverge significantly from fundamentals. Section II deals
with the survival of noise traders in the basic model and in an extended model in which successful
                                                          4                                     10/8/87

investors are imitated (as in Denton (1985)). Section III presents qualitative implications of the model

for the behavior of asset prices and market participants. Section IV presents qualitative implications of
the presence of noise traders for real economic activity. Section V concludes. A first appendix dis-
cusses the effect of fundamental risk on the survival of noise traders. A second appendix shows that
our results, while mathematically more complex, hold as well in a model with a bounded distribution

of prices and with fundamental as well as noise trader created price risk.




1. NOISE TRADING AS A SOURCE OF RISK

Noise Tradin.g and Sophisticated Investing
        The central feature of the model presented below is the presence of both noise traders and
sophisticated investors. Noise traders falsely believe that they have information about the price that the
risky asset will sell for in the future. They may get their pseudo-signals from technical analysts, stock
brokers, or economic consultants and irrationally believe that they carry information. Or they may, in
formulating their investment strategies, exhibit the fallacy of excessive subjective certainty that has

been repeatedly demonstrated in experimental contexts since Alpert and Raiffa (1960). Alternatively,
noise traders may be motivated by the following chain of reasoning: 'The tip I have just received may
reflect real knowledge -- in which case I will profit by following it -- or the market may be fully effi-
cient arid the tip may be noise. If the market is efficient I will be accepting extra risk, but not an
abnormally low expected return, by acting on the tip. Therefore I should invest at least a small amount

 as long as I give the tip any positive probability of being valid,"1
         The optimal behavior of sophisticated investors in asset markets without noise traders is to buy
 and sell assets on the basis of fundamental risk characteristics. In the presence of noise traders the
 optimal behavior of sophisticated investors would involve paying attention to pseudo-signals and act-
 ing to exploit noise traders' irrational misperceptions. Sophisticated traders would then optimally
 exploit noise traders, buying when noise traders depress prices and selling when noise traders push
 prices up. Sophisticated investors would trade actively on the basis of public information. When


 1Many economists speculations on the 'small firm in January' effect were based on this line of reasoning.
                                                            5                                      10/8/87

viewed from the outside they would resemble noise traders in actively managing their portfolios.
These are the sophisticated investors our model examines.


The Model

         Our basic model is a stripped down overlapping generations model with two-period lived

agents (Samuelson (1958), Diamond (1965)). For simplicity, there is no first period consumption, no
labor supply decision, and no bequest. As a result, the resources agents have to invest are exogenous.
The only decision considered is the portfolio choice of the young.
         The model contains two assets that pay identical dividends. One of the assets, the safe asset
(s), pays a fixed real dividend r. Asset (s) is in perfectly elastic supply: a unit of it can be created out
of and a unit of it turned back into a unit of the consumption good in any period. Its price is therefore
always fixed at one. The dividend r paid on asset (s) is thus the riskiess rate. The other asset, the
unsafe asset (u), always pays the same fixed real dividend r as asset (s). But (u) is not in elastic sup-
ply: it is in fixed and unchangeable quantity, normalized at one unit. We wifi usually interpret (s) as a
riskiess short-term bond and (u) as the aggregate of equities. The price of (u) fri period t is denoted Pt•

If all agents accurately perceive that the two assets always pay the same dividends, then assets (u) and
(s) will be perfect substitutes and will sell for the same price of one in all periods. But this is not an
equilibrium in the presence of noise traders.

         The basic model possesses two types of agents: sophisticated investors (denoted 'i') who
have rational expectations and noise traders (denoted "n). We assume that noise traders are present in
the model in measure jt, that sophisticated investors are present in measure 1-ji, and that all agents of a

given type are identicaL1 Both types of agents maximize perceived expected utility given their per-
ception of the ex-ante mean of the distribution of the price of (u) at t+ 1. The representative soph-

isticated investor young in period t accurately perceives the distribution of returns to holding the risky
asset. The representative noise trader young in period t misperceives the expected price of the risky
asset by an independent normal random variable pt:2

1A more general model would consider the interaction of noise traders with different sets of misperceptions.
21n this case asset returns have a normal distribution, and so the linear mean-variance approximation to expected utility
is exact. The validity of the mean-variance approximation when misperceptions are not normally distributed is
considered in the appendix.
                                                         6                              10/8/87
                         —
            (1)              N(p*,a2)
The mean misperception p* is a measure of the average "bullishness" of the noise traders, and            is

the variance of noise traders' misperceptions of the expected return per unit of the risky asset.
        Each agent's utility is a constant absolute risk aversion function of wealth when old:

            (2) U = - e2V
where y is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion. Agents choose their portfolio when young to
maximize expected utility. Sophisticated investors use the correct probability distribution of next
period's prices. Noise traders maximize their own expectation of utility given the dividend that will be
paid next period, the one-period variance of Pt+ 1' and their false belief that the distribution of the price

of (u) next period has mean Pt above its true value. With normally-distributed returns, maximizing the

expected value of (2) is equivalent to maximizing (Samuelson (1970)):

             (3)

where i is the expected final wealth, and            is the one-period ahead variance of wealth.

        The sophisticated investor chooses the amount ? of the risky asset (u) he buys to maximize:

             (4)      E(U) =     W-   yc    =
                                                c0
                                                     + X(r +        - p1(1+r)) -    y(X)2{1o }
 where co is a function of first-period labor income, an anterior subscript denotes the time at which an

 expectation is taken, and we define:

             (5)             = E{ (c'11 - E1(pl))2}
 to be the variance ofpt+i about its one-period forecast. The representative noise trader maximizes:

             (6)      E(U) =     W-         = c0     +    X(r +      - p1(1+r)) -                  }+X

 The only difference between (4) and (6) is the fmal term in (6) added to capture the noise trader's mis-

 perception of the expected return from holding a unit of the risky asset.
        Given noise traders' misperception of the one-period return on (u), young noise traders and
 sophisticated investors maximize (perceived expected) utility by dividing wealth between (u) and (s).
 The quantities n and X' of the risky asset purchased are functions of the price Pt of the risky asset,

 of the one-period ahead distribution of the price of (u), and (in the case of noise traders) of their mis-
                                                                7                                          10/8/87
perception Pt of the expected return. When old, agents convert their holdings of (s) to the con-
sumption good, sell their holdings of (u) for price Pt+1 to the new young, and consume all their
wealth.

          Any agent wishing to hold asset (u) from period t to period t+ 1 must consider the possibility
that the noise traders will be either bullish or bearish on asset (u) in period t+ 1. Noise traders with

faulty and stochastic expectations create the possibility of capital gains and losses on rational agents'
holdings of (u). Asset (u) -- which carries no fundamental risk -- thus becomes risky. The presence
of noise traders eliminates the riskiess arbitrage demand for asset (u) and breaks the identity between
the prices of (u) and (s).
          One can think of alternative specifications of noise traders. There are well-defined mappings
between misperceptions of returns Pt and (a) noise traders' fixing a price Pt at which they will buy and
sell, (b) noise traders' purchasing a fixed quantity                of the risky asset, or (c) noise traders' mistaking
the variance of returns (taking them to be 2* instead of 2)i The equilibrium in which noisetraders
matter found in our basic model exists regardless of which primitive specification of noise traders'
behavior is assumed.


The Pricing Function

          Solving (4) and (6) yields expressions for agents' holdings of (U):


1Let noise traders set:


                       p1 =      - 2y o.2 + .aa. + t(P:it:rP*)

where G2 is the total variance --
                                the sum of 'fundamental dividend variance, noise trader-generated price variance, and
any covariance terms -- associated with ho1dng the risky asset (u) for one period. Alternatively, let noise traders set
the quantity of the risky asset that they buy -- whatever its price --

                          At = 1+              2
                                        (2y)a
or let the noise traders misperceive the variance of returns on the risky asset, taking as the variance:



                                 =
                                                                           8                                       10/8/87
                                   r +                - (1 + r)p
                             =
                                               2y{a2
                                                   pt+1
                                                       }
                                   r       +          -   (1   + r)p
              (8)            =                                                 +
                                               2y{a2
                                                 t pt+l}                               2T{&
                                                                                          pt,1
                                                                                               }


Since the old sell their holdings, the demands of the young must sum to one in equilibrium. Equations

(7) and (8) imply that:

              (9)       Pt         1       r{         r   +            -
                                                                           2?() +                  }
Equation (9) expresses the risky asset's price in period t as a function of period t's misperception by
noise traders (Pt)' of the technological (r) and behavioral ('y) parameters of the model, and of the char-
acteristics of the one-period ahead distribution of                                     If we consider only steady-state equilibria by
imposing the requirement that the unconditional distribution of Pt+ 1 be identical to the distribution of

Pt then the endogenous one-period ahead distribution of the price of asset (u) canbe eliminated from




                                                                                           ()
the equilibrium pricing function (9) by solving recursively.1

               (10)       Pt =         1   +
                                               PLP)             +                  -


 Inspection of (10) reveals that only the second term is variable, for y, p*, and r are all constants, and
 the one-step ahead variance of Pt is a simple unchanging function of the constant variance of a gener-

 ation of noise traders' misperception Pt

                             2                            =
              (11)                     =
                             P+i               Pt*i                 2
                                                               (1+r)

 The final form of the pricing rule for (u), in which the price depends only on exogenous parameters of
 the model and on public information about present and future misperception by noise traders, is:




 'The model cannot have well-behaved bubble equilibria, for the safe asset is equivalent to a storage technology that
 pays a rate of return r greater than the rate of growth of the economy. The number of stationary equilibria does depend
 on the primitive specification of noise traders behavior. For example, if noise traders randomly pick each period the
 price Pt at which they will buy and sell unlimited quantities of the risky asset, then (trivially) there is only one
 equilibrium. If the noise traders randomly pick the quantity X' which they purchase, then the fundamental solution in
 which Pt is always equal to one is an equilibrium in addition to the equilibrium in which noise traders matter.
                                                     9                                   10/8/87

            (12)       Pt =      +
                                     t(pp*)      +        - (2y)a2
                                                             r(1+r)


Interpretation
        The last three terms that appear in (12) and (10) show the impact of noise traders on the price
of asset (u). As the distribution of Pt converges to a point mass at zero the equilibrium pricing func-

tion (12) converges to its fundamental value of one.

        The second term in (12) captures the fluctuations in the price of the risky asset (u) due to the
variation of noise traders' misperceptions. Even though asset (u) is not subject toany fundamental
uncertainty and is so known by a large class of investors, its price varies substantially as noise traders'
opinions shift. When a generation of noise traders is more "bullish" than the average generation, they
bid up the price of (u). When they are more "bearish" than average, they bid down the price. When
they hold their average misperception -- when Pt =       -- the term is zero. As one would expect, the

more numerous are noise traders relative to sophisticated investors, the more volatile are asset prices.
        The third term in (12) captures the deviations of Pt from its fundamental value due to the fact

that the average misperception by noise traders is not zero. If noise traders are bullish on average, this
"price pressure" effect makes the price of the risky asset higher than it would otherwise be. Optimistic
noise traders bear a greater than average share of price risk. Since sophisticated investors bear a
smaller share of price risk the higher is p*, they require a lower expected excess return and so are
willing to pay a higher price for asset (u).
        The final term in (12) is the heart of the model. Sophisticated investors will not hold the risky

asset unless compensated for bearing the risk that noise traders will become bearish and the price of the
risky asset will fall. Both noise traders and sophisticated investors present in period t believe that asset
(u) is mispriced, but because Pt+1 is uncertain each class is not willing to go too far in betting on this

mispricing. At the margin, the returns from enlarging one's position in an asset that everyone agrees is
mispriced (but different classes think is mispriced in different directions) are offset by the additional
price risk that would be run. Noise traders thus "create their own space": the uncertainty over what
next period's noise traders will believe makes the otherwise riskiess asset (u) risky, and drives its price
                                                         10                                      10/8/87

down and its return up. This is so despite the fact that both sophisticated investors and noise traders
always hold portfolios which possess the same amount of fundamental risk: zero. Anyintuition to the

effect that investors in the risky asset "ought" to receive higher expected returns because they perform
the valuable social function of risk bearing neglects to consider that noise traders' speculation is the
only source of risk. For the economy as a whole, there is no risk to be borne.
        The reader might suspect that our results are critically dependent on the overlapping generations
structure of the model, but this is not accurate. Equilibrium exists as long as the returns to holding the

risky asset are always uncertain. In the overlapping generations structure this is assured by the
absence of a last period. For if there is a last period in which the risky asset pays a non-stochastic
dividend and is liquidated, then both noise traders and sophisticated investors will seek to exploit what

they see as riskiess arbitrage opportunities. If, say, the total liquidation value of the risky asset is 1 +r,
the previous period sophisticated investors will try to buy and sell arbitrarily large quantities of asset
(u) at a price of one, and noise traders wifi try to buy and sell arbitrarily large quantities at a price of:

             (13)        p=      1+
 The excess demand function for the risky asset will be undefined. But in a model with fundamental

 dividend risk the assumption that there is no last period, and hence the overlapping generations struc-
 ture, are not necessary. With fundamental dividend risk no agent will ever be subjectivelycertain what
 the return to holding the risky asset will be, and so the qualitative properties of equilibrium in our
 model hold even with a known terminal date.1 The overlapping generations structure is therefore not

 needed when fundamental dividend risk is present.
         Our discussion has maintained the assumption that all agents who are not noise traders are

 sophisticated investors who optimally exploit the presence of noise. A more reasonable assumption is

 that many traders pursue passive strategies -- neither responding to noise nor trading against noise
 traders -- as is advised by many finance textbooks. If a large fraction of non-noise trading is of this

 1The infinitely extended overlapping generations structure of the basic model does play another function. It assures
 that each agents horizon is short. No agent has any opportunity to wait until the price of the risky asset 'recovers"
 before selling. Such an overlapping generations structure may be a fruitful way of modelling the effects on prices of a
 number of institutional features, like frequent evaluations of money managers' performance, that may lead rational,
 long-lived market participants to care about short term rather than long term performance. In our model, thehorizon of
 the typical investor is of some importance: as we show below, arbitrage becomes easier as the horizon of agents
 becomes longer, and prices approach fundamental values,
                                                          11                                    10/8/87

passive type, then even a very small measure of noise traders can have a large impact on prices If
noise traders wish to sell, they will find in aggregate that they have no one else to sell to. Prices will
move until noise traders' no longer wish to sell. The impact of noise trading depends not on the num-
ber of noise traders but on the relative numbers of noise traders and of those willing to actively bet

against them.1




II. THE SURVIVAL OF NOISE TRADERS
The Returns to Noise Trading
        We have demonstrated that noise traders can affect prices even though there is no uncertainty

about fundamentals. It is often argued that noise traders who affect prices will earn lower returns than

the rational, sophisticated speculators they trade with. Hence economic selection will work to weed
them out (Friedman (1953)). This argument is flawed. Noise traders collective shifts of opinion
increase the riskiness of and average returns to assets. If noise traders' portfolios are concentrated in
assets subject to noise trader risk, noise traders can earn higher rates of return on their investments
even though they hold portfolios with no greater degree of fundamental risk than do sophisticated
investors.
        The conditions under which noise traders earn higher expected returns than sophisticated
investors are easily laid out. All agents earn a certain net return of r on their investments in asset (s).
The difference between noise traders' and sophisticated investors total returns given equal initial wealth
is the product of the difference in their holdings of the risky asset (u) and of the excess return paid by a
unit of the risky asset (u). Call this difference in net returns to the two types of agents ARni:

             (14)       AR.= (X-X)(r +                -        + r))

The difference between noise traders' and sophisticated investors' demands for asset (u) is simply:

                                        _________         (l+r)2p
             (15)        (?-X) =               2                2
                                         (2y) pt1         (2?)t 2p

'A simple example may help to make our point. Suppose that all investors are convinced that the market is efficient.
They will hold the market portfolio. Now suppose that one investor decides to commit his wealth disproportionately
to a single security. Its price will be driven to infinity.
                                                       12                                                10/8/87

The expected value of the excess return on the risky asset (u) as of time t is:
                                                                                             22
                                                                                        (2y)jta
                                                               2       -                             -
                       (r + p11 - p(l    + r)) =                                   =
             (16)                                     (2y)a                I1P                   2
                                                                                         (1+r)

And so:
                                                  2       2
                                             (1+r)
             (17)       t(n-) =          -
                                    Pt
                                              (2'y).ta2

The expected excess total return of noise traders will be positive only if both noise traders are opti-
mistic (Pt positive, which makes (15) positive) and the risky asset is priced below its fundamental

value (which makes (16) positive. Since (17) is the product of (15) and (16), it is positive only if
both (15) and (16) have the same sign. Since (16) is guaranteed to be positive if (15) is negative, the
expected excess total return can be positive only if both of its factors are positive.

          Taking the global unconditional expectations of (17) yields:
                                               (1+r)
                                                      2(p*)2       +       (1+r)
                                                                                   22
                                                                                   c
              (18)      E(1R .) = p* —
                                                              (2y)p.2

                                                                                                                   the
Equation (18) makes obvious the requirement that for noise traders to earn higher expected returns,
mean misperception p* of returns to holding the risky asset must be positive. The first p* on the right

hand side of (18) increases noise traders' expected returns through what might be called the "hold
 more" effect. Noise traders' expected returns relative to those of sophisticated investors are increased
 when noise traders on average hold more of the risky asset and earn a larger share of the rewards to
 risk bearing. If p* is less than zero, noise traders' changing misperceptions still make the fundamen-

 tally riskless asset (u) risky and still push the expected returns to holding asset (u) up,but the rewards
 paid to risk bearing accrue disproportionately to sophisticated investors, for noisetraders on average
 hold less than their share of the risky asset.
          The first term in the numerator incorporates the "price pressure" effect. As noise traders
 become more bullish, they demand more of the risky asset on average and drive up its price. They
 thus reduce the return to risk bearing, and hence the differential between their returns and those of

 sophisticated investors.
           The second term in the numerator incorporates the "buy high-sell low" effect. Because noise
                                                         13                               10/8/87

traders' misperceptions are stochastic, that they have the worst possible market timing. They buy the
most of the risky asset (u) just when other noise traders are buying it, which is when they are most
likely to suffer a capital loss. The more variable are noise traders' beliefs, the more damage their poor
market timing does to their returns.

        The denominator incorporates the "create space" effect central to this model. As the variability
of noise traders' beliefs increases, the price risk in the system increases. Sophisticated investors are
less willing to assume the capital risk they must bear to take advantage of noise traders' mispercep-

tions. If the "create space" effect is large, then the "price pressure" and "buy high-sell low" effects
inflict less damage on noise traders' wealth relative to sophisticated investors' wealth. The "create
space" effect raises noise traders' relative returns by reducing the extent to which sophisticated traders
are willing to exploit noise traders' misperceptions.
        Two effects -- "hold more" and "create space"tend
                                                      -- to raise noise traders' relative expected
returns. Two effects -- "buy high-sell low" and "price pressure" -- tend to lower noise traders' relative

expected returns. Neither pair clearly dominates. It is clear that noise traders cannot have higher
returns if noise traders are on average bearish, for if p * does not exceed zero there is no "hold more"

effect. It is also clear that noise traders do not have higher returns if they are too bullish, for as p *

grows large the "price pressure" effect, which increases with (p*)2, dominates. For intermediate

degrees of average bullishness noise traders earn higher expected returns. And it is clear from (18)
that the larger is y, that is the more risk averse are agents, the larger is the range of p* over which
noise traders have higher returns.

        The higher expected returns of the noise traders come at the cost of holding portfolios with

sufficiently higher variance to give noise traders lower expected utility (computed using the true dis-
tribution of wealth when old). Since sophisticated investors maximize true expected utility, any trad-
ing strategy alternative to theirs that earns a higher mean return must have a variance sufficiently higher
to make it unattractive. The average amount of asset (s) that must be given to old noise traders to give
them the ex ante expected utility of sophisticated investors can be shown to be:

                                  (1÷r)
                                        2    F                *2
            (19)                      •'         1   +
                                  (4)2 L
                                                             14                                        10/8/87

This amount falls with an increase in the stochastic irrationality of noise traders and rises with an
increase in the mean misperception of noise traders. The magnitude of noise traders' mistakes grows
with p*, but the extra risk penalty for attempting to exploit noise traders' mistakes grows with

         Noise traders receive higher average consumption than sophisticated investors, and sophisti-
cated investors receive higher average consumption than in fundamental equilibrium, yet the productive

resources available to society -- its per period labor income, its ability to create the productive asset (s),
and the unit amount of asset (u) yielding its per period dividend r -- are unchanged by the presence of
noise trading. The source of extra returns is made clear by the following thought experiment.
Imagine that before some date t there are no noise traders. Up until time 't both assets sell at a price of
one. At 'r it is unexpectedly announced that in the next generation noise traders will appear. The price
p of the asset (u) drops; those who hold asset (u) in period 'r suffer a capital loss. This capital loss is

the source of the excess returns and of the higher consumption in the equilibrium with noise. The
period t young have more to invest in (s) because they pay less to the old for the stock of asset (u). If

at time 0) it became known that noise traders had permanently withdrawn -- perhaps because the gov-

ernment had credibly committed itself to undo the purchases and sales of noise traders --then those
 who held (u) at time o would capture the present value of what would otherwise have been future
 excess returns as p jumped to one. The fact that the generations that suffer and benefit from the

 arrival and departure of noise traders are pushed off to -00 and +00 in the basic model creates the

 appearance of a free lunch.1
          The fact that "bullish" noise traders can earn higher returns in the market than sophisticated
 traders implies that "market selection" does not necessarily eliminate irrational behavior that affects
 prices.2 Since noise traders' wealth can increase faster than sophisticated investors', it is not possible
 to make any blanket statement to the effect that there can be a stable population of irrational agents only

 if they are continuously subsidized.


 11n practice, the cost of future noise trader risk in a security will be paid by whoever sells it to the public. In the case
 of stock, the cost will be paid by the entrepreneur.
 2There is a sense in which "market selection" could work against noise traders. The greater variance of noise traders
 returns may give long-lived agents a high probability of having low wealth and a low probability of having very high
 wealth. Since the criterion of "fitness' might be not a high expected wealth but a small probability of a very low
 realization of wealth, market selection might work against such a trader even though the expected value of wealth is
 high We pursue these issues in our follow up paper (De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (in preparation)).
                                                           15                                      10/8/87



Inheritance of Beliefs but Not Wealth
        Our two-period model precludes our treating the effects of wealth accumulation by noise
traders. We turn instead to a model of "imitation" rather than "accumulation" in which the issues of
survival can be directly addressed by allowing the fraction of agents who are noise traders to be deter-

mined by the emulation effects developed in Denton (1985).
        There are no bequests. Each generation earns exogenous labor income when young and con-
sumes all of its wealth when old. Each individual has one child; and children are predisposed to be of
the same type (sophisticated investor or noise trader) as their parent. But there is some switching. If
noise traders earn a higher return in any period, a fraction of the young who would otherwise be
sophisticated investors become noise traders:
                               =       + c(R - R1)
             (20)        t+l
where R and R are the realized returns of period t old, and where tt is the fraction of the population
that are noise traders. There are (i-sit) sophisticated investors and p noise traders.

         Equation (20) is a simple learning rule; investment strategies that were successful in the pre-
vious generation win converts. It is similar to simple adaptive learning rules used by Bray (1982) and
Lucas (1986).l Equation (20) aims to capture the idea that success breeds imitation, which in many
cases is a plausible theory of investor behavior. Witness the well-known 1966 "Presidents Report' of
then Ford Foundation President McGeorge Bundy (1967):

             It is far from clear that trustees have reason to be proud of their performance in making
             money for their colleges. We recognize the risks of unconventional investing, but the true
             test of performance in the handling of money is the record of achievement, not the opinion
             of the respectable. We have the preliminary impression that over the long run caution has
             cost our colleges and universities much more than imprudence or excessive risk taking.

Bundy's intention to change the management of the Ford Foundation's portfolio in the late 1960's
exemplifies the switch from acting like a risk-averse sophisticated investor to acting like a noise trader.


'One might argue that the single reasonable learning rule would be to take the past distribution of noise traders' and
sophisticated investors' total wealth, evaluate the utility associated with each realized total wealth, and calculate the
expected utility from following each strategy. In our view, this amounts to saying that an agent who understands the
deep structure of the model and performs the calculations that a sophisticated utility-maximizing investor would
perform as part of his decision among investment strategies would not choose to be a noise trader. We do not disagree.
                                                            16                                    10/8/87

Casting aside 'the opinion of the respectable" --that the large returns earned by go-go fund managers
in the 1960's were achieved by riding the crest of the noise trader wave -- Bundy views "the record of

[recent past] achievement" as the rational criterion for choosing among portfolio strategies. The Ford
Foundation abandoned its prudence and shifted to a high 3 portfolio that had probably already attracted

the attention of large numbers of other noise traders.1
        The model with imitation is easily solved if << 1. If is significant at the scale of any one

generation, then those investing in period t will have to calculate what the effect of the distribution of

returns will be on the division of those young in period t+l between noise traders and sophisticated
investors. If is small, then the calculation of returns can be carried out as if the population will be
divided between noise traders and sophisticated investors in the proportions                  and l-J.it forever.

        Equation (12), the pricing rule for Pt with jt noise traders, requires only that a subscript be
added to the fraction of noise traders .tt to give the limit of the pricing rule for the model with variable

proportions as the parameter converges to zero:
                                               - p*)              (2y)p2
                         p = 1+                         +
                                                            Ip* - _____
             (12')                            l+r            r     r(1+r)2

The expected return gap between noise traders and sophisticated investors is equation (17) when the
proportion of noise traders is fixed at p. With the proportion lit variable, the limit of the expected

 return gap as converges to zero is given by:
                                                        2    2
                                                    (1÷r) (p)
              (17')       tn-i =          P   - ___________

                                                     (2'y)i12


 Over time      will tend to grow or shrink as (17') is greater or less than zero. It is thus immediate clear
 that although there is a steady state value for -tt this steady state is unstable. As the noise trader share

 declines, sophisticated investors' willingness to bet against noise traders increases. Sophisticated
 investors thus earn more money from their exploitation of noise traders' misperceptions, and the gap



 1As a model in which noise traders produce transitory components in aggregate stock prices would predict, the years up
 to the late 1960's that saw equities earn high rates of return were followed by years in which equities earned low rates
 of return. As many a university official can ruefully attest, anyone who paid attention to Bundy would have lost a
 great deal as a result of holding a portfolio with a high 3 that had been probably bid up by noise traders during the
 1960's.
                                                     17                                   10/8/87

between the expected returns earned by noise traders and sophisticated investors becomes negative. If

the noise trader share      is below:

                               (p*2 + a2)(l+r)2
                                        P
            (21)    j.i*=
                                   2p*(2)
then the noise trader share will tend to shrink. If lit is greater than li*, noise traders will create so

much price risk as to make sophisticated investors very reluctant to speculate against them. Noise
traders will therefore earn higher expected returns than sophisticated investors and will grow in num-
ber. In the long run noise traders dominate the market or disappear, as is shown in figure 1.
        This result contradicts our intuition, which suggests that rather than approaching zero or two
the number of noise traders should converge to an intermediate steady-state value. Appendix I
demonstrates that this is indeed the case if the current model is further extended to allow for funda-

mental dividend risk. In such a model, the noise trader population may settle down to a steady state
value or noise traders may drive sophisticated investors out of existence. The noise trader share,
however, is never driven to zero in a model in which asset (u) possesses fundamental risk.
        These results do not imply that all types of noise traders will flourish in fmancial markets.
Only "bullish," and not too "bullish," noise traders will flourish. But this is sufficient to make our
point. In any population there are likely to be noise traders of different stripes. As long as economic
selection works in favor of some of them, there is no basis for assuming that their effects on asset
prices can be neglected in the long run.

        There is a further selection argument that works in favor of noise traders and that is obscured
by our two period formulation. Noise traders who are lucky in their guesses get wealthier, and as a
result are likely to increase their faith in their guesses and invest even more aggressively. Those who
are unlucky will lose both money and faith. Even if noise traders as a group do not earn higher than
average returns, as time passes a larger and larger share of noise trader wealth will come to be con-
centrated in the hands of those noise traders who are most convinced of the value of their judgments.
                                                        18                              10/8/87

III. NOISE TRADING AND ASSET MARKET BEHAVIOR1
       This section describes a number of respects in which models allowing for the presence of noise
traders provide a more realistic description of asset markets than models that postulate that all agents

are rational. In the presence of noise trading, investment strategies similar to those pursued by highly
paid market professionals may pay off, asset returns exhibit mean reversion documented by a great
deal of empirical work, and asset prices diverge on average from fundamental values as suggested
indirectly by Mebra and Prescott (1986) and directly by the comparison of the portfolio and market
values of closed end mutual funds.


What Do Traders Do?
        In a world without noise traders, rational sophisticated investors would trade for one of three

reasons: to consume (or save), to rebalance portfolios, or to exploit inside information. Trading
would be relatively infrequent, especially in markets where little private information is available like

those for treasury securities, foreign exchange, and index futures. Sophisticated market participants
might be concerned with information bearing on fundamental values, but they would have little con-
cern with indicators of what other traders who lack significant private information are doing.
        This description does not ring true as a characterization of the activities of very highly paid and

not naive market participants. Professional money managers eschew passive strategies, instead seek-
ing to discover "What is Mister Johnson [of Fidelity] doing?. ..What three stocks does Mister Johnson

 like best? What's going to happen next?" (Smith (1968), emphasis in original). The volume of trad-
 ing is far greater than can be satisfactorily rationalized on the basis of the standard motives.
 Wojnilower (1980) concludes that "it defies belief that turnover of thirty-eight billion dollars a day in

 just one segment of the fixed-income market [U.S. Treasury securities] is required to fix the rational
 allocation of capital." In the foreign exchange markets, two to three hundred billion dollars' worth of
 currencies change hands every day, an amount far greater than necessary for trade and capital account
 transactions. And annual trading in index futures approaches the total value of stock market capital-

 ization. Highly compensated market analysts devote a great deal of effort to examining patterns in


 Much of this section follows insights developed in Black (1986).
                                                            19                                        10/8/87

prices and in the volume of trade that have no clear connection with the determinants of fundamental

value. And many of them profess to be more concerned with indicators of the extent of the demand for
securities a day ahead than with underlying fundamental values.
        All of these aspects of actual market behavior are to be expected if noise trading is important.
There will be profits to be made by trading against noise traders. Data on volume and price patterns
might help to gauge what noise traders have done and are going to do. In the absence of fandamen-tal
risk, past volume data are uninformative because past price data alone reveal p*, p2' and Pt In the

presence of fundamental risk, volume may provide worthwhile clues to whether movements in asset
prices reflect rational bets made on the basis of inside information or irrational bets made by noise

traders. Changes in asset demands and supplies can have significant effects on prices even if they
convey no information about fundamentals and involve only a trivial proportion of outstanding asset
stocks. Shleifer (1986) and Harris and Gurel (1986) have demonstrated that the inclusion of stocks in
the S&P 500 index, and the consequent demand for these stocks by index funds, has a substantial
impact on stock prices even though it has no implications at all for fundamental values.1 Price pres-
sure effects can also be invoked as explanations for the calendar effects recently documented by finan-
cial economists (Rozeff (1985)). These effects are not surprising if prices are set not according to
some representative agent's valuation of fundamentals but instead to balance the demands and supplies
of noise traders and sophisticated investors.2
         We have written as if noise traders and sophisticated investors can be easily distinguished.
This is not the case over the horizons relevant for investors. As Summers (1986) and Poterba and
Summers (1987) stress, even if noise traders regularly drove prices thirty percent away from funda-
mentals, speculators who optimally exploited the deviations would require hundreds of years to sta-
tistically demonstrate the superiority of their strategy. For anyone who believes that there are irrational
investors Out there, but that he is not one of them, trading will be optimal. Noise traders will be those


1We regard it as instructive that leading brokerage firms should collect daily data on short interest in individual
securities and regard such data as valuable proprietary information.
2An analogy makes our point. If no one liked to gamble, there would be no casinos. Since some people like to
gamble, other individuals rationally compete in devoting substantial resources to building casinos and betting against
those who have a taste for gambling. In the case of casinos, it is clear who is exploiting whom. In other cases, it
may not be so clear who is gaining and who is losing welfare as a result of their betting strategy. It is clear that the
private returns to the houses efforts to exploit gamblers are greater than the social returns. Hirshleifer (1971) was
among the first to observe that trying to learn today what will be public tomorrow is a rent seeking activity.
                                                       20                                 10/8/87

whose guesses about what average opinion will expect average opinion to be are false relatively often.
Sophisticated investors will be those whose guesses are more often on the mark. But those more

correct on average -- those with higher actual ex ante expected utility -- will not necessarily be
wealthier. And both groups will, like the investors we observe, trade actively and be concerned about
information bearing on the supply and demand of securities.


Volatility arid Mean Reversion in Asset Prices
        In our model with noise traders absent -- with both p* and           set equal zero -- the price of (u)

is always equal to its fundamental value of one. When noise traders are present the price of asset (u) --

identical to asset (s) in all fundamental respects --- is excessively volatile in the sense that its price
moves more than can be explained on the basis of changes in fundamental values. The variance of the

price of (u) is as given by (11):

             (11)      t
                           2
                               = 2 = 22            P


                                              (1+r)

 None of this variance can be justified by changes in fundamentals: there are no changes in expected
 future dividends in our model, or in any variable relevant to the determination of required returns.
         A large body of evidence demonstrates that asset prices respond rapidly to news about fun-
 damental values. However, an accumulating body of evidence suggests that it is difficult to account

 for all of the volatility of asset prices in terms of news. While Shiller's (1981) claim that the stock

 market wildly violated variance bounds imposed by the requirement that prices be discounted present

 values relied on controversial statistical procedures (Kleidon (1986)), other evidence supporting the
 general conclusion that asset price movements do not all reflect changes in fundamental values is more

 clear cut. For example, Roll (1985) considers the relatively straightforward orange juice futures mar-
 ket, where the principle source of relevant news is weather. He demonstrates that a substantial share
 of the movement in prices cannot be attributed to news about the weather that bears on fundamental
 values. French and Roll (1986) demonstrate that over intervals where there is reason to suppose that

 the amount of news about fundamentals is constant the market moves much more when open; this

 suggests that volatility is imparted by trading quite apart from the effects of news. Similarly, Campbell
                                                             21                                  10/8/87

and Kyle (1987) conclude on the basis of analyses of the changes in dividends and discount rates that
follow stock price movements that a large fraction of market movements cannot be attributed to news
about fundamental values.
        If asset prices respond to noise and if the errors of noise traders are not permanent, then asset
prices should exhibit mean reverting behavior. For example, if noise traders' misperceptions follow
an AR (1) process, it is easily demonstrated that serial correlation in returns will decay geometrically as

in the "fads" example of Summers (1986), As Shiller (1986) and Summers (1986) and stress, even
with long time series it is likely to be difficult to detect slowly decaying transitory components in asset
prices. Since the same problems of identification that plague econometricians affect speculators, actual
market forces are likely to be less effective in limiting the effects of noise trading than in our model

where rational investors fully understand the process describing the behavior of noise traders.

        Moreover, even if sophisticated investors accurately diagnose the process describing the
behavior of noise traders, if misperceptions are serially correlated they will not be willing to bet nearly
as heavily against noise traders: the risks of capital loss remain, and they are balanced by a smaller
expected return since the price is not expected to move all the way back to its fundamental value in the
next period. Therefore a higher unconditional variance of asset prices about their mean will still be
consistent with noise traders' earning higher returns.
         An example of how rapidly unconditional price variance grows as misperceptions become per-
sistent can be provided by assuming that misperceptions follow an AR(l) process with innovation T

and autoregressive parameter 4). In this case the unconditional variance of the price of asset (u) about
its mean is:1


             (22)                                 2                    2
                                 (r +   (1—4)))       (r +   (1—4)))    (1_4)2)

Noise traders who earn higher expected returns than sophisticated investors can thus cause larger


10f course demand for assets depends not on the unconditional but on the conditional price risk. The variance of the
price of (u) about its one step ahead anticipated value is:
                                  22
                  a
                 tp1
                    2
                         =   _____        2
                             (r + (1-4)))
in the case of serially correlated misperceptions.
                                                   22                                  10/8/87

deviations of prices from fundamental values of misperceptions are serially correlated. The difference

in expected returns is given by:

           (23)       E(zR .) =         - (r + (1))2(p*)2     -   (r +   ())2
                                                                  (2y)t(l -4)

Transitory components in asset prices that exhibit persistence can be very large in size and still be con-
sistent with noise traders' earning higher returns than sophisticated investors. And the fact that prices
revert to means implies that measures of scale have predictive power for asset returns: when prices are
high relative to dividends, prices are going to fall in our model.
        There is significant evidence that stock prices indeed exhibit mean reverting behavior. Fama
and French (1986) demonstrate using data for the 1926-1985 period that long horizon stock returns
exhibit negative serial correlation. Building on their work, Poterba and Summers (1987) use data for
the entire 187 1-1986 period for the United States and for a number of other countries to demonstrate
that transitory components cannot convincingly be ascribed to changes in ex ante returns caused by
macroeconomic variables. DeBondt and Thaler (1985, 1987) provide related evidence using data on
individual firms. These results would all be predicted by, and are consistent with, our model.         In

fact, the idea that noise trading distorts prices forms the basis for fundamentalist and contrarian
 investment strategies. These strategies call for purchasing securities with low price earnings ratios that
 are seen as irrationally out of favor. Practiced with apparent success by patient investors like Benjamin
 Graham and Warren Buffett, this strategy laid out by Graham and Dodd (1934) requires both an eye
 for situations in which firms are selling for below their fundamental values and substantial patience.
         Many studies including Mankiw and Summers (1984) and Mankiw (1986) note that anomalies
 exactly paralleling the price earnings ratio anomaly are present in the bond market. Long rates have
 predictive power for future short rates, but it is nonetheless the case that when long rates exceed short

 rates, they tend to fall and not to rise as predicted by the expectations hypothesis. While convincing
 stories about changing risk factors have yet to be provided, this behavior is exactly what one would

 expect if noise trading distorted long bond yields.
                                                           23                                       10/8/87

Asset Prices and Fundamental Values
        One of the strongest predictions of the efficient markets hypothesis is that assets ought to sell
for their fundamental values. In most cases, fundamental value is difficult to measure, and so this
prediction cannot be directly tested. But the fundamental value of a closed-end fund is easily assessed:
since the fund pays dividends equal to the sum of the dividends paid by the stocks in its portfolio, a
closed end fund should sell for the market price of its portfolio. Yet closed end funds sell and have
sold at large and substantially fluctuating discounts (Herzfeid (1980), Malkiel (1977)) which have been
relatively small during the bull markets of the late 1960's and the 1980's and were large during the
bear markets of the 1970's.
        Models in which noise trader risk plays a significant role provide a natural explanation for the
gap between the fundamental and market values of closed end funds) Anyone investing in a closed
end fund faces not only the risk that the fund's portfolio may decline but also the risk that the spread
between the market and fundamental value of the fund may increase. This extra risk would make
rational sophisticated investors unwiThng to hold the fund at the market value of the fund's portfolio.
And this extra risk would make rational sophisticated investors' demand for closed-end fund shares
less than perfectly elastic. A rational investor would not buy heavily as the spread widens because
doing so would entail accepting the risk that noise traders will be even more averse to the fund when
one wants to sell. A rational investor would then take a large capital loss even if the assets in which
the fund has invested earn a high return.2


1Alternative explanations of closed end fund discounts that rely on transactions costs or fears of mismanagement
cannot explain the substantial correlated fluctuations of the discounts of different funds. Agency cost models of the
closed-end fund discount also make the starting-up of closed end mutual funds unintelligible. In our model, noise
traders will sometimes believe that the funds managers can earn more than the market return on their portfolios. When
noise traders are sufficiently optimistic about closed end funds, it will pay entrepreneurs to purchase stock shares,
repackage them in a closed end fund, and then sell the shares of the closed end fund to noise traders.
2One can see how the fact that closed-end fund shares are subject not only to fundamental risk --risk affecting the value
of the fund's portfolio -- but also noise trader risk -- risk that the closed-end fund discount might change — affecu
investment decisions in the investment adce given by one of the leading students of the closed-end fund discount,
Malkiel (1973). Malkiel confidently recommended in 1973 that investors purchase then heavily (20 to 30%)
discounted closed-end fund shares: such an investor would do better than by picking stocks or investing in an open-end
fund unless "the discount widened in the future," The confidence of Malkiel's recommendation stemmed from his belief
that "this,,. risk is minimized.,. [since] discounts [now].,, are about as large as they have ever been historically." And
the obverse is Malkiel's belief that the holder of a closed-end fund should be prepared to sell if the discount narrowed --
not only if the discount disappeared, but also if the discount narrowed. The latest version of A Random Walk Down
Wall Street (1985) does not recommend the purchase of closed-end fund shares in spite of the fact that many closed-end
funds still sell at discounts. The noise trader risk that discounts may widen again in the future is a disadvantage that
apparently weighs heavily against the relatively small advantages given by the present small discount.
                                                    24                                  10/8/87

       In our model, if noise traders earn higher expected returns than sophisticated investors then the
average price for which the asset (u) sells is guaranteed to be below its fundamental value. The
expected value of p is:

           (24)       E(p)   = p* =     1
                                             2t2
                                            - ______ +
                                                    2      r
                                              r(1+r)

Since noise traders hold more of the risky asset and earn negative capital gains on average, they can
earn higher expected returns than sophisticated investors only if the dividend on the unsafe asset
amounts to a higher rate of return on average than does the same dividend on the safe asset. For this to
hold, the unsafe asset must sell at an average price below its fundamental value of one.
       The point that in our model the average prices of assets are different from their fundamental
values is of wider application. Consider the analysis of Mehra and Prescott (1986), which rejects the
hypothesis that the stochastic processes followed by total consumption and by asset returns satisfy the
Euler equation of a representative consumer. An application of Mehra and Prescott's procedure to data
generated by our model would produce an equity puzzle similar to that found in U.S. data: the zero
covariance of dividends paid on the risky asset with consumption cannot justify the high average rate
of return paid on the risky asset. An analyst looking at data generated by our model would also reject
the hypothesis that the stochastic processes of aggregate consumption and asset returns satisfy the
Euler equation for a representative consumer, since the marginal utility of agents who do satisfy the

Euler equation, i.e. young sophisticated investors, is not a function of aggregate consumption (Ingram

(1987)).




IV. NOISE TRADING AND REAL ECONOMIC DECISIONS
Tpbin's 0 and Investment
        If the risky asset is interpreted as a claim on equity capital, then for noise traders to earn higher
expected returns than sophisticated investors Tobin's q must on average be too low. If physical capital
is accumulated up to the point where the cost of a marginal unit is equal to the traded value of equity

claims to future rents from capital, on average the capital stock will be below its optimal value. In an
                                                    25                                   10/8/87

average generation, aggregate consumption could be increased if society could purchase additional
quantities of asset (u) at a price p''. Yet no investor will fmd it worth his while to do so. In other
words, asset (u) is underpriced on the stock market given the zero covariance of its fundamental return

with consumption.
        The risk caused by noise trading is a social cost. If it could be reduced either by discouraging
noise traders from entering the market or by offsetting their actions, welfare would be enhanced.
Suppose, for example, that a wise government was able to credibly promise to stabilize the price of (u)
and eliminate the effects of noise trading by engaging in "open market' operations in the securities (s)
and (u). The result would be a large capital gain for holders of the unsafe security. While this
potential capital gain for the cuffent old that can be realized if it becomes credible that noise trader risk

will disappear, private agents themselves cannot bring it about. They cannot affect the economy after
their departure, and any individual -- a small actor -- would have to bear an immense amount of risk in
any attempt to stabilize the market.

        The story told here provides a rationale that might justify government intervention in foreign
exchange markets. Government actions to offset noise and reduce noise trader created risk can raise
social welfare. Of course, our model biases the case in favor of intervention since the only source of
volatility is noise; the standard argument against intervention stresses authorities' proclivity to trade

against movements caused by shifting fundamentals.
        The fact that Tobin's q is below one on average in our model if noise traders earn higher
expected returns does not imply that increasing investment in asset (u) would be socially desirable

given the structure and functioning of the asset market. Although asset (u) is underpriced given its
fundamental risk, it is overpriced given its market risk. Additional investment in (u) would clearly be

desirable if the stock market were not an independent source of risk. However, since more privately

liquid capital of type (u) will in equilibrium expose private investors to greater risk, society's acquiring
asset (u) at a price of Pt units of asset (s) will unambiguously reduce social welfare in the basic model

as long as Pt is greater than zero. The utility of sophisticated investors remains unchanged if an
infinitesimal amount of asset (u) is replaced by Pt of asset (s); the utility of noise traders declines.
                                                           26                                      10/8/87



Corporate Finance
        While our model does not deal with individual securities, it suggests some consequences of
noise for corporate financing decisions. In a model with noise traders the Modigliani-Miller theorem
does not necessarily apply. To see why it might not, it is instructive to consider the standard
"homemade leverage" proof of the theorem. This proof demonstrates that a rational investor can undo
any effects of firm leverage and maintain the same real position regardless of a firm's payout policy. It
does not suggest that less than rational traders will do so. Given that noise traders in general affect
prices, it follows that unless they happen to trade so as to undo the effects of changes in leverage, the
Modigliani-Miller theorem will not hold.

         An example of failure of investors to trade so as to undo leverage is provided by the pricing of

dual purpose investment companies (Litzenberger and Sosin (1977), Malkiel and Firstenberg (1978)).
Dual purpose funds are mutual funds which divide their capital into equal numbers of preferred and
common shares and invest in a diversified equity portfolio. The preferred stock receives all the
dividend income generated by the portfolio and is redeemed at face value at a fixed liquidation date.
The con-u-non stock receives no dividends while the preferred stock is outstanding, and then receives
the balance of the portfolio on liquidation.

         The fact that there is a fixed redemption date at which the common stock turns into the invest-

ment company's portfolio implies that at earlier dates the common stock is best interpreted as a lever-

aged claim on the portfolio. An investor purchasing equal fractions of the preferred and the common
can undo the increase in leverage arising from the capital structure of the investment company. Yet the
sum of the preferred and common of the dual purpose fund often sold much below the value of the
funds portfolio) At the start of 1980 Malkiel recommended that investors purchase a number of dual-
purpose funds that sold at discounts from net asset value of over twenty percent (Malkiel (1985)).
         It is plausible to think that there is little opportunity for noise traders to become confused about
the value and thus disturb the price of assets that have a certain and immediate liquidation value. Noise
traders are most likely to become confused about assets that offer fundamentally risky payouts in the

1lnterpreting the discount solely in terms of transactions or agency costs faces the previously-noted problem of
explaining how these funds ever go public and why the discount fluctuates.
                                                     27                                 10/8/87

distant future. Assets of long duration which promise fundamentally uncertain as opposed to
immediate and certain cash payouts may thus be subject to considerably more than their share of noise
trader risk.
        Consequently, if noise traders fail to pierce the corporate veil, the likely concentration of their
misperceptions on assets of long duration makes the packaging of the firm's securities worthwhile.
For example, the choice of a firm's debt equity ratio can matter. If noise traders do not misperceive the
returns on debt as long as debt is low risk and yet do misperceive the returns on risky and long-
duration equity, then keeping some but not too much debt in a firm's capital structure might allow it to

receive the highest price for its securities. This might explain why managers appear extremely
concerned with maintaining very high bond ratings (Donaldson (1984)).
        If noise trader risk associated with a financial asset increases rapidly with the asset's duration,
a firm might want to pay dividends rather than reinvest even if there are tax costs to doing so. If
dividends can make equity look more like a safe short term bond to noise traders, then paying
dividends might reduce the total amount of noise trader risk borne by a firm's securities and might
raise the value of equity if the reduction in the discount entailed by noise trader risk exceeds additional
shareholder tax liability. Moreover, dividends will not be equivalent to share repurchases unless noise
traders perceive the two to be complete substitutes. If investors believe that future stock repurchases
are of uncertain value because noise traders disturb the price of equity, then the equity of a firm
repurchasing shares can be subject to greater undervaluation than that of a firm paying dividends. A
bird in the hand is truly better than one in the bush.
        Recent empirical evidence summarized by Jensen (1986) indicates that the more constrained is
the allocation of the firm's cash flows, the higher is its valuation by the market. For example, share
prices rise when a firm raises dividends, swaps debt for equity, or buys back shares. In contrast share
prices fall when a firm cuts dividends or issues new shares, These results are consistent with our
model if making the returns to equity more determinate can reduce the noise trader risk that it bears.
Increases in dividends that make equity look safer to noise traders may reduce noise trader risk and

raise share prices. Swaps of debt for equity will have the same effect, as will share buy backs. As
long as a change in capital structure convinces noise traders that a firm's total capital is more like asset
                                                         28                                     10/8/87

(s) and less like asset (u) than they had previously thought, changes in capital structure will increase
value.
         Leveraged buyouis can be privately profitable in the presence of noise traders.1 In these trans-

actions the residual claim to the firm that is subject to noise trader risk is taken out of the equity market
and held by management who presumably see only the true fundamental value of the firm and are
uninterested in what the firm would bring on the market in a month or a year. If the debt of the now

private firm is not traded and is hence free from noise trader risk, this debt plus managers' valuation of
their shares are worth more than the debt and equity of the firm when it was public.
         The above discussion makes it clear that noise trader risk is a cost that any issuer of a security

to be traded in a public market must bear. Both traded equity and traded long term debt will be under-
priced relative to fundamentals if their prices are subject to the whims of noise traders' opinions. Why
then are securities traded publicly? Put differently, why don't all firms go private to avoid noise trader
risk? Presumably firms have publicly traded securities if the benefits, such as a broader base from

which to draw capital, a larger pooi to use to diversify systematic risk, and liquidity, exceed the costs
of the noise trader generated undervaluation. Assets for which these benefits of public ownership are
the highest relative to the costs of noise trader risk are probably the assets that will be issued onto and
traded on liquid markets. While the issuers of these securities will try to minimize the costs of noise
 trader risk by "packaging" the securities appropriately, they will not be able to eliminate such risk

 entirely.


 Long Horizons
          The presence of noise traders makes coherent and correct a widely-held view of the relative

 social merits of"speculation and "investment' that has found little academic sympathy. Many active
 participants in financial markets have argued that the presence of traders who are looking only for short
 term profits is socially destructive. The standard economist's refutation of this argument relies on
 recursion: If one seeks to buy a stock now to sell in an hour, one must calculate its price in an hour.
 But its price in an hour depends on what those who will purchase it think its price will be a further

 'Whether they are also socially productive depends on whether the removal of a firm from the market reduces noise
 trader risk or merely causes the transfer of noise trader risk to other securities.
                                                         29                            10/8/87

hour down the road. Anyone who buys an asset -- no matter how short the holding period -- must
perform the same present value calculation as someone who intends to hold the asset for fifty years.
Since a linked chain of short term "traders" performs the same assessment of values as a single
"investor", the claim that "trading" is bad and "investing" good is simply incoherent. Prices will be
unaffected by the horizon of the agent as long as the rate of discount and willingness to bear risk are

unchanged.
       In our model this claim is not true. The horizon of agents matters. If agents live for more than
two periods the equilibrium will be closer to the "fundamental" equilibrium then if agents live for two
periods. As an example, consider an infinitesimal measure of infinitely lived but risk averse sophisti-
cated traders. Suppose Pt is less than one. An infinitely lived agent can sell short a unit of (s) and buy
a unit of(u). He collects a gain of 1-Pt and he has incurred no liability in any state of the world. The

dividend on (u) will always offset the dividend owed on (s). The fact that an infinitely lived agent can
arbitrage assets (s) and (u) without ever facing a settlement date implies that any infinitely-lived
sophisticated investor could push the price of (u) to its fundamental value of one.
        While long but finite lived agents do not have a riskiess arbitrage opportunity, their asset
demands aie more responsive to price movements than those of two period lived agents. A young
three period-lived sophisticated investor forbidden from entering the market in middle age will demand
not X1' but instead:


             (25)         + r(l   + r)
                                         /    i-pt
                                             2-y(t Q2)
                                                   Pt



purchasing more than a two period lived agent if Pt below its fundamental value arid going short
more if Pt is higher than its fundamental value. Having a longer horizon allows one to engage in self-

insurance by taking advantage of the fact that the two period-ahead price variance is no greater than the
one period-ahead price variance. For the longer the holding period, the smaller the excess rate of
return necessary to compensate for a given amount of price risk and the greater the chance to earn
additional profits from market timing. Changing the maximum "horizon" of the agents in the model

has real effects on the behavior of equilibrium prices because returns compound from period to period

while price risk does not.
                                                         30                                      10/8/87

        The embedding of the fmancial market in an overlapping generations model in which agents die

after two periods is a device to give rational utility maximizers short horizons. Such a theoretical
device may serve as an adequate way to model institutional features of asset markets -- triennial per-

formance evaluations of pension fund money managers, for example -- that may lead even fully ratio-
nal agents to have short horizons. Realistically, even an agent with a horizon long in terms of time
may have a horizon "short in the context of this model. If there is sufficient dividend risk and if noise
trader misperceptions are persistent, then agents might well fmd it unattractive to buy stocks and hold
them for very long periods in the hope that the market will someday recognize their value. For in the
meantime, during which the assets might have to be sold, market prices may deviate even further from
fundamental values. The claim that short horizons are bad for the economy is both coherent and true in
our model.
        It is nevertheless unclear that increasing the difficulty of transactions by imposing transaction
taxes, and thus removing from the market those with short horizons, is a good idea. Transaction taxes
do penalize those with short horizons. But such taxes also reduce the liquidity of each individual's
investment, There are two wedges between the market price of capital goods and the fundamental
value of their quasi rents: first, capital sells at a discount because it is subject to noise trader-generated
price risk; second, capital sells at a discount because it is not as liquid as cash. It is not clear whether
transactions taxes push q toward its fundamental value, for they would tend to reduce the first wedge
and increase the second, as Keynes (1936) noted.1




V. CONCLUSION
        The analysis in this paper suggests that traditional objections to introducing noise traders into
models of financial assets are ill-founded. Certain types of noise traders are likely to flourish and



 Genera] Theory, p. 170: "The spectacle of modern investment markets has sometimes moved me towards the conclu-
sion that to make the purchase of an investment permanent and indissoluble, like marriage.., might be a useful remedy
for our contemporary evils. For this would force the investor to direct his mind to the long-term prospects and to
those only. But a little consideration of this expedient brings us up against a dilemma, and shows us how the liquidity
of investment markets often facilitates, though it sometimes impedes, the course of new investment. For the fact that
each individual investor flatters himself that his commitment is "liquid" (though this cannot be true for all investors
collectively) calms his nerves and makes him much more willing to run a risk."
                                                   31                                10/8/87

grow in importance even when rational speculators optimally take advantage of their mistakes. The
presence of noise traders and the recognition by sophisticated investors of their presence can together
account for a variety of financial market phenomena, including excess price volatility, deviations of

average market prices from fundamental values, as well as linkages between speculative prices and
investment and financing decisions.
       A number of studies, notably Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Pfleiderer (1984), and Stein
(1987) have constructed models of trade among differentially informed agents that are formally similar
to the model developed here. In these models there are no irrational traders, but traders have different
pieces of information. 'While the issue is in part semantic, we regard our model with noise traders as
more realistic. As the term is conventionally used in economics, someone is 'irrational if two people
form different expectations on the basis of the same information. Unless the concept of private infor-
mation is tautologically equated with ones having one's own distinct opinion, it is hard to see how the
assumption of universal rationality can be maintained for all traders in broad markets like those for

treasury securities, foreign exchange, and market indices.
       Many economists appear to resist the introduction of irrational agents into economic models
because of a conviction that the overwhelming comparative advantage of the economics profession lies
in the analysis of rational utility-maximizing behavior. We share this belief. Economists have illumi-
nated a wide range of phenomena by placing rational agents in environments that limit in a variety of
ways their ability to trade and that afford them different types of technological opportunities. Our
analysis has concentrated on describing the interactions that result when maximizing rational investors
are placed in an environment where they have the opportunity to trade with persons holding irrational
beliefs. Exploring the limits of arbitrage in such settings seems to us to be entirely within the bounds
of the conventional economic approach and to take the concept of arbitrage very seriously indeed.
        We hope to have demonstrated that a theory in which noise is important is not a theory in

which anything can happen; rather, a theory in which noise is important is a theory in which noise cre-
ates identffiable consequences. Many theories in the natural sciences -- the ideal gas law and evolution

by natural selection come to mind -- derive regular and observable consequences from inescapable
random noise. The introduction of noise into models of financial markets has the potential to enlarge
                                                   32                                 10/8187

the scope of phenomena for which we can give scientific explanations. Taking noise seriously may

bear fruit even if economists are never successful at generating predictive theories of its content. We
suspect, however, that the experimental evidence on behavior under uncertainty will ultimately enable
us to understand the behavior now labelled "noise.'
                                                    33                                 10/8/87

                                              APPENDIX I
                    FUNDAMENTAL RISK AND iNHERITANCE OF BELIEFS


        The introduction of fundamental risk changes the conclusions reached by analyzing the
"inheritance of beliefs but not wealth" model with imitation of successful types of agents. Instead of
the noise trader population tending toward either zero or one depending on the initial state, it now
either settles down to a stable equilibrium L or expands until there are no sophisticated investors

remaining. The addition of fundamental risk makes it more likely that noise traders earn higher
expected returns. Specifically, small populations of noise traders are guaranteed to earn higher
expected returns than sophisticated investors.
        We first trace how the introduction of normally distributed dividend risk changes the behavior
of asset prices, and we then investigate the changed dynamics of the "inheritance of beliefs but not
wealth" extension of the basic model. Let asset (u) pay not a certain dividend r but an uncertain divi-

dend:
           (Al) r+
where Ct is independent and normally distributed with zero mean and constant variance. Asset

demands become:

            ()                  r+ tt+1
                                   p -(l+r)p
                               2y(a2 +2a;+1r+1 +a2)
                                 r+          - (1 + r)p
                                                                           Pt
            (A3)           =                               +
                               2?(02
                                 t     t ;++ +a2)
                                     +2a      £
                                                               2(& +2L c++
                                                                   Pt+i                 E



instead of (7) and (8). The only change is the appearance in the denominators of the asset demand
functions of the total risk involved in holding asset (u) -- the sum of noise trader price risk and fun-
damental dividend risk -- instead of simply noise trader-generated price risk.
        The pricing function with fundamental risk is transformed from (12) into:


            (A4)          =     +
                                    .tp* -
                                      r
                                             xr ( + 2l+r
                                                      £
                                                                  +              +
                                                                                        l+r
                                                                                            - p*)
                                                                      (14-r)2J
                                                   34                                  10/8/87

       The price risk term is replaced by the total risk associated with holding (u). The difference




                                                   j
between expected returns to noise traders and to sophisticated investors becomes:

                                                            + a2
            (AS)        E(AR) =         -             i p*2

                                                         2p.a        p.2a2
                                                                 +
                                            2y(02 +        l+r
                                                                     (1-1-r)2


        Adding fundamental risk to the basic model enlarges the range of parameter values over which

noise traders earn higher returns than sophisticated investors. While the "hold more," "average price
pressure," and "buy high-sell low" effects are not changed by the addition of fundamental risk, the

"create space" effect -- the denominator of (AS) -- is increased. Since there is more risk involved in
holding asset (u), sophisticated investors are now less willing to trade in order to exploit noise traders'
mistakes. The long positions that noise traders take in the risky asset on account of their average

"buffishness" are more highly rewarded.
        The introduction of fundamental risk alters the dynamics of the model with inheritance of
beliefs but not wealth. When the noise trader share k is zero, (AS) is clearly positive. If the pro-

portion of noise traders is small, they have no significant effect on prices. Since on average they hold
more of the high-yielding risky asset they will earn higher average returns. When the noise trader
share is very large, (AS) is also positive. If there are a larger number of noise traders, they have a sig-
nificant effect on prices and their demands move prices against them. They buy high and sell low.
But their stochastic actions also begin to significantly increase the risk borne by those who hold the
asset (u). As risk increases with .tt2, the "create space" effect which makes sophisticated investors

unwilling to take positions in the risky asset eventually dominates and ensures that noise traders earn
higher returns if J.tt is large.
        For intermediate values of p, either noise traders or sophisticated investors may have higher

expected returns. Setting equation (AS) equal to zero implicitly describes a quadratic equation in
There are either two or zero values of .tt that solve E((AR))=0. If there are no real roots, noise
traders will make more money than sophisticated investors and will take over the market no matter how
                                                            35                                       10/8/87

many noise traders there are (see figure 2).1
         By contrast, when the implicit quadratic in ji does have real roots, there will be a stable equi-
librium value of tt (as shown in figure 3) in the model with inheritance of beliefs but not wealth. This
value, the lower of the two roots of the implicit quadratic in J.tt, will govern the long run share of the

population who are noise traders if the initial proportion of agents who are noise traders is sufficiently
below the upper root tH. If           is higher than the upper root, then the proportion of the population

who are noise traders will tend to increase until all maximizers are once again driven out in the model
with inheritance of beliefs. The large amount of noise trader created risk keeps sophisticated investors

from taking positions in the risky asset large enough to give sophisticated investors higher expected
returns.




1As long as noise traders are bullish a homogeneous population of sophisticated investors is not evo]utionarily stable.
If the set of noise traders is of measure zero, then noise traders always earn higher returns in expected value than
sophisticated investors if there is fundamental risk in the model. But if the set of sophisticated investors is of measure
zero, then it is not always the case that sophisticated investors earn higher returns in expected value than noise traders.
                                                     36                                  10/8/87

                                              APPENDIX II

  BOUNDED DISTRIBUTIONS OF ASSET PRICES AND THE EXISTENCE OF EQUILIBRIUM


       The model presented in the text assumes that asset prices are normally distributed and that divi-

dends are certain. In reality dividends are not certain, and limited liability prevents asset prices from
having an unbounded distribution. In this appendix we consider the consequences of the removal of
the assumptions that there is no fundamental risk and that asset prices have an unbounded distribution.
The first part discusses how the absence of fundamental risk causes equilibrium to fail to exist in the
basic model if prices are bounded. The second part presents a model in which prices are bounded, and
yet equilibrium exists and noise traders have expected returns as high as do sophisticated investors.


Fundamental Risk and Market Equilibrium
        The assumption that returns are normally distributed implies that the linear mean-variance
approximation to the constant absolute risk aversion utility function is exact. More importantly, the
fact that normally distributed asset prices are unbounded is essential for the existence of equilibrium in

the basic model.
        Suppose that the distribution of the price of (u) is bounded by PL and PH and that Pt is close to
PU Then a lower bound to the gross rate of return from holding (u) will be equal to: 1 + (r/pL). If
PL is less than one, this lower bound on the distribution of one-period returns will be larger than the

sure return on the sale asset (s). Asset (u) will dominate asset (s). Rational sophisticated investors
will go infinitely short asset (s) and infinitely long asset (u). Therefore if the distribution of Pt in
equilibrium is bounded below, it must be that PL is greater than or equal to one. Similarly, if the sale
asset (s) is not to dominate the risky asset (u) in a neighborhood of PH the least upper bound PH to
the distribution of Pt must be less than or equal to one.
        Section one of the text showed that setting Pt always equal to one cannot be an equilibrium of

the basic model, since the noise traders' demand for the risky asset is then unbounded if their
misperception of returns is positive. The existence of a floor below which the price cannot drop
implies that when the price approaches the floor, fall beneath (PL+r)/(l+r) there is a riskiess arbitrage
                                                      37                                  10/8/87

opportunity open to sophisticated investors. Since every bounded distribution of prices has a positive
chance of reaching states in which a sophisticated investor has a riskiess arbitrage opportunity, equili-
brium simply does not exist if the distribution of prices is bounded.


A Mode] with Bounded Prices

         The chain of iterative arbitrage arguments that unravels equilibrium if asset prices are bounded

can be broken by introducing any mechanism that will keep asset demands bounded when the price of
the risky asset approaches its limit. One such mechanism would be the presence of any kind of
fundamental risk. A second such mechanism would be the existence of binding margin requirements.
And a third would be restrictions on short sales. The latter two mechanisms are themselves easily
motivated by the unwillingness of lenders of money or stock to themselves bear any of the risk associ-
ated with their debtors' portfolios.
         As an example of how these mechanisms can allow the existence of equilibria in which noise

traders earn high relative expected returns and prices are never negative, we present a simple model in

which fundamental risk plays the role of limiting sophisticated investors' demands for the risky asset.
In this model the price of asset (u) takes on only two possible values and noise traders and sophisti-
cated investors earn identical expected returns, Moreover, the presence of noise traders is the source
of all variance in the price of the risky asset and of an arbitrarily large share of the variance in the rates

of return earned by investments in the risky asset. This model is contrived to serve only the limited
purpose of providing a counterexample to the view that our results rely on either the possibility of
prices becoming negative or the relative insignificance of noise trader compared to fundamental risk.
         Let there be a fixed quantity, one unit, of asset (u) and let asset (s) be in elastic supply at a price
of one. Let both assets pay a dividend r. And let there be a chance E that in any period holdings of the

risky asset becomes worthless: the firms that (u) is a claim on are confiscated, shareholders' claims
are extinguished, and ownership of asset (u) is transferred to the government and then sold to the

young.
         Let sophisticated investors and noise traders be endowed when young with wealth wo, and let

both noise traders and sophisticated investors be present in measure 112. The utility function of
                                                        38                                     10/8/87

sophisticated investors is taken to be any concave function of wealth when old that satisfies:
            (A6)      urn U'(w)=
                    w -+ 9(1+r)

where the level of consumption when old 9(1+r) is the "subsistence" level of consumption which

sophisticated investors are unwilling to risk being unable to attain. The existence of a wealth at which
U'(w) becomes infinite and the E chance of confiscation of holdings of the risky asset together serve to

bound sophisticated investors' asset demands. These features perform the same function as wold be
performed by margin requirements or restrictions on short sales.
        Let noise traders be with probability 1/2 optimistic, in which case they demand a fixed quantity
H of the risky asset and the price of the risky asset is ax its high value of PH• With probability 112
noise traders are pessimistic, in which case they demand a fixed quantity L of the risky asset and the

price of the risky asset is at its low value of PL• The quantity H is set equal to two so that when

optimistic the 1/2 measure of noise traders hold the entire unit of the risky asset. In order for supply to
equal demand, sophisticated investors must wish to go neither long nor short in the risky asset, which
must therefore pay an expected return when noise traders are optimistic equal to the riskiess rate:

                                  (pL+2r)(l -)
                                  ___________
             (Al)       p11 =
                                    1 + 2r + c


        When noise traders are optimistic there are no excess expected returns. All portfolios pay an
expected rate of return of r. Noise traders and sophisticated investors will thus have equal uncondi-
tional expected returns if they hold equal amounts of the risky asset when noise traders are pessimistic,
if:

             (A8)       ?= ?= 1
        Consider a sequence of economies, otherwise alike in structure, for which the probability E that

the holdings of the risky asset will become worthless converges to zero. The values of prices, asset
holdings, and expected returns will also converge to limit values.1 If the amount of wealth that
sophisticated investors have available for speculation wo - e is greater or equal to one, then as the
chance of confiscation approaches zero L can be equal to one only if the price PL of the risky asset


1Which are not the values taken on in the limit economy. The limit economy, for which Eequals zero, has the price
of the risky asset always equal to one in equilibrium.
                                                     39                                  10/8/87

when noise traders are pessimistic approaches one. Sophisticated investors' demands will be such as
to eliminate noise trader risk. As long as is small they wifi buy and sell asset (u) to keep its price

always close to one.
       if the amount of wealth that sophisticated investors have available for speculation w0-O is less
than one, then sophisticated investors' expenditures on the risky asset will be bounded above by w0-

9. Investing more would force sophisticated investors' consumption below subsistence if holdings of
the risky asset did become worthless. As the chance of confiscation approaches zero, the price of the

risky asset when noise traders are pessimistic approaches:
           (A9)               = w0-8
                       PL

In this case the price of the risky asset when noise traders are optimistic approaches:
                                 (w0 - 0) + 2r
            (AlO) H =                1+2r
Note that the smaller is 0, and hence the larger is the amount of wealth sophisticated investors are

willing to commit to speculation, the smaller is the difference between the limits of the prices of (u) in

the two states and the closer do the limits of the prices of (u) approach one, which is the limit of the
fundamental value of (u) as the chance of confiscation £ approaches zero.

        In this formulation as specified, noise traders and sophisticated investors earn identical
expected returns. Noise traders would earn higher expected returns if they demanded a little less than

all of the risky asset when optimistic. The sophisticated investors would then hold a positive share of
the risky asset, which they would be willing to do only if it paid an expected return higher than the
riskiess rate. Noise traders would also earn higher expected returns if there were additional stares in

which noise traders held intermediate beliefs about the desirability of the risky asset.
        In this model, all variance in the price of the risky asset is due to the presence of noise traders.
And an arbitrarily large share of the variance in the rate of return of the risky asset is due to the pres-
ence of noise traders. As approaches zero, the contribution of fundamental risk to total rate of return
variance also approaches zero; fundamental risk is the risk of an event which could be so unlikely as to

almost certainly not occur in the sample available to the econometrician. Fundamental risk, however,

continues to constrain the behavior of sophisticated investors because it remains significant in utility
                                                     40                                  10/8/87

terms even as it becomes infinitesimal in terms of its contribution to the variability of the rate of return

earned by the risky asset.
                                                 41                               10/8/87

                                          REFERENCES



Alpert, Mark and Howard Raiffa., "A Progress Report on the Training of Probability Assessors"
(1960), in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, eds., Judgment Under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 294-305.
Black, Fischer, "Noise," Journal of Finance 41 (July 1986): 529-543.
Bray, Margaret, "Learning, Estimation, and the Stability of Rational Expectations," Journal of
Economic Theory 26 (1982): 3 18-339.
Bundy, McGeorge, "President's Report," in Ford Foundation Annual Report 1966 (New York: Ford
Foundation, 1967).
Campbell, John Y., and Albert Kyle, "Smart Money, Noise Trading, and Stock Price Behavior"
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University xerox, 1987).
DeBondt, Werner F.N., and Richard H. Thaler, "Further Evidence on Investor Overreaction and
Stock Market Seasonality," Journal of Finance 42 (July 1987): 557-8 1.
DeBondt, Werner F.N., and Richard H. Thaler, "Does the Stock Market Overreact?" Journal of
Finance (1985): 793-805.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, "Are
Rational Investor Populations Evolutionarily Stable?" (in preparation).
Denton, Frank T., "The Effect of Professional Advice on the Stability of a Speculative Market,"
Journal of Political Economy 93 (October, 1985): 977-993.
Diamond, Peter, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," American Economic Review 55
(1965).
Donaldson, Gordon, Managing Corporate Wealth (New York: Praeger, 1984).
Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political Economy 84
(December 1976): 1161-74.
Fama, Eugene F., "The Behavior of Stock Market Prices," Journal of Business 38,1(1965): 34-105.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, "Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Prices
(Chicago: University of Chicago xerox, 1986).
French, Kenneth R., and Richard Roll, "Stock Return Variances: The Arrival of Information and the
Reaction of Traders," Journal of Financial Economics 17(1986): 5-26.
Friedman, Milton, "The Case For Flexible Exchange Rates," in Essays in Positive Economics
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953).
 Graham, Benjamin, and David Dodd, Security Analysis (New York: McGraw Hill, 1934).
 Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz, "On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets,"
 American Economic Review 70,3 (1980): 393-408.
                                              42                               10,'8/87
Haitiwanger, John, and Michael Waidman, "Rational Expectations and the Limits of Rationaiity,"
American Economic Review 75,3 (1985): 326-340.

Harris, Lawrence, and Eytan Gurel, "Price and Volume Effects Associated with Changes in the S&P
500: New Evidence for the Existence of Price Pressure," Journal of Finance 41(1986): 851-60.
Hart, Oliver, and David Kreps, "Price Destabilizing Speculation," Journal of Political Economy 94,5
(1986): 927-952.
Herzfeld, Thomas, The Investor's Guide to Closed-End Funds (New York: McGraw Hill, 1980).
Hirshleifer, Jack, "The Private and Social Values of Information and the Rewards to Inventive
Activity," American Economic Review 61(1971): 561-574.

Ingram, Beth Fisher, "Equilibrium Modelling of Asset Prices: Rationality v. Rules of Thumb" (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University xerox, 1987).
Jensen, Michael C., "The Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,"
American Economic Review (1986).

Jensen, Michael C., "The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-64," Journal of Finance
23 (May 1968): 389-41 6.

Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment. Interest and Money (London:
Macmillan, 1936).
Kleidon, Allan W., "Anomalies in Financial Economics," Journal of Business 59 Supplement
(1986): S285-316.
Kyle, Albert, "Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading," Econometricp (1985): 1315-1336.
Lewellen, Wilbur, Ronald Lease, and Gary Schiarbaum, "Patterns of Investment Strategy and
Behavior Among Individual Investors," Journal of Financial Economics (1974).
Litzenberger, Robert, and Howard Sosin, "The Structure and Management of Dual-Purpose Funds,"
Journal of Financial Economics 4,2 (March 1979): 203-230.

Lucas, Robert (1986), "Adaptive Behavior and Economic Theory," Journal of Business 59
Supplement (1986): S217-42.
Malkiel, Burton G., "The Valuation of Closed-End Investment Company Shares," Journal of Finance
(March 1977): 847-59.
Malkiel, Burton G., A Random Walk Down Wall Street (New York: Norton, 1973).
Maildel, Burton G., and Paul B, Firstenberg, "A Winning Strategy for an Efficient Market," Journal
of Portfolio Management (1978): 20-25.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "The Term Structure of Interest Rates Revisited," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1:1986 61-96.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Lawrence H. Summers, "Do Long Term Interest Rates Overreact to Short
Rates?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1984.

Mehra, Rajneesh, and Edward Prescott, "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle," Journal of Monetary
Economics (1986).
                                                 43                              10/8/87
Merton, Robert C., "On the Current State of the Stock Market Rationality Hypothesis," (Cambridge:
Sloan W.P. 1717-85, 1985).
Miller, Merton H., "Behavioral Rationality in Finance: The Case of Dividends," Journal of Business
Supplement 59 (1986): S451-68.
Pfleiderer, Paul, "The Volume of Trade and the Variability of Prices" (Stanford: Stanford University
xerox, 1984).
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and
Implications" (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University xerox, 1987).
Roll, Richard, "Orange Juice and Weather," American Economic Review 75 (1985).
Rozeff, Michael, "The Tax-Loss Selling Hypothesis: New Evidence from Share Shifts" (Iowa City:
University of Iowa Working Paper, 1985).
Russell, Thomas, and Richard H. Thaler, "The Relevance of Quasi-Rationality in Competitive
Markets," American Economic Review 75,5 (1985): 107 1-82.
Samuelson, Paul A., "The Fundamental Approximation Theorem of Portfolio Analysis in Terms of
Means, Variances, and Higher Moments," Review of Economic Studies 38 (1970): 537-42.
Samuelson, Paul A., "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the Social
Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy 66 (December 1958): 467-482.
Shiller, Robert J., "Comments on Merton and Kleidon" Journal of Business 59 Supplement (1986):
S317-22.
Shiler, Robert J., "Stock Prices and Social Dynamics," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2:1984 457-498.
Shiller, Robert J., "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
Dividends?" American Economic Review 71 (June 1981): 421-36.
Shleifer, Andrei, 'Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?" Journal of Finance 41(1986): 579-
90.
"Smith," Adam, The Money Game (New York: Random House, 1968).
Stein, Jeremy, "Informational Externalities and Welfare-Reducing Speculation," Journal of Political
Economy 42 (December 1987).
Summers, Lawrence H., "Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental Values?" Journal of
Finance 41 (July 1986): 591-601.
Wojnilower, Albert (1980), "The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Economic Activity,"
Brookins Parers on Economic Activity 2,1980 (1980): 277-340.
                              44             10/8/87

                FIGURE 1
DYNAMICS OF THE NOISE TRADER SHARE OF THE
  POPULATION WITH NO FUNDAMENTAL RISK




                          1




                FIGURE 2
DYNAMICS OF THE NOiSE TRADER SHARE OF THE
    POPULATION WITH NO EQUILIBRIA

      E{ER}



                              Jt
                        1




                 FIGURE 3
 DYNAMICS OF THE NOISE TRADER SHARE OF THE
     POPULATION WITH TWO EQUILIBRIA




                   7//I
