                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SOCIAL CAPITAL AND LABOR MARKET NETWORKS

                                        Brian J. Asquith
                                      Judith K. Hellerstein
                                       Mark J. Kutzbach
                                        David Neumark

                                      Working Paper 23959
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23959


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 2017, Revised January 2019




This research was supported by the Russell Sage Foundation. Opinions expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, the Russell Sage Foundation, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Much of the work for this analysis was done while Mark Kutzbach was an employee of
the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information
is disclosed. We are grateful to Andrew Foote, Matt Harding, Christian Hansen, Lisa Hellerstein,
Thomas Hegland, Erika McEntarfer, Chun (KC) Kuang, and Arezou Koohi for helpful comments
and discussions. This research uses data from the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer
Household Dynamics Program, which was partially supported by National Science Foundation
Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191, and ITR-0427889; National Institute on Aging Grant
AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Brian J. Asquith, Judith K. Hellerstein, Mark J. Kutzbach, and David Neumark. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Capital and Labor Market Networks
Brian J. Asquith, Judith K. Hellerstein, Mark J. Kutzbach, and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 23959
October 2017, Revised January 2019
JEL No. J01,J64,R23

                                          ABSTRACT

We explore the links between social capital and labor market networks at the neighborhood level.
We harness rich data taken from multiple sources, including matched employer-employee data
with which we measure the strength of labor market networks, data on behavior such as voting
patterns that have previously been tied to social capital, and new data – not previously used in the
study of social capital – on the number and location of non-profit sector establishments at the
neighborhood level. We use a machine learning algorithm to identify important potential social
capital measures that best predict neighborhood-level variation in labor market networks. We find
evidence suggesting that smaller and less centralized schools, and schools with fewer poor
students, foster social capital that builds labor market networks, as does a larger Republican vote
share. The presence of establishments in a number of non-profit oriented industries are identified
as predictive of strong labor market networks, likely because they either provide public goods or
facilitate social contacts. These industries include, for example, churches and other religious
institutions, police departments, fire and rescue services including volunteer fire departments,
country clubs, mayors’ offices, chamber music groups, hobby clubs, and museums.


Brian J. Asquith                                 Mark J. Kutzbach
W. E. Upjohn Institute                           Center for Financial Research
300 S Westnedge Avenue                           Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Kalamazoo, MI 49007                              550 17th Street NW, MB-2127
United States                                    Washington, DC 20429
basquith86@gmail.com                             mkutzbach@fdic.gov

Judith K. Hellerstein                            David Neumark
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Tydings Hall                                     University of California, Irvine
University of Maryland                           3151 Social Science Plaza
College Park, MD 20742                           Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER                                         and NBER
hellerst@econ.umd.edu                            dneumark@uci.edu
I. Introduction

         The Oxford English dictionary defines social capital as “The networks of relationships among

people who live and work in a particular society, enabling that society to function effectively.” 1 In this

paper, we explore the links between measures of social capital and labor market networks among people.

Specifically, we use machine learning methods to examine whether higher social capital in a neighborhood

is associated with stronger labor market networks among neighbors. We harness the richness of data taken

from multiple sources, including matched employer-employee data with which we measure the strength of

labor market networks, data on behavior such as voting patterns that have previously been tied to social

capital, and new data – not previously used in the study of social capital – on the number and type of non-

profit sector establishments at the neighborhood level.

         We are motivated in this paper by the large body of empirical research documenting the importance

of informal contacts in yielding successful labor market outcomes. The origins of this research are usually

traced to Granovetter (1974). He interviewed people in Newton, Massachusetts about how they found their

jobs, finding that about half of workers (among technical, professional, and managerial workers) found

their jobs through a social contact. However, many also found jobs through a work contact, emphasizing

that friends and relatives are not the only potential source of information about jobs or referrals to jobs.

Later survey evidence summarized in Ioannides and Datcher Loury (2004) establishes some reliance on

friends and relatives to find jobs; in particular, they report that 15.5 percent of the unemployed and 8.5

percent of the employed contact friends and relatives as part of their job search. Our work derives even

more specifically from recent empirical research showing that networks based in residential communities or

neighborhoods improve labor market outcomes for local residents, including higher wages, longer tenure,

and for individuals displaced from jobs, faster re-employment (Hellerstein et al., 2014, and Hellerstein et

al., 2016). 2


1
  See https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/social_capital (viewed August 23, 2017). Portes (1998) discusses
the history of the term and reviews how it has been used in the field of sociology.
2
  Using confidential Long-Form 2000 Census data (in Boston), Bayer et al. (2008) show that two individuals who live
on the same Census block are about one-third more likely to work on the same block than are two individuals who live



                                                         1
         The goal of our study is to explore the connection between social capital and labor market

networks. Given, on the one hand, strong interest in social capital, and, on the other hand, all of the work

documenting the importance of neighborhood-based labor market networks to labor market outcomes of its

residents, we ask what we view as a fundamental question that has not been explored previously: When

social capital is higher in a neighborhood, are neighbors better networked in terms of the jobs they hold? In

addressing this question, we make four key contributions to the research literature on both social capital

and labor market networks. First, we connect these two literatures by asking how neighborhood levels of

social capital are linked to the strength of local labor market networks. Second, we draw on a unique data

set – the National Establishment Time Series, or NETS – to construct novel measures of location-based

social capital based on the non-profit sector. Third, given that we have many potential social capital

measures, we use a machine learning algorithm to select the measures that are predictive of the strength of

local labor market networks, rather than making a priori assumptions about which social capital measures

belong in our empirical specifications. And fourth, we examine the link between social capital and labor

market networks using a local labor market network measure that, as discussed below, we have previously

demonstrated to be important for labor market outcomes.

         The social capital measures we study have been hypothesized in the previous literature to increase

connections among neighbors and should also foster labor market networks as we measure them. We

construct neighborhood-level measures of social capital that fit into four broad categories.

         First, we construct measures reflecting the demographic homogeneity of neighborhoods. These

measures are motivated by findings in Alesina and La Ferrara (2002), suggesting that trust of others both in

the community and more generally in society is viewed as an important component of social capital and is

partly a function of community characteristics that are shared among residents (Lochner et al., 1999).

         Second, we use information on the size and characteristics of local school districts to construct a




in the same block group but not on the same block. (The latter may be alike, but are less likely to be networked.)
Taking this further, Hellerstein et al. (2011) and Hellerstein et al. (2014) show that neighbors are more likely to work
at the same business establishment, consistent with the hypothesis that labor market networks mitigate information
imperfections in the labor market.


                                                            2
set of variables that could plausibly reflect the extent of parental involvement in schools. We hypothesize

that greater parental involvement in schools generates social capital, as parents are invested in schools and

interacting with each other’s children and with other neighborhood residents. We believe that this

involvement will be higher in smaller schools that are more community based (Cotton, 1996; Gardner et al.,

2000) in schools with higher-income parents (Guryan et al., 2008), and in schools with smaller student-

teacher ratios.

         Third, we use voting behavior measures that include voter turnout, prevailing political opinion, and

ideological homogeneity. Voter turnout is associated with high civic participation (Guiso et al., 2004),

another important reflection of social capital (Lochner et al., 1999). Other studies have shown that liberals’

and conservatives’ political priorities arising from differences in moral perspectives (Haidt, 2007) lead to

trusting different institutions (Putnam, 1994, and Dugan, 2015). For example, Putnam (1994) suggests that

conservatives may be more supportive of local, potentially more private associations that build social

capital at the local level, whereas liberals might be less supportive out of a concern that current inequalities

will be embedded in local social capital. 3 Because these institutions may differ in the extent to which they

build neighborhood social capital that augments labor market networks, we include the Democratic two-

party vote share. We also control for ideological homogeneity by way of the maximum of the two-party

vote share, because homogeneity has been shown in other contexts to foster social capital (Alesina and La

Ferrera, 2002), and, in this case, would indicate that others in your community share your beliefs.

         Finally, the major focus of our paper is to build on past work suggesting that civic institutions (e.g.,

Coleman, 1988; Putnam, 2000), religious organizations (e.g., Putnam, 2000; Putnam and Campbell, 2012),

and other non-profits (Rupasingha et al., 2006) contribute importantly to social capital. To explore the role

of these non-profits as facilitators of social capital that strengthen labor market networks, we make novel

use of a new data source in the study of social capital. Specifically, we use data on the universe of

establishments, from the National Establishment Time Series (NETS), to measure the number and



3
 Think, for example, of different perspectives on local control of school and even school funding (see, e.g., Meyer et
al., 1987).


                                                           3
composition of non-profits by Census tract, and we explore – using our machine learning methods – which

ones are associated with evidence of stronger labor market networks.

        To be clear, our main contribution with regard to social capital is our exploration of the role of non-

profits, via the introduction of this new data. We use the other social capital measures, derived from the

literature, in part to reflect that literature, but also to establish whether the estimated effects of the non-

profit-related social capital measures we introduce are likely to reflect variation in social capital that is

independent of the proxies for social capital others have proposed. Our inclusion of these other proxies

should not be viewed as us insisting that these measures from the literature in fact reflect social capital.

        The goal of our analysis is to explore the relationships between these measures of social capital and

the measure of the importance of neighborhood-based labor market networks developed in Hellerstein et al.

(2011). This network measure is explained below, but its core idea is to quantify the extent to which

neighbors are clustered at the same employers, controlling for the geographic proximity of peoples’

workplaces to where they live. We construct this measure using data from the Longitudinal Employer-

Household Dynamics (LEHD) program at the U.S. Census Bureau, which provides highly comprehensive

wage and salary employment data. This matched employer-employee data links persons to residences and,

if they are employed in a job covered by Unemployment Insurance, to the locations of establishments of

their employer.

        Theoretical models of labor market networks assume that there is imperfect information that

hinders the search behavior of unemployed workers and/or firms, and that information flows through

networks. These models generally fall into one of two categories that describe the information

imperfections and how they are mitigated by networks. First, in models such as Calvó-Armengol and

Jackson (2007) and Ioannides and Soetevent (2006), unemployed workers do not have full information

about job vacancies, and job searchers can learn about job vacancies either directly from employers or

indirectly via employed individuals among their network contacts. Second, in Montgomery (1991), the

information imperfection is on the employer side, and firms learn about a potential worker’s ability if the

firm employs individuals from the potential worker’s network. In both of these frameworks, the existence



                                                         4
of the network increases the job-finding probabilities of unemployed job searchers. 4

           The measure of clustering we use captures the network connections between neighbors arising

from either of these two models. Of course, as in nearly all research on labor market networks, we cannot

directly observe the flow of information about jobs or applicants in the labor market. However, our past

work has, in our view, validated the measure we use as capturing the effects of this flow of information. In

particular, our network measure is associated with higher wages for employed workers and longer job

tenure (Hellerstein et al., 2014), both consistent with better labor market matches when our network

measure is higher. And it is associated with faster re-employment of workers who lose jobs in mass layoffs,

and a higher likelihood of re-employment at a neighbor’s employer (Hellerstein et al., 2016), consistent

with employed neighbors providing referrals to their employers, or providing information about job

vacancies to unemployed workers in their network.

           Moreover, our network measure of the extent to which neighbors are clustered at the same

employer could potentially reflect other influences. As a result, in our past work we have used rich models

to control for other – non-network – sources of relationships between our empirical network measure and

these outcomes, mostly related to either variation in the strength of local labor markets, and sorting of

workers across geographic locations who likely to experience similar labor market outcomes, including

taking similar jobs. For example, in our work on re-employment after mass layoffs (Hellerstein et al.,

2016), we control for highly-detailed fixed effects so that we identify the effect of networks from

subgroups of workers who experience the same mass layoff at the same employer in the same county, and

who differ only in terms of the Census tract in which they reside – and the variation in the network measure

across those tracts. And in asking whether our network measure is associated with higher wages or longer

job matches (Hellerstein et al., 2014), we net out (via potential controls in our regressions) variation in the

network measure that could be explained by neighbors tending to work in the same Census tract – which

would inevitably lead to some working at the same employer – because of transportation infrastructure or

simple geographic proximity.


4
    Jackson (2008, Chapter 10) provides a transparent discussion and comparison of these models.


                                                           5
         As a result of these prior analyses, we assume that our empirical network measure is related to the

flow of information about jobs between neighbors. Our analysis is cross-sectional, based on a network

measure we have constructed for one year (2010) and social capital measures that correspond as closely as

possible to that year based on data availability. While our network measure is an indirect measure of the

underlying “construct,” which is the flow of information – in this case, between neighbors – we believe this

interpretation of our measure is supported by the extensive prior research we have conducted. We do not

explore what drives the variation in our social capital measures. While we are not particularly concerned

with reverse causation, it is possible that there are other characteristics of neighborhoods associated with

our social capital measures that also influence the extent to which neighbors are networked in the labor

market. We do try to use a comprehensive set of potential measures of neighborhood-level social capital to

explain variation in our network measure, as well as some obvious control variables that will likely help

explain our network measure. Nonetheless, given that social capital is multi-dimensional, and given that

there are many other neighborhood characteristics that could potentially help explain variation in our

network measure, our evidence should be viewed primarily as descriptive work that can strengthen existing

hypotheses and potentially generate new ones about the links between social capital and labor market

networks. In this way, our research is similar in approach to Chetty et al. (2014), which, in part, examines

how factors varying across geographies correlate with upward mobility. More closely related – although

focused on crime rather than labor market outcomes – is Sharkey et al. (2017), who study the relationship

between crime and local non-profits that focus on reducing violence.5

         Given the exploratory nature of this paper, and the large number of possible social capital

measures, we use a machine learning algorithm to identify important potential social capital measures that

best predict the variation in our labor market network measure. We view the use of machine learning as a



5
  Sharkey et al. use a different and narrower data source on non-profits, from the National Center for Charitable
Statistics, which includes organizations that have registered for tax-exempt status with the IRS. We explored using
this same data source, but decided not to because the tax-exempt unit is often a central location, meaning we could not
identify local establishments of an organization. Moreover, we were interested in very local measures of
establishments – at the tract level – whereas Sharkey et al. use city-level measures. Finally, establishments in the non-
profit sector that are not themselves non-profits – but are included in our data – can play a role in enhancing social
capital.


                                                           6
key component of this research. There are many potential variables that could explain variation in the

strength of labor market networks and also can be interpreted as capturing social capital. We want to let the

data tell us which variables to include. The machine learning helps us avoid having to choose, ex ante,

which of these variables are likely to reflect social capital, or, worse, to search for significant predictors

that can be most easily interpreted, ex post, as reflecting social capital. In addition, the machine learning

algorithm we use (LASSO) imposes sparsity on the candidate social capital measures, which, given that we

have a large vector of such candidate measures, helps in providing interpretable estimates by focusing on

the most important predictors.

II. The Observed Network Isolation Index

        The first important task is to define our measure of the neighborhood labor market network. Our

measure, developed in Hellerstein et al. (2011), uses worker-level data and captures the extent to which

employees of a business establishment come disproportionately from people who live in the same

neighborhood (defined as a Census tract). This measure is important because the models of labor market

networks we reference above predict that that if neighbors are networked together they will cluster at the

same establishments.

        We use Census tracts as our residential neighborhood definition because Census tracts define the

boundaries that are traditionally used to measure residential segregation (Iceland and Weinberg, 2002), and

because Census tracts are defined to ensure that the tracts are “as homogeneous as possible with respect to

population characteristics, economic status, and living conditions” (U.S. Census Bureau, n.d. (a)). This is a

reasonable definition of a neighborhood in which co-residents are likely to interact, more so because most

Census tracts are relatively small, facilitating contact at schools, churches, community organizations, etc. –

a point we return to below. To help ensure that neighborhoods are compact enough to facilitate interaction

among residents, we restrict the Census tracts in our analysis to “urban” tracts, which are defined based on

population density, and may fall in both central cities and suburbs. Limiting our analysis to urban tracts

focuses our analysis on areas where workers live closer together and sort across a large set of employers, so

any effects of social capital should be more apparent with this sample both due to a high capacity of social



                                                        7
interaction and potentially more evidence of clustering in establishments in our measure of labor market

networks.

           To construct our worker-level network measure, we compute for each worker, in the establishment

where they work, the percentage of his or her co-workers who live in the same Census tract. For worker i in

tract c this observed network isolation is:

                                                          ∑I
                                                          j ≠i
                                                                 C   (i, j ) ⋅ I E (i, j )
                                        (1)      NIic =                                      ,
                                                                 ∑I
                                                                 j ≠i
                                                                         E   (i, j )


where IC(i, j) is an indicator for whether co-worker j of worker i also lives in the same Census tract as i, and

IE(i, j) is an indicator for whether i and j work in the same establishment. The sums in the numerator and

denominator are taken over all workers other than the worker i who work in worker i’s establishment. Their

ratio is the share of co-workers with whom each worker is co-resident. 6

           We operationalize a measure of network isolation at the neighborhood level by averaging NIic over

individuals who live in the same Census tract. This community-based network index is a natural metric

because it is derived from the individual network measure developed and tested previously by Hellerstein et

al. (2011). We construct the observed community-based network index in two different (but closely related)

ways. The first version of the index builds up from the observed network index NIic for all employed

neighbors in a residential Census tract at that time. Then, at the community level, the community network

index is the average of the network indexes of each of the neighbors:

                                                      1         Wc
                                                                                   
                                        (2)     NIc = 
                                                    W
                                                                 ∑ NI         ic    ×100,
                                                      Wc        i =1              

where Wc is the number of employed neighbors (i.e., workers) in the neighborhood.

           The second version of our community-based network index is constructed over all residents of a

Census tract who are of working-age, whether or not they are employed. We denote this measure as NIcP,

where P signifies that this measure is calculated over people, not workers. It is measured as:



6
    We define workers at single-employee firms (who have no co-workers) as having an NIic of zero.


                                                             8
                                                     1     Pc
                                                                        
                                     (3)     NIcP =        ∑ NI   ic    ×100,
                                                      Pc   i =1        

where Pc is the number of working-age neighbors (i.e., people) in the neighborhood. Because we define NIic

= 0 for persons who are not employed, NIcP will always be smaller than NIcW, more so when the

employment rate in the tract is lower (as NIcP then includes more zeros).

        The strength of any relationships between social capital measures and labor market networks may

differ across the two measures. If social capital primarily influences employment outcomes for those who

would be employed in any case, by increasing the number of workers who share an employer, then we

might expect stronger relationships between social capital and NIcW. But an effect of social capital on

employment itself could strengthen the estimated relationships with NIcP, if the additional employed people

tend to work with their neighbors. That said, NIcW may be a preferable measure regardless, because it is

more likely to be independent of local economic conditions that may be correlated with our social capital

measures (in particular, those that are counts of establishments in the non-profit sector) – a correlation that

could create spurious evidence of a relationship between social capital and NIcP.

        For this project, we draw data from multiple sources, some public and some restricted-access. The

dataset for measuring NIcW and NIcP, our network measures, is the Census Bureau’s LEHD Infrastructure

Files, which combine state-provided data on earnings records for jobs linked with employer account

information (Abowd, 2009). The LEHD jobs frame consists of Unemployment Insurance covered

employment, which is the same domain as the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages and inclusive

of the vast majority of wage and salary jobs (Stevens, 2007). The Person History File, a component of the

Infrastructure Files, provides quarterly earnings of a person at an employer within a state, as well as

observed or imputed assignments to establishments at an employer. The Employer Characteristics File

gives establishment location, size, and industry. Information on characteristics of individuals in the LEHD,

including age, comes from the Individual Characteristics File (ICF), which is compiled at the Census




                                                        9
Bureau from Decennial Censuses and from federal administrative data sources. 7 We also use longitudinal

information on where individuals have lived (whether they are employed or not) that comes from a

confidential dataset called the Composite Person Record (CPR). The CPR, also derived from administrative

data, reports an annual place of residence for individuals (Graham et al., 2017). It is this unique

combination of administrative records on residential address and workplace information for individuals that

enables us to calculate our network measures NIcW and NIcP.

         Given that our research is cross-sectional in nature, we use information for only the year 2010 to

construct the network measures, as that year corresponds most closely to the rest of our data. (Some of the

other aggregate Census data is used to construct social capital measures or potential controls, as discussed

below.) We extract home and workplace information for workers at approximately 110 million primary

jobs that were active on April 1, 2010, where a primary job is defined as the highest earning job that a

person holds. 8,9 We use draws from an imputation model that assigns establishments to workers in the case

of employers with multiple units within a state, where such assignments are uncertain. 10 While the

uncertainty represented by this imputation would tend to reduce our estimates of network isolation at the

neighborhood level, our previous research using LEHD has found that the relative differences in




7
  The Social Security Administration’s Numident file provides sex, date of birth, place of birth, citizenship, and race.
The 2000 Census short and long forms provide age, sex, race, ethnicity, education, and national origin. The ICF
combines these sources, where observed, and imputes values for the rest. The ICF can be linked to the LEHD earnings
records using personal identifying information.
8
  We use the Person History Enhanced Across SEIN and Non-SEIN Transitions (PHEASANT) process to consolidate
state level Person History Files. The PHEASANT takes successor/predecessor transitions of employers into account
when calculating a worker’s job spell duration and earnings at an employer.
9
  Because we only observe employment on a quarterly basis, we define a job as held on April 1 if we observe the
worker to work with a given employer in both the first and second quarters of the year, based on the inference that
jobs held with the same employer in both quarters are most likely also active on April 1. This follows the definition
used in LEHD public-use data products of instantaneous counts of jobs. Our definition of employment omits those
who were not employed by the same employer over the two quarters, even if they worked in both quarters; these
individuals may have had job-to-job transitions or periods of non-employment.
10
   Most states do not require employers to assign workers to a particular establishment. For workers at multi-unit
employers (about 44 percent of all jobs), or jobs where the reporting firm has multiple establishments in the same
state, we make use of the imputation model developed by the LEHD program to allocate establishments to workers
(Abowd, 2009). For the set of active establishments during a worker’s tenure, the model attempts to replicate the size
distribution of establishments and the observed distribution of commute distances. Although the model makes ten
imputation draws for each job, which are equally weighted for the production of small area statistics in public-use
data, we use only the first such draw.



                                                          10
networking across groups are not affected by using the imputation. 11 Following the methods described

above and using home and workplace information for each job, we calculate NIic for each worker, and then

average these by the Census-tract residence count of the same set of workers to compute NIcW, and by the

Census-tract count of all persons age 19 to 64 in administrative records to compute NIcP.

III. Social Capital Measures and Potential Controls

         Because we use a Census tract-level measure of neighborhood labor-market connectedness, we also

need to construct measures of social capital that vary by Census tract in order to learn about the relationship

between labor market networks and neighborhood social capital. The measures of social capital that we use

come almost exclusively from non-LEHD data sources that we have merged at the Census tract level with

our LEHD data.

         The first of these additional data are the 5-year estimates from the 2008-2012 American

Community Survey (ACS). We extract from the ACS a vector of Census tract economic and demographic

characteristics that are known to be related to labor market outcomes and to socioeconomic characteristics

of communities more generally. The demographic characteristics include: the share of tract residents in

poverty; the share of tract-residents who live in owner-occupied housing; the share of tract residents who

are Hispanic; the share black non-Hispanic; the share Asian non-Hispanic; the share non-U.S. born; the

share currently married; and the share in various education categories (less than high school; share with

high school degree or some college; and share with at least a bachelor’s degree). 12

         There are three reasons to include these demographic variables in the analysis. First, for our

network measure NIcP, individuals who are not employed contribute a value of zero to the tract average.

Their non-employment is partially predicted by demographic variables (such as educational attainment),

and so including these demographic variables helps control for important features of labor market success.




11
   Hellerstein et al. (2014) find that observed network isolation tends to be lower for samples including multi-unit
employers, likely due to noise from the imputation, though variation in observed NI across subsets of the data has
similar patterns in both single- and multi-unit samples. For example, in Hellerstein et al. (2014), whites have almost
double the observed NI as blacks in both single-unit jobs and all-jobs samples.
12
   While the 2008-2012 ACS is reported in 2010 Census tract geography, statistics for four urbanized 2010 Census
tracts were not reported by the ACS and are dropped from our sample.


                                                           11
Second, even for the network measure NIcW that excludes the non-employed, previous research (e.g.

Hellerstein et al., 2011 and 2014) clearly demonstrates variation among the employed in the importance of

neighborhood networks across race, ethnicity, and education groups, because, for example, labor markets

(and hence neighborhood-based networks) are more local for less-skilled labor, and because of a greater

reliance of immigrants on network connections (Portes, 1998). The third reason to include these controls as

candidates in our machine learning algorithm is that there is evidence that demographic characteristics are

key to producing social capital and social trust (Alesina and La Ferrera, 2002; Rupasingha, 2006; and

Putnam, 2007). The home ownership rate may be thought of as a measure of social stability and also as an

indicator of lower residential density, which has been found to be associated with greater interaction

between neighbors (Brueckner and Largey, 2008).

        We also extract and use two commuting-related variables from the ACS, aggregated to Census

tract-level rates. First, we construct a measure of the fraction of employed local residents whose commutes

to work are less than 10 minutes, treating this as a measure of local job access. If there are many nearby

jobs, employment rates are likely to be higher (Ihlanfeldt, 2006; Zenou, 2008), and neighborhood residents

may work together not because of networks but simply because of job access. The second variable we

construct is the fraction of the employed who commute to work by driving alone. Lone commutes suggest

that neighbors are not working at similar locations (or at the same establishment), which can reflect the

geographic dispersion of employment opportunities for residents of a given Census tract or a lack of transit

options. Note, though, that this could also potentially be a measure of social capital, as residents

commuting together (by carpool or public transit) may share job information.13

        We construct a second set of Census tract-level measures to capture various dimensions of local

schools, which we view as potentially related to social capital. These measures enable us to ask whether

neighborhood social capital that is school-based also translates into more networked labor markets. We first


13
   Zenou (2013) argues that spatial distances can create social distances, where workers who engage in long commutes
forfeit the opportunity to expand their social network because of driving time’s opportunity costs. If so-called “weak
ties” – ties outside of immediate family and friends – can improve job matching, then it stands to reason that driving
alone can also be forfeiting opportunity to expand one’s social ties.



                                                         12
overlay a 2010 map of U.S. Census Bureau school district boundaries onto a map of Census tracts. 14 We

then assign to each Census tract characteristics of the school district in which it falls, obtaining school-level

characteristics from the Department of Education’s Common Core of Data. School districts often cover

multiple Census tracts, in which case all Census tracts in the district are assigned the same school-level

variables. When school district boundaries bisect a Census tract, the tract is assigned school-level variables

that reflect a weighted average of the characteristics of the school districts it serves, with the weight being

the fraction of land area in the Census tract covered by the district.

        The school district variables we construct are: the average student-teacher ratio; the share of

students in the schools on free or reduced-price lunch; the number of different districts to which students in

the Census tract are assigned; and the average number of Census tracts served by the school districts in a

tract (which in the case of one district covering the entire tract is simply the number of tracts that district

serves). Higher student-teacher ratios and the number of students in the school on free/reduced-price lunch

may reflect school districts where parents do not have resources to invest in social capital via the local

schools. Our measure of the number of different districts to which students in living in a tract are assigned

could be viewed in one of two ways. It could be negatively related to the extent to which schools are

strongly community based, if when a tract is divided into many districts, the residents of the tract are less

likely to interact with each other at their children’s school. On the other hand, it could be an indicator of

small school districts in which parents interact more, thus fostering social capital at more local levels. Our

related measure – of the number of tracts served by the school – is meant to capture how large the school

district or districts in the tract are. We view this measure as unambiguously measuring the size of school

districts, which we expect to be negatively related to social capital (paralleling the second interpretation of

the number of districts variable).

        A third set of covariates we construct to use in predicting NIcW and NIcP reflects voting patterns at

the Census tract level. We view these measures as motivated directly by the social capital literature cited


14
  We use school district boundaries. In states with non-unified school districts, these may be elementary school
boundaries. While elementary school boundaries might be more relevant with regard to parent interaction (and hence
social capital), data on elementary district boundaries were much sparser.


                                                        13
earlier. We generated a dataset of 2008 presidential voting results by 2010 Census tracts using the Harvard

Election Data Archive (HEDA, Ansolabehere et al., 2014). HEDA’s publicly available files allow us to

match precinct-level voting results to Census Voting Districts (VTDs), and a Census Bureau crosswalk

between VTDs and Census geography at the Census block level allows us to overlay VTDs onto Census

tracts. We construct three Census tract-level variables from the HEDA data: the fraction of the voting age

population in the Census tract that voted in the 2008 presidential election; the fraction that voted for the

Democratic candidate in 2008 (among those voting for either the Republican or Democratic candidates);

and the fraction of votes cast for the candidate of the party winning the majority of votes in the tract. Note

that we do not principally interpret these voting-derived variables as reflecting outcomes associated with

the policies supported by one group or another. Rather, we view them as descriptors of a neighborhood’s

population and social behavior. To this end, we also note that Census tracts do not necessarily conform to

local or Congressional electoral boundaries, and that we include state fixed effects in some specifications,

which would sweep out the influence of any related influence from governance at the state level.

        Finally, we use data from the 2013 NETS to construct Census tract-level measures of counts of

establishments in the non-profit sector (which can include government institutions) such as libraries,

churches, civic associations, and community centers, which might facilitate the social capital that builds

labor market networks. The NETS is a database that contains address information, employment

information, and NAICS industry codes for essentially the universe of establishments in the United States

(for more information, see Neumark et al., 2007). To align with our other data, we use observations on

establishments for the year 2010.

        The NETS is constructed by Walls & Associates from Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) data. 15 The NETS

is based on D&B’s Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Marketing Information (DMI) file for each

year. The primary purpose of D&B’s data collection effort is to provide information on businesses to the

business community, by constructing a set of “predictive indicators” (e.g., the D&B rating and Paydex



15
 For more details, see http://exceptionalgrowth.org/downloads/NETSDatabaseDescription2013.pdf (viewed
November 30, 2017), Neumark (2007), and the appendix of Neumark et al. (2011).


                                                      14
scores), and for marketing purposes. The DMI file for each year is constructed from an ongoing effort to

capture each business establishment in the United States in each year, including nonprofits and the public

sector. The NETS is a longitudinal file that links DMI files, although we do not exploit the longitudinal

dimension in this paper.

         The DMI files underlying the NETS are based on a multi-layered process incorporating many data

sources, in which D&B uses a massive data collection effort to try to identify and assemble information on

all business establishments. This includes over 100 million telephone calls from four calling centers each

year, as well as information from legal and court filings, newspapers and electronic news services, public

utilities, all Secretaries of State, government registries and licensing data, payment and collections

information, company filings, and the U.S. postal service. One highly desirable feature of the NETS

database is that it covers essentially all establishments. This reflects the fact that it is designed to capture

the universe rather than a sample of establishments.

         Unlike the LEHD, the NETS potentially has complete coverage of non-profit establishments,

which makes it a better data source for capturing this type of social capital. Non-profits with no

employment would not appear in LEHD, and even some employers, such as religious schools in some

states, are exempt from Unemployment Insurance law and do not appear in the LEHD (Stevens, 2007). 16

         Non-profits serve many different community functions such as providing public goods (e.g.,

neighborhood watch associations) or facilitating social interaction (athletic clubs), or both (Kiwanis clubs).

The LASSO estimation’s results can, in principle, help establish whether labor market networks are

correlated with public goods provision (“better” neighborhoods yield stronger networks) or easier social

interaction (more meeting opportunities yield stronger networks), although in practice it is not

straightforward to classify establishments in the non-profit sector as playing one role or the other.

         While the NETS captures all types of business establishments, we draw on past research and theory


16
  In Illinois, for example, the state code (820 ILCS 405/211.3, ch. 48, par. 321.3 says: “For the purpose of Section
211.2, the term “employment” shall not include services performed—A. In the employ of (1) a church or convention
or association of churches, or (2) an organization or school which is not an institution of higher education, which is
operated primarily for religious purposes and which is operated, supervised, controlled or principally supported by a
church or convention or association of churches.”


                                                          15
on social capital that focuses on the non-profit sector. The NETS includes an indicator for legal status that

identifies non-profits. However, this field is missing in about one-half of cases. Hence, rather than flagging

specific establishments as non-profits, we instead flag all NAICS 6-digit industries in which at least 10

percent of establishments with this field non-missing are coded as non-profits, and we use all the

establishments in these industries in order to classify where non-profits – and potential social capital – are

located. Note that our definition is quite broad, in that we use a (rather low) threshold in defining an

industry as being “non-profit,” and we use counts of all establishments in the industry as a measure of the

intensity of activity in the industry. We use this rather expansive view of where non-profits – and

potentially for-profits that engage in the same activities – can generate social capital as a starting point. We

then deploy LASSO to let the data tell us whether and where our criterion for defining the non-profit sector

is too broad in the sense of not fostering social capital that leads to stronger labor market networks.

        The NETS in many cases has either the establishment’s exact geo-coordinates or the Census block

group or tract where it is located. We use Geographic Information System (GIS) software to map

establishments in the NETS to Census tracts. In each Census tract, we construct counts of establishments in

each of the 6-digit NAICS categories we have identified as an industry with high non-profit concentration.

        It is important to emphasize that our social capital measures are local measures. As such, our

results should be interpreted as reflecting the effects of local social capital on the strength of neighborhood

labor market networks. There could be social capital created by non-profits at a less local level that

facilitate sharing of information about jobs, such as government-run websites for either private or public

jobs. 17 And some of the businesses or institutions in the non-profit sector that we study may play this role at

a more aggregate level than the Census tract.

IV. Machine Learning: LASSO

        To examine the relationship between our social capital measures and our local labor market

network measure, we utilize a machine learning algorithm known as LASSO (Townsend, 2017). 18 LASSO


17
  See, for example, https://www.usajobs.gov/ (viewed December 4, 2017).
18
  Townsend’s method is itself a STATA implementation of the recommended LASSO algorithm developed in
Friedman et al. (2010).


                                                       16
is not the only machine learning algorithm that we could use to select social capital measures, but we think

it will yield a better-fitted model to the data than its two main alternatives, ridge regressions and pretesting.

As detailed in Abadie and Kasy (2018), ridge regressions fit models best when most regressors are

expected to have non-zero coefficients, while pretesting fits best when most potential coefficients are

expected to be set to zero (called high sparsity). LASSO fits best in intermediate cases where there is a high

degree of sparsity, but where one wants to avoid an overly aggressive assumption on the number of

coefficients being set to zero. LASSO is also appropriate in cases like ours where the literature is somewhat

ambiguous on the breadth of institutions that might instigate some network-based social capital: there are

good reasons to think that a significant set will have no impact, but there are many possible variables (in

our case, social capital measures) for which we are estimating coefficients (Abadie and Kasy, 2018).

         The key to understanding LASSO starts by examining the objective function when seeking to

estimate a vector of parameters β (Tibshirani, 1996):
                                                                  𝑝𝑝                        𝑝𝑝
                           (4)       𝛽𝛽̂ = argmin ∑𝑛𝑛𝑐𝑐=1(𝑦𝑦𝑐𝑐 − Σ𝑙𝑙=1 𝑥𝑥𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑙 )2 + 𝜆𝜆 ∑𝑙𝑙=1|𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑙 |.
                                            𝑏𝑏

         Note that the first term on the right-hand side of the equation is the usual Ordinary Least Squares

(OLS) objective function – minimizing the sum of squared errors when given a linear equation relating a

dependent variable y to a vector of observable variables x (tract level observations are denoted by c, and

regressors by l). 19 When researchers do not have strong priors as to which observable characteristics belong

in the vector x, and especially when the set of possible x’s is large (and perhaps even larger than the sample

size) – so that there is a risk of “over-fitting” – LASSO serves as a covariate reduction technique where the

data guide the researcher as to the set of observable characteristics among those in x that best belong in the

regression. As such, the second term on the right-hand side is a penalty function, where the penalty factor 𝜆𝜆

is selected by the LASSO algorithm. 20 The LASSO estimation procedure identifies the set of parameters


19
   For concreteness, in our context, yc is the network measure (NIcW or NIcP) at the Census tract level c, and xcl is the
vector of potential contributors to a high observed level of network connectedness.
20
   There are many different methods for calibrating 𝜆𝜆, but the Townsend (2017) implementation uses cross-validation.
In cross-validation, the sample is randomly split into several, equal-sized “folds.” On K−1 of the folds, the coefficients
and penalty factor are calculated, and then on the kth fold, they are applied as a validation exercise to calculate the
out-of-sample error. Repeating this exercise leaving out one fold each time, the penalty factor that minimizes the out-
of-sample error is chosen to be reapplied to the entire sample.


                                                               17
that best predict the data under the assumption that all other coefficients of the other possible regressors

should be set to zero; that is, the LASSO-reported coefficients are artificially shrunken, with some going to

zero, to keep the number of predictors small. The final step (post-LASSO estimation procedure) is to then

estimate an OLS regression using only the restricted set of covariates as regressors, which “restores” the

proper coefficient values on the selected regressors (Belloni and Chernozhukov, 2013). 21

        The candidate x variables that we have collected and grouped into four categories as described

above are: demographic and commuting variables; school-district variables; voting pattern variables; and

non-profit penetration in the Census tract. We sometimes include two other variables in our LASSO

algorithm. One is what we call a “transport isolation index” (similar to Hellerstein et al., 2014). This

variable is intended to control for differences in transportation infrastructure that can generate variation in

our network measures even when there is no actual sharing of information of the type that underlies

network models. For example, transportation infrastructure in an area (like a highway or subway line)

might lead to many people from one tract of residence working in a common tract, which can lead some of

them to work in the same establishment simply for this reason. To allow for the possibility that observed

network isolation is the result of commuting tendencies rather than interpersonal connections, we construct

transport isolation measures corresponding to each networking measure, which we label TIcW and TIcP. We

compute these on a per worker and per person basis from 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 (as with NIic in Equation 1), which gives the

share of total workers in an employment tract who reside in the same tract as that worker – i.e., who have

the same origin and destination tracts in their commute. In this way, the transport isolation indices are

constructed in an identical manner as the network measures, following Equations 2 and 3, except that we

use the workplace Census tract rather than the establishment. But while the transport index may be higher

in some Census tracts because of the availability of local transportation infrastructure, it may alternatively




21
  A LASSO regression induces shrinkage on the coefficients, relative to what the same coefficient estimates would be
under OLS. Performing OLS after model selection has the virtue of eliminating the shrinkage bias while achieving
similar convergence properties as the LASSO itself. This result is somewhat dependent on the LASSO selecting an
appropriately “sparse” model – i.e., a model where the number of selected variables is small relative to the number of
candidate variables. However, even if model does not achieve sparsity, running OLS after LASSO still retains the
virtue of eliminating the shrinkage bias.


                                                         18
be high in those tracts because of social capital in a neighborhood that leads neighbors to work in the same

neighborhoods. If it is the latter, the transportation index, like the network isolation index itself, is an

outcome, and including it in the estimation could “over-control” for the determinants of our network

measure.

        The second potential control is the simple count of all NETS establishments operating in the

neighborhood Census tract, regardless of industry classification. The number of establishments in a Census

tract can be correlated with the network index mechanically because it can lead to clusters of neighbors

working together due to geographical proximity, and thus may be an important control in the regression.

Alternatively, the number of these establishments actually may be a measure of social capital, if, for

example, local zoning laws lead to land being allocated to a large number of small establishments, versus

restricting the local area to residential use or a few, large employers.

        Finally, in order to control for state fixed effects, in some models we first “residualize” both the

dependent variable and all the candidate social capital measures by regressing each of them individually on

the fixed effects (Frisch and Waugh, 1933; Lovell, 1963). We then run the LASSO procedure on the

residualized variables, effectively partialling out the state fixed effects, and using only the remaining

within-state variation in those models. For all of the variables we include in the models (with the exception

of the state fixed effects), we allow the LASSO procedure to pick the variables that remain, and then we re-

estimate the model using OLS with just these variables. Both the variable selection and the ensuing

estimated coefficients tell us whether and which of the social capital proxies are related to neighborhood

labor market networks.

        One current limitation of LASSO is that conducting proper inference can be challenging.

Computing standard errors from LASSO coefficients themselves is non-trivial, because the LASSO

function is a non-linear and non-differentiable function, even when λ is fixed (Tibshirani, 1996). Post-

LASSO OLS coefficients, while computable, do not incorporate the fact that the first-stage of the LASSO

preselects the covariates (x’s) for the second stage. That is, each coefficient’s distribution for these is

                                           � = 𝑀𝑀, where 𝑀𝑀
conditional on both the covariates and on 𝑀𝑀              � is the OLS regression model selected out of all



                                                        19
the possible candidate OLS models M that could come out of the first stage LASSO. We deal with this in

two different ways. First, we report the usual OLS standard errors, disregarding the model selection from

the LASSO. This should result in standard errors that are too small. In most OLS applications, this would

be a problem, and in our context, what this means in practice is that we might incorrectly infer that too

many social capital measures are related to our labor market network measure than is actually the case. But

given that the LASSO procedure excludes many of our candidate social capital measures to begin with, and

given that we interpret our results with appropriate caution, we are not too concerned about this.

        Nonetheless, we also report 95-percent confidence intervals on our OLS estimates as constructed

using a second method. In a recent paper, Lee et al. (2016) (hereafter, LSST) showed that under the

assumption that the error term in the second-stage regression model is normally distributed, conditioning on

 � = 𝑀𝑀 gives the estimated coefficients a truncated normal distribution. They outline an algorithm for
𝑀𝑀

finding the left and right truncation points of that distribution, which we implement to create adjusted

confidence intervals for the coefficient estimates. We note that these confidence intervals also are only an

approximation for two reasons. First, the set of candidate models M is defined by assuming we have

included in the LASSO all possible social capital measures that may be related to our network measure.

Second, LSST’s results rely on an assumption of normality, which in our setting is clearly only an

approximation since our network measure is actually bounded. In practice, it turns out that the statistical

inferences are nearly identical using these two methods, indicating that the OLS standard errors are likely

not problematic.

        The fact that the results of the LASSO procedure do not necessarily yield causal evidence does not

trouble us. There simply is a scarcity of wide-scale evidence that ties labor market network strength to local

organizations and characteristics that are typically associated with social capital. That said, it is important

to note that one cannot draw policy conclusions from these associations, such as whether, for example,

increasing the presence of non-profit sector establishments would boost labor market networks.

V. Results

Descriptive statistics



                                                       20
         Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for all our variables with the exception of the tabulations of

establishments in the non-profit sector in the NETS. Our sample of approximately 34,000 Census tracts is

determined by our urban area restriction as well as limitations due to data availability. 22 Our network

measures are calculated over 48.3 million workers whose highest earning job is at one of 3.3 million unique

employers located at one of 4 million unique establishments. The mean of the observed network isolation

index NIc is about 1.6 when we calculate it using only workers (which we denote NIcW); 23 it falls to about

1.0 when we include the non-employed in the calculation (which we denote NIcP), who by definition have

NIic = 0. The average transport isolation measures – 0.59 for workers and 0.37 for the population – are

significantly lower than observed network isolation, which is consistent with labor markets being more

networked than what might be anticipated from location factors alone. 24

         In interpreting the means of the demographic and education variables, recall that these are

computed over tracts, and are for urban tracts only. Thus, these means are not representative of the U.S.

population. In the last panel, the schooling and voting variables reveal that most tracts include only one

school district (the mean is about 1.33). The high Democratic vote share is a reflection of the selection on

urban tracts. The high majority vote share (0.68) points to considerable homogeneity in voting.

         Table 2 reports information from the NETS on all 90 of the 6-digit NAICS industries with at least

10 percent of establishments coded as non-profits, drawn from the universe of establishments with non-




22
   Starting with the U.S. total of 73,057 Census tracts, we first limit to the 44,127 that are classified as fully urban and
in a state where LEHD jobs data was available in 2010 (we exclude 1,267 tracts in Massachusetts and the District of
Columbia). We also exclude the small number of tracts that do not have at least 100 residents with LEHD earnings.
Linking to the voting and schooling data further limits the sample to (approximately) 34,000, with the voting data
being more restrictive. Census tracts have a target population of 4,000 residents, with the 25th, 50th, and 75th
percentiles of our tracts, by population, having 2,886, 3,966, and 5,190 persons, respectively. Given this similar sizing
and the nature of our evaluation, we do not weight our estimates by population, so each Census tract serves as an
observation.
23
   This is lower, by a factor of about three, than in Hellerstein et al. (2014). The differences arise due to the restriction
to urban tracts in this paper, and the inclusion of multi-unit establishments. Hellerstein et al. (2011 and 2014) present a
scaled version of this network measure (averaged across all workers) that subtracts out the clustering of neighbors in
establishments that can occur randomly, and computes this difference relative to the maximum clustering that can
occur. This adjustment is less important in the present paper, where we are more interested in explaining variation in
the network measure than in asking “how important” networks are in an absolute sense.
24
   Moreover, the 1.6 figure for NIcW (for example) should not be interpreted relative to 100 percent, but relative to the
maximum amount of clustering that could occur; this is much lower, because given the size distribution of firms, all
neighbors typically could not work at the same establishment as any given reference person.


                                                             21
missing legal status (see the on-line appendix for full descriptions of each industry). The entries are ordered

in terms of NAICS codes. The maximum percentage of establishments coded as non-profits is above 50

percent (for NAICS code 813219), and is high for industries including charities, humane societies, hospitals

and clinics, athletic associations, rehab facilities, etc.

        We can imagine that some of these are more likely to be associated with higher social capital that

might be tied to labor market networks (e.g., churches, places of worship, etc., NAICS code 813110, and

civic associations, NAICS code 813410), others might be tied to social capital but play little role in labor

market networks (e.g., activity centers for disabled persons, NAICS code 624120), and others might be

weakly connected to social capital in the first place (e.g., apartment and condominium management,

NAICS code 531311). However, rather than try to pre-specify which industries are likely to facilitate the

kind of social capital that builds labor market networks, we use our machine learning approach to identify

these industries (as well as to select among the other potential social capital variables we constructed).

Although we have not yet discussed the estimation results, Table 2 provides a preview, as we indicate in

boldface industries (or a subset of the full NAICS definition) that are retained in at least some of our

LASSO estimations. We later describe and summarize the industries that, according to our LASSO

estimations, increase labor market network connections.

Preliminary regressions

        As preliminary evidence, Table 3 reports results of regressions for the two versions of our network

measure – NIcW and NIcP – including the demographic controls, the other controls, and the social capital

measures (e.g., the school district and voting variables) that are based on prior research. We use simple

OLS in this table and not LASSO, and we just include this smaller set of potential social capital measures

(and not the non-profit sector establishment counts). The specifications vary with respect to whether the

tract-level isolation index and establishment counts are included, and whether or not we include state fixed

effects, and for each version of the dependent variable we first report results with the social capital

measures excluded.

        The estimated coefficients on the demographic variables are a bit hard to interpret, since the



                                                         22
variables can be quite strongly related. For example, both the share of tract residents living in poverty and

the fraction black are each strongly positively correlated with our observed network isolation index and

with each other, but the estimated coefficients on these variables in Table 3, while both generally

statistically significant, are often opposite in sign. The estimate of a higher network measure where the

share of immigrants (non-natives) is higher is consistent with past findings on immigrants, language, and

the importance of networks (e.g., Hellerstein et al., 2011). The education results sometimes indicate that the

observed network measure is highest where the share with low education is highest, consistent with less-

educated workers participating in more local labor markets. The positive effect of the share with a

bachelor’s degree (or higher) in most specifications (relative to high school graduates or those with some

college – the omitted group), suggests that the more highly-educated also have good network connections –

perhaps more so because of access to social capital than the local nature of their labor market.

        With regard to the commuting variables, tracts with shorter commutes appear to be more

networked. However, this likely is due to some extent to a higher density of jobs nearby, which is

consistent with the finding that the estimated effect of the short-commute variable declines by more than

three-quarters when the transport isolation index is included (in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8)). Commuting

by driving alone is associated with lower values of NIcW and NIcP. 25

        We also find that our network measure is higher when residential mobility is lower (where

residential mobility – or lack thereof – is captured by the share of residents that did not move in the

previous year). There is also evidence, especially in the specifications including the tract-level isolation

index and the establishment counts, that NIcW and NIcP are also higher when the share of housing that is

owner-occupied is higher. Both results may simply reflect the fact that residential mobility and home

ownership rates are measures of socioeconomic characteristics of neighborhoods. But it is worth noting that

both results also are consistent with more sharing of labor market information between neighbors when

neighbors are more likely to know each other – whether somewhat mechanically because they are likely to


25
  Whether one drives to work alone can also be interpreted as a reflection of network connections among neighbors,
raising the possibility that including this variable subsumes other network effects. However, all of our estimated
relationships with network-related measures were changed only negligibly by excluding this variable.


                                                        23
have been at the same address longer, or perhaps also because homeowners interact with neighbors in a

variety of ways that renters do not.

         The bottom rows of the table report results for the schooling- and voting-related social capital

measures. The estimated signs of the effects of the schooling variables are consistent with our expectations.

Census tracts with more school districts (which may be a proxy for smaller school districts) appear more

networked. Similarly, tracts with smaller school districts – which serve fewer tracts – are also more

networked, and tracts where school districts report smaller average class sizes – which may have to do

more with school size – are more networked. With regard to the voting variables, it appears that more

homogeneous voting and voter turnout are positively correlated with NIcW and NIcP, while tracts with a

larger Democratic vote share seem to have less-extensive labor market networks. 26

LASSO regressions

         In Table 4 we turn to the LASSO estimates. These are the specifications into which we introduce

the counts of non-profit establishments by industry, and allow the data-driven machine learning algorithm

to determine which social capital variables (and other variables) belong in the OLS regression. We report

estimates from six specifications. First, using NIcW – the network measure that is constructed using only

workers – we show results excluding and then including (potentially, if chosen by LASSO) the tract-level

isolation index and establishment count, and for each of these cases, excluding and then including (via

residualization) the state fixed effects. Then, using NIcP, the network measure based on population, we

repeat the specifications including the tract-level isolation index and establishment count (both because

these are selected by LASSO, and are strongly significant), with and without fixed state effects. The

specifications including the transport isolation measures, which are also sensitive to employment, should

help to control for employment-related effects on our networking measure (though transport isolation may

also over-control, as hiring to the same location, even if not the same firm, may also be a product of

networks).



26
  Recall the earlier discussion of the local nature of our social capital measures. It may be that a higher Democratic
vote share is associated with popular support for institutions that provide social capital at a more aggregate level.


                                                           24
         The first panel of the table covers the demographic and commuting controls. One interesting result

is that the estimates for these variables are not very different from those in the corresponding specifications

in Table 3, and the variables generally not selected by LASSO are those whose effects in Table 3 were

quite small, with only a couple of exceptions.

         The second panel covers the potential schooling and voting social capital variables. LASSO retains

the variables related to number of districts and the Democratic vote share in all specifications. At the other

extreme, voter turnout is retained in only one specification. The estimated magnitudes of the schooling and

voting variables are similar to Table 3, and the signs are always the same. Thus, the estimates indicate that

neighborhoods with smaller districts and schools are more networked, as are neighborhoods where fewer

schoolchildren qualify for free or reduced-price lunch. The majority vote share results indicate that more

politically homogeneous neighborhoods – on this metric – have stronger labor market networks. And again,

a higher Democratic vote share lessens labor market network connections.

         The last set of results – which begin below the schooling and voting variables – pertain to the

counts of non-profit establishments in the 90 industries with a large share of such establishments. 27

Comparing column (1) to column (3), column (2) to column (4), and column (2’) to column (4’) indicates

that there are many industries that are selected by the LASSO procedure whether or not we include fixed

state effects. Similarly, comparing column (1) to column (2), and column (3) to column (4) – and the same

is true for NIcP – indicates that many of the same industries are retained whether or not the tract-level

isolation index and the establishment counts are included as potential controls.

         Among the industries in which the count of non-profit sector establishments is often retained and

the estimated coefficient is positive and statistically significant, many seem like natural or even

stereotypical types of establishments that would foster social capital in one of a number of ways. This list

includes the following: 28




27
  The order of the industries is the same as in Table 2, sorted by NAICS codes.
28
  Note that we use a subset of all the industry definitions from Table 2, chosen to try to best characterize the NAICS
industry. One has to exercise caution in characterizing these industries, as the on-line appendix indicates that for some
NAICS codes there is a much longer list of business types within the code.


                                                           25
    •   union health and welfare funds (NAICS code 525120)

    •   elementary, junior, and secondary schools (NAICS code 611110)

    •   chamber music groups (NAICS code 711130)

    •   museums (NAICS code 712110)

    •   country clubs and golf courses (NAICS code 713910)

    •   camps (NAICS code 721214)

    •   churches, mosques, etc. (NAICS code 813110)

    •   charitable trusts (NAICS code 813211)

    •   hobby clubs, civic associations, Scouts, PTAs, etc. (NAICS code 813410)

    •   labor unions (NAICS code 813930), and

    •   fire and rescue services, including volunteer fire departments (NAICS code 922160).

        These types of non-profits picked out by the LASSO procedure seem to be those likely to

encourage contacts between neighbors. For example, country clubs may generate contacts between those

who work in related jobs and share social contacts, given that there may be significant socioeconomic

homogeneity. And in the case of schools, the contacts seem likely to be between parents with children,

paralleling, to some extent, evidence suggesting that labor market network connections between neighbors

are stronger among neighbors with school-age children of similar ages (Bayer et al., 2008, Table 7).

        There are other non-profit establishments that are retained with significant positive coefficients and

which could also foster social capital, although perhaps less directly with regard to communication among

neighbors. These include industries such as: ambulance and rescue services (NAICS code 621910); nursing

homes (NAICS code 623110); city and mayors’ office (NAICS code 921110); and police departments

(NAICS code 922120), These industries might be best characterized as providing public goods, in which

case a high establishment count may reflect decentralization, with Census tracts in smaller municipalities or

those where service provision is more disaggregated being more likely to have their own facilities. In that

case, the local presence of these public goods facilities may be a more indirect indicator of communities

that are smaller, with more community involvement and monitoring (e.g., Ostrom, 1990), and hence more


                                                     26
ties that can enhance labor market networks.

         Finally, to be sure, there are some findings – especially negative ones – that seem harder to

interpret. The industries with persistent negative effects include: distribution of electric power (NAICS

code 221122); social science research and development services (NAICS code 541720); fundraising

campaign organization services (NAICS code 561499); humane societies (NAICS code 813312);

professional associations (NAICS code 813920); campaign organizations (NAICS code 813940);

homeowners’ associations (NAICS code 813990); and arts/cultural or economic development

administration (NAICS code 926110). One possible explanation of these latter findings is that these kinds

of industries are associated with hiring that tends not to be local (such as government jobs, or professional

jobs).

         We cannot explain all of our findings, and indeed we did not expect to be able to do so. We are,

after all, using a machine learning algorithm that picks out predictors of our network measures, and we

have not imposed theoretical constraints or priors on the potential predictors (other than restricting to

establishments in industries with a higher share of non-profits). Overall, however, we regard the industries

selected by the LASSO procedure that are positively associated with either the worker-based network

measure (NIcW) or the population-based network measure (NIcP) as broadly supportive of the idea that non-

profits that foster interaction between residents facilitate the development of social capital that helps create

labor market connections among neighbors. To provide the reader with a better sense of this result, Table 5

lists the full NAICS definitions for the industries with positive (and significant) effects in five or more

specifications in the LASSO estimates reported in Table 4.

         The magnitudes of the estimated relationships between some of our social capital measures are

non-trivial. For example, in column (3) of Table 4, the estimated coefficient on hobby clubs, Scouts, PTAs,

etc. (NAICS code 813410) is 0.0224. In Table 6, we show the standard deviations of the non-profit sector

counts; for this industry, the standard deviation is 1.939. Thus, a one standard deviation change would

increase NIcW by about 0.0434, and given a mean of NIcW of 1.609, the implied effect is about 2.7 percent.

The implied effects is about twice as larger for churches, mosques, synagogues, etc. (NAICS code 813110);



                                                       27
the estimated coefficient in column (3) is about the same magnitude, but the standard deviation is twice as

large. Similarly, although the estimated coefficient for country clubs and golf courses (NAICS codes

713910) is much larger (e.g., 0.173 in column (3)), the standard deviation is much lower (0.337), leading to

a similar size effect.

        In contrast, the implied effects of some of the sectors that have negative effects on the network

measures are smaller. For example, the implied effect of establishments in the distribution of electric power

(NAICS code 221122) in column (2) is 0.0162, and the implied effect for establishments in campaign

organizations, etc. (NAICS code 813940) in column (3) is 0.0187. Indeed, the average standard deviation is

more than 50 percent larger (0.22 versus 0.13) for industries with a positive effect on the network measures

than for industries with a negative effect, based on Table 6.

        We note that the list of industries with positive estimated effects on our network measures are not

simply the industries that are have the highest share of non-profits or, alternatively, the largest industries

with a non-profit component (as specified in the NETS – see the % Non-Profit and Total Estab.’s fields,

respectively, in Table 2 and the on-line appendix). Such a finding might have been consistent with non-

profits simply being a byproduct of social largesse (in that they must operate on a non-profit basis), which

might be related to our networking measure, or an indication that only the largest and most widespread

types of non-profits have a discernable statistical relationship with our networking measure. Of the fifteen

industries with the highest non-profit reporting share (see Table 2), only one – charitable trusts and

community foundations (NAICS code 813211) – appears consistently with positive effects on our network

measures (see Table 5). The industry with the greatest share non-profit, community chests (NAICS code

813219), has no discernable effect on labor market networks in any specification.

VI. Conclusions

        Our goal in this paper is to conduct empirical analyses to identify characteristics of neighborhoods

(Census tracts) that may facilitate the development of social capital leading to variation, across

neighborhoods, in the extent of labor market networking among neighbors. We draw on prior literature,

mainly on social capital, to construct neighborhood-level measures of social capital of various kinds,



                                                       28
focused primarily on characteristics of schools and school districts, and of voting behavior. In addition, we

measure the prevalence in neighborhoods of businesses/institutions concentrated in the non-profit sector

that are likely to increase social capital and network ties. We use machine learning methods to let the data

tell us which of these measures help predict neighborhood variation in a measure of neighborhood-based

labor markets that we have used in past research, which both captures potential network connections among

neighbors, and is associated with good job market matches and better labor market outcomes.

        With regard to schooling and voting, our analysis suggests that schools that are likely smaller and

in less centralized school districts foster social capital that builds labor market networks, as does a larger

Republican vote share, which we interpret as a population characteristic. Among industries with a

reasonable share of non-profits, a number are identified as predictive of strong labor market networks, and

these industries do, in fact, seem to us to likely play this role via either public goods provision or

facilitating social contacts. These industries include: churches and other religious institutions, police

departments, fire and rescue services including volunteer fire departments, country clubs, mayors’ offices,

chamber music groups, hobby clubs, and museums. For many of these, it seems plausible to think that

people working or looking for work may develop relationships that lead to sharing of labor market

information among neighbors and among employers. Overall, we regard the industries selected by the

LASSO procedure as broadly supportive of the idea that establishments in the non-profit sector are

successful at fostering interactions between residents that build social capital to create labor market

connections among neighbors.

VII. Discussion

        There is a long-standing interest in social capital in sociology, political science, and economics,

and a burgeoning interest in labor market networks in both sociology and economics. We believe our study

contributes to and strengthens this literature in four significant ways. Most important, we connect the two,

asking how neighborhood levels of social capital are linked to the strength of local labor market networks.

Second, we draw on a new data set to construct novel measures of social capital based on the

representation, in the neighborhood, of businesses in the non-profit sector. Third, given the multiplicity of



                                                       29
social capital measures – especially when we introduce non-profit counts across a large number of

industries, we use a machine learning algorithm to select the measures that are predictive of the strength of

local labor market networks. And fourth, we use a local labor market network measure that we have

validated in our past research showing that it is correlated with better job matches, faster re-employment

after mass layoffs, etc., and that it explicitly measures and captures the influence of the role of one’s

neighbors in helping one find a job.

         That said, there are potential limitations, mainly related to trying to address these questions in a

large-scale, quantitative study. First, we do not – nor do most network researchers – observe direct network

connections between agents. 29 Second, and as a corollary, the network measure we use does not capture

other types of network connections that may influence job finding, such as connections to former workers,

university alumnae, or military service members (e.g., Cingano and Rosolia, 2012; Laschever, 2016; Oyer

and Schaefer, 2012). And third, we cannot identify the explicit ways in which social capital – as reflected in

the measures we use – enhance labor market networks. Fourth, social capital has many possible dimensions

that we may fail to capture in our social capital measures, such as trust and norms (Coleman, 1988), and

social capital that “bridges” – connecting dissimilar people – as opposed to “bonding” – connecting similar

people (e.g., Kim et al., 2006; Putnam, 2000).

         In our view, it is critical to complement the kind of large-scale evidence we have assembled with

ethnographic and case study evidence that probes the explicit operation of labor market networks, and that

seeks to understand what influences – including explicit manifestations of different types of social capital –

the extent to which potential network members share information about jobs and workers and help people

find better job matches. One study that has critical elements of both types of evidence is the Kasinitz and

Rosenberg (1996) study of network hiring and social capital on the Red Hook, Brooklyn, waterfront. 30

Ultimately, the accumulation of evidence on labor market networks and what makes them stronger and

more effective can not only increase our understanding of behavior, but, ideally, also point to ways in


29
   A significant exception in which researchers can observe these connections is the Add Health data set (see, e.g.,
Goodreau et al., 2009).
30
   Portes (1998) discusses other similar studies.


                                                          30
which policymakers or other stakeholders can strengthen labor market networks to improve the inclusion

and integration into the labor market of groups that may have less access to good jobs.

           There may also be ways to expand on the analysis of the large-scale data we use to refine

understanding of social capital measures. For example, there is research suggesting that religious and

secular voluntary associations (like our non-profits) have different forms of social capital, 31 and religious

denominations may vary in their degree of insularity and hence the type of social capital they create

(bonding versus bridging). 32 Furthermore, the value of various sources of social capital may vary across

persons in the same neighborhood with different characteristics. In the NETS data, organizations’ names

(and hence likely identities) are not confidential, so it could be possible to do research that links specific

information on these types of organizations with modifications of our labor market network measures that

try to capture which neighbors are connected. Intersecting institutional and personal characteristics might

yield interesting new findings, but the volume of output and demands for interpretation would be

substantially greater, so we leave that for future work.




31
     See, e.g., Acevado et al. (2014), and Monsma (2009).
32
     See, e.g., Putnam and Campbell (2012).


                                                            31
                                              References
Abadie, Alberto, and Maximilian Kasy. 2018. “Choosing Among Regularized Estimators in Machine
Learning.” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Abowd, John M., Bryce Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin McKinney, Marc Roemer,
and Simon Woodcock. 2009. “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the Quarterly
Workforce Indicators.” In Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen, and Mark J. Roberts (Eds.), Producer
Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research, 149-230.
Acevado, Gabriel A., Christopher G. Ellison, and Xiaohe Xu. 2014. “Is It Really Religion? Comparing
the Main and Stress-Buffering Effects of Religious and Secular Civic Engagement on Psychological
Distress.” Society and Mental Health, 4(2), 111-128.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2002. “Who Trusts Others?” Journal of Public Economics, 85(2),
August, 207-234.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, Maxwell Palmer, and Amanda Lee. 2014. “Precinct-Level Election Data.”
Harvard Dataverse. Available at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/file.xhtml?fileId=2456565&version=1.0
(viewed March 27, 2017).
Bayer, Patrick, Stephen Ross, and Giorgio Topa. 2008. “Place of Work and Place of Residence: Informal
Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(6), December, 1150-
1196.
Belloni, Alexandre and Victor Chernozhukov. 2013. “Least Squares After Model Selection in High-
Dimension Sparse Models.” Bernoulli, 19(2), 521-547.
Brueckner, Jan K., and Ann G. Largey. 2008. “Social Interaction and Urban Sprawl.” Journal of Urban
Economics, 64(1), July, 18-34.
Calvó-Armengol, Antoni, and Matthew O. Jackson. 2007. “Networks in Labor Markets: Wage and
Employment Dynamics and Inequality.” Journal of Economic Theory, 132(1), January, 27-46.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 129(4): 1553-1623.
Cingano, Federico, and Alfonso Rosolia. 2012. “People I Know: Job Search and Social Networks.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 30(2), April, 291-332.
Coleman, James S. 1988. “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital.” American Journal of
Sociology, 94, Supplement, S95-S20.
Cotton, Kathleen. 1996. “School Size, School Climate, and Student Performance.” School Improvement
Research Series. Northwest Region Educational Laboratory. Available at
http://educationnorthwest.org/sites/default/files/SizeClimateandPerformance.pdf (viewed August 23,
2017).
Dugan, Andrew. 2015. “Trust Differs Most by Ideology for Church, Police, Presidency.” Gallup, June
30th. Available at http://www.gallup.com/poll/183875/trust-differs-ideology-church-police-
presidency.aspx?utm_source=Politics&utm_medium=newsfeed&utm_campaign=tiles (viewed March 27,
2017).
Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani, 2010. “Regularization paths for Generalized
Linear Models via Coordinate Descent,” Journal of Statistical Software 33, 1-22.
Frisch, Ragnar and Frederick V. Waugh. 1933. “Partial Time Regressions as Compared with Individual
Trends.” Econometrica, 1(4), October, 387-401.
Gardner, Pamela W., Shulamit N. Ritblatt, and James R. Beatty. 2000. “Academic Achievement and
Parental Involvement as a Function of High School Size.” The High School Journal, 83(2), December-
January, 21-27.
Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2002. “An Economic Approach to Social
Capital.” The Economic Journal, 112(384), November, F437-F58.
Goodreau, Steven M., James A. Kitts, and Martina Morris. 2009. “Birds of a Feather, or Friend of a
Friend? Using Exponential Random Graph Models to Investigate Adolescent Social Networks.”
Demography, 46(1), February, 103-125.
Graham, Matthew R., Mark J. Kutzbach, and Danielle H. Sandler. 2017. “Developing a Residence
Candidate File for Use with Employer-Employee Matched Data.” U.S. Census Bureau, Center for
Economic Studies, Discussion Papers, CES 17-40.
Granovetter, Mark S. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2004. “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
Development.” American Economic Review, 94(3), June, 526-556.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney, 2008. “Parental Education and Parental Time with
Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3), Summer, 23-46.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2007. “The New Synthesis in Moral Psychology.” Science, 316(5827), May, 998-1002.
Hellerstein, Judith K., Mark Kutzbach, and David Neumark. 2016. “Labor Market Networks and
Recovery from Mass Layoffs: Evidence from the Great Recession Period.” NBER Working Paper No.
21262.
Hellerstein, Judith K., Mark Kutzbach, and David Neumark. 2014. “Do Labor Market Networks Have an
Important Spatial Dimension?” Journal of Urban Economics, 79(3), January, 39-58.
Hellerstein, Judith K., Melissa McInerney, and David Neumark. 2011. “Neighbors and Co-Workers: The
Importance of Residential Labor Market Networks.” Journal of Labor Economics, 29(4), October, 659-
695.
Iceland, John, and Daniel H. Weinberg. 2002. “Racial and Ethnic Segregation in the United States: 1980-
2000.” Available at https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/resseg/pdf/paa_paper.pdf (viewed March
27, 2017).
Ihlanfeldt, Keith R., 2006. “A Primer on Spatial Mismatch within Urban Labor Markets.” In Arnott, R.,
McMillen, D. (Eds.), A Companion to Urban Economics, 404–417. Boston, MA: Blackwell.
Ioannides, Yannis M., and Linda Datcher Loury. 2004. “Job Information, Networks, Neighborhood
Effects, and Inequality.” Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4), December, 1056-1093.
Jackson, Matthew O. 2008. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kasinitz, Philip, and Jan Rosenberg. 1996. “Missing the Connection: Social Isolation and Employment on
the Brooklyn Waterfront.” Social Problems, 43(2), May, pp. 180-196.
Kim, D., S. V. Subramanian, and I. Kawachi. 2006. “Bonding Versus Bridging Social Capital and their
Associations with Self Rated Health: A Multilevel Analysis of 40 US Communities.” Journal of
Epidemiology & Community Health, 60(2), 116-122.
Laschever, Ron. 2013. “The Doughboys Network: Social Interactions and the Employment of World War
I Veterans.” Unpublished paper. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1205543 (viewed
May 24, 2018).
Lee, Jason D., Dennis L. Sun, Yuekai Sun, and Jonathan E. Taylor. 2016. “Exact Post-Selection
Inferences, with Application to the LASSO.” The Annals of Statistics, 44(3), 907-27.
Lochner, Kimberly, Ichiro Kawachi, and Bruce P. Kennedy. 1999. “Social Capital: A Guide to its
Measurement.” Health & Place, 5(4), December, 259-270.
Lovell, Michael C. 1963. “Seasonal Adjustment of Economic Time Series and Multiple Regression
Analysis.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58(304), 993-1010.
Meyer, John, W. Richard Scott, and David Strang. 1987. “Centralization, Fragmentation, and School
District Complexity.” Administrative Science Quarterly, 32(2), June, 186-201.
Monsma, Stephen V. 2003. “Nonprofit and Faith-Based Welfare-to-Work Programs.” Society, 40(2), 13-
18.
Montgomery, James D. 1991. “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an Economic
Analysis.” American Economic Review, 81(5), December, 1408-1418.
National Center for Education Statistics, 2012. Common Core of Data. Available
https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/pubagency.asp (viewed March 27, 2017).
Neumark, David, Brandon Wall, and Junfu Zhang. 2011. “Do Small Businesses Create More Jobs? New
Evidence for the United States from the National Establishment Time Series.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 93(3), February, 16-29.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall. 2007. “Employment Dynamics and Business
Relocation: New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series.” Research in Labor Economics,
39-83.
Onyx, Jenny, and Paul Bullen. 2000. “Measuring Social Capital in Five Communities.” Journal of
Applied Behavioral Science, 36(1), March, 23-42.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
Cambridge, U.K. Cambridge University Press.
Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer. 2012. “Firm/Employee Matching: An Industry Study of American
Lawyers.” NBER Working Paper No. 18620.
Portes, Alejandro. 1998. “Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications in Modern Sociology.” Annual
Review of Sociology, 24, 1-24.
Putnam, Robert D., 2007. “E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and Community in the Twenty-First Century. The
2006 Johan Skytte Prize Lecture.” Scandinavian Political Studies, 30(2), 137-174.
Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Putnam, Robert D., and David E. Campbell. 2012. American Grace: How Religion Divides and Unites
Us. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Putnam, Robert D. 1994. “Social Capital and Public Affairs.” Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences, 47(8), May, 5-19.
Rupasingha, Anil, Stephan J. Goetz, and David Freshwater. 2006. “The Production of Social Capital in
U.S. Counties.” The Journal of Socio-Economics, 35(1), February, 83-101.
Sharkey, Patrick, Gerard Torrats-Espinosa, and Delaram Takyar. 2017. “Community and the Crime
Decline: The Causal Effect of Local Nonprofits on Violent Crime.” American Sociological Review, 82(6),
December, 1214-1240.
Stevens, David W. 2007. “Employment that is Not Covered by State Unemployment Insurance Laws.”
Longitudinal Employer–Household Dynamics, Technical Paper No. TP-2007-04.
Tibshirani, Robert. 1996. “Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso.” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 58(1), 267-288.
Townsend, Wilbur. 2017. “ELASTICREGRESS: STATA Module to Perform Elastic Net Regression,
LASSO Regression, Ridge Regression.” Statistical Software Components S458397, Boston College
Department of Economics, revised April 16, 2018.
U.S. Census Bureau. n.d. (a). “Chapter 10: Census Tracts and Block Numbering Areas.” Available at
http://www.census.gov/geo/www/GARM/Ch10GARM.pdf (viewed December 23, 2010).
U.S. Census Bureau, n.d. (b). “School Districts Cartographic Boundary Files Descriptions and Metadata.”
Available at http://www.census.gov/geo/www/cob/sd_metadata.html (viewed December 25, 2010).
Zenou, Yves. 2013. “Spatial Versus Social Mismatch.” Journal of Urban Economics, 74, March, 113-
132.
Zenou, Yves. 2008. “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis.” In Blume, L., Durlauf, S. (Eds.), The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Second Ed. London: MacMillan.
     Table 1: Summary Statistics for Network, Transportation, Population, School, and Voting Variables, Census Tract Level
                                                                                                             Std.        25th                    75th
Variable                                         Description                                      Mean       dev.     percentile     Median   percentile
NIcW                                             Observed tract average network isolation          1.609    1.113       0.88           1.35     2.03
                                                 index, per worker
TIcW                                             Observed tract average transport isolation        0.588      0.612       0.24         0.40       0.70
                                                 index, per worker
NIcP                                             Observed tract average network isolation          1.013      0.710       0.53         0.84       1.29
                                                 index, per resident
TIcP                                             Observed tract average transport isolation        0.373      0.393       0.14         0.25       0.45
                                                 index, per resident
Number of NETS establishments                    Count                                             214.5      209.4       101          165        265
Poor                                             Proportion                                        0.170      0.140       0.06         0.13       0.25
Hispanic                                         Proportion                                        0.200      0.238       0.03         0.10       0.27
Black, non-Hispanic                              Proportion                                        0.174      0.253       0.02         0.06       0.20
Asian, non-Hispanic                              Proportion                                        0.066      0.104       0.01         0.03       0.08
Other race, non-Hispanic                         Proportion                                        0.030      0.035       0.01         0.02       0.04
Non-native                                       Proportion                                        0.159      0.141       0.05         0.11       0.23
Currently married                                Proportion                                        0.468      0.135       0.38         0.48       0.56
Education < high school                          Proportion                                        0.155      0.126       0.06         0.12       0.22
Education ≥ Bachelor’s degree                    Proportion                                        0.282      0.192       0.12         0.24       0.41
Commute < 10 minutes                             Proportion                                        0.120      0.076       0.07         0.10       0.16
Commute by driving alone                         Proportion                                        0.744      0.135       0.69         0.78       0.84
Did not move in last year                        Proportion                                        0.820      0.101       0.77         0.84       0.89
Share of housing owner-occupied                  Proportion                                        0.587      0.237       0.42         0.61       0.78
Number of districts                              Count of number of districts                      1.329      0.785       1.00         1.00       1.00
Average number of tracts in school district(s) Count of number of tracts                           1.366      2.510       0.21         0.49       1.20
Student/teacher ratio                            Ratio                                            16.880      3.425      14.51        16.11      19.28
Free/reduced-price lunch share                   Proportion                                        0.497      0.230       0.31         0.52       0.70
Majority vote share                              Proportion, maximum of Democratic or              0.681      0.136       0.57         0.65       0.77
                                                 Republican vote share
Democratic vote share                            Proportion, Democratic share of Democratic        0.635      0.182       0.50         0.62       0.77
                                                 and Republican votes
Voter turnout                                    Proportion voting Democratic and                  0.528      0.214       0.37         0.52       0.67
                                                 Republican as share of voting age population
Note: There are approximately 34,000 Census tract observations. The network measures are calculated using the LEHD Infrastructure Files for jobs
held in 2010 at the beginning of the second quarter. For details on the residence-based network isolation measures, see Equations 2 and 3 in Section II.
For details on the residence-based transport isolation measures, see Section III. Establishment counts are totaled by Census tract from the National
Establishment Time Series. Census tract demographic characteristics are constructed from the 2008-2012 ACS 5-year file. Measures of school districts
and voting are derived from the Department of Education’s Common Core of Data and the Harvard Election Data Archive (HEDA), respectively.
                    Table 2: NETS Tabulations of 6-Digit NAICS Industries with > 10 Percent of Establishments Non-Profit
                                                                                                                                             Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS    NAICS Description (Examples)                                                                                                         Count       Estab.’s   Profit
114210   Animal trapping, commercial; Fishing preserves; Game preserves, commercial; Game retreats; Hunting preserves                           139        1063      13.1%
115111   Cotton ginning; Ginning cotton                                                                                                         103         728      14.0%
221122   Distribution of electric power; Electric power brokers; Electric power distribution systems                                            361        1727      20.9%
221310   Canal, irrigation; Filtration plant, water; Irrigation system operation; Water distribution (except irrigation)                       1744        8586      20.3%
221320   Collection, treatment, and disposal of waste through a sewer system; Sewage disposal plants; Sewage treatment plants or                292        1938      15.1%
         facilities; Sewer systems; Waste collection, treatment, and disposal through a sewer system
311313   Beet pulp, dried, manufacturing; Molasses made from sugar beets; Sugar, granulated, made from sugar beets                              14           51      27.5%
485113   Bus line, local (except mixed mode); Bus services, urban and suburban (except mixed mode); Bus transit systems (except                 78          696      11.2%
         mixed mode); City bus services (except mixed mode); Commuter bus operation (except mixed mode)
519120   Archives; Bookmobiles; Circulating libraries; Film archives; Lending libraries; Libraries (except motion picture stock                3470        16800     20.7%
         footage, motion picture commercial distribution); Motion picture film libraries, archives; Reference libraries
522294   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC); Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA); FNMA (Federal                            38          313      12.1%
         National Mortgage Association); GNMA (Government National Mortgage Association)
523991   Administrators of private estates; Bank trust offices; Escrow agencies (except real estate); Fiduciary agencies (except real           383        3240      11.8%
         estate); Personal investments trust administration; Securities custodians; Trust administration, personal investment
522130   Corporate credit unions; Credit unions; Federal credit unions; State credit unions; Unions, credit                                    2962        12821     23.1%
524114   Dental insurance carriers, direct; Group hospitalization plans without providing health care services; Health insurance                397         3497     11.4%
         carriers, direct; Hospital and medical service plans, direct, without providing health care services
525110   Employee benefit pension plans; Funds, employee benefit pension; Funds, pension; Pension funds; Pension plans (e.g.,                   98          863      11.4%
         employee benefit, retirement); Plans, pension; Retirement pension plans; Union pension funds
525120   Union health and welfare funds                                                                                                          29         159      18.2%
525920   Bankruptcy estates; Personal estates (i.e., managing assets); Personal investment trusts; Personal trusts; Private estates (i.e.,      230         814      28.3%
         administering on behalf of beneficiaries); Testamentary trusts; Trusts, estates, and agency accounts
531311   Apartment managers’ offices; Condominium managers’ offices, residential; Cooperative apartment managers’ offices;                      663        3239      20.5%
         Managers’ offices, residential condominium; Managers’ offices, residential real estate
541720   Historic and cultural preservation research and development services; Humanities research and development services;                   1183        8242      14.4%
         Social science research and development services
561499   Address bar coding services; Bar code imprinting services; Fundraising campaign organization services on a contract or fee             796        4497      17.7%
         basis; Mail consolidation services; Mail presorting services; Teleconferencing services
561591   Convention and visitors bureaus; Convention bureaus; Tourism bureaus; Tourist information bureaus; Visitors bureaus                    211         808      26.1%
611110   Elementary and secondary schools; High schools; Junior high schools; Military academies, elementary or secondary;                     30846      119478     25.8%
         Montessori schools, elementary or secondary; Parochial schools, elementary or secondary
611210   Academies, junior college; Colleges, community; Colleges, junior; Community colleges; Community colleges offering a wide               838        2691      31.1%
         variety of academic and technical training; Junior colleges
611310   Academies, college or university; Business colleges or schools offering baccalaureate or graduate degrees; Colleges (except           5666        17482     32.4%
         junior colleges); Colleges, universities, and professional schools; Law schools; Medical schools
611513   Apprenticeship training programs; Carpenters’ apprenticeship training; Craft union apprenticeship training programs;                   426        3241      13.1%
         Electricians’ apprenticeship training; Trade union apprenticeship training programs
611630   Foreign language schools; Language schools; Schools, language; Second language instruction; Sign language instruction;                 99          910      10.9%
         Sign language schools
                                                                                                                                           Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS    NAICS Description (Examples)                                                                                                       Count       Estab.’s   Profit
611699   Bible schools (except degree granting); CPR (cardiac pulmonary resuscitation) training and certification; Diction schools;           343        3166      10.8%
         Life guard training; Public speaking training; Yoga instruction, camps, or schools
611710   College selection services; Educational guidance counseling services; Educational support services; Educational testing             4544        24088     18.9%
         evaluation services; Educational testing services; School bus attendant services; Student exchange programs
621410   Abortion clinics; Birth control clinics; Childbirth preparation classes; Counseling services, family planning; Family planning       619        1420      43.6%
         centers; Family planning counseling services; Fertility clinics; Pregnancy counseling centers
621420   Alcoholism treatment centers and clinics (except hospitals), outpatient; Drug addiction treatment centers and clinics (except       1926        6128      31.4%
         hospitals), outpatient; Mental health centers and clinics (except hospitals), outpatient
621491   Group hospitalization plans providing health care services; Health maintenance organization (HMO) medical centers and                252        1325      19.0%
         clinics; HMO (health maintenance organization) medical centers and clinics
621498   Biofeedback centers and clinics, outpatient; Clinics/centers of health practitioners from more than one industry practicing          907        4453      20.4%
         within the same establishment; Community health centers and clinics, outpatient
621610   Home care of elderly, medical; Home health agencies; Home health care agencies; Home nursing services (except private               1677        16718     10.0%
         practices); Hospice care services, in home; Nurse associations, visiting
621910   Air ambulance services; Ambulance services, air or ground; Emergency medical transportation services, air or ground;                1197        5342      22.4%
         Rescue services, air; Rescue services, medical
621991   Blood banks; Blood donor stations; Eye banks; Organ banks, body; Organ donor centers, body; Sperm banks, human                       427        1570      27.2%
622110   Children’s hospitals, general; General medical and surgical hospitals; Hospitals, general medical and surgical; Hospitals,          3986        9913      40.2%
         general pediatric; Osteopathic hospitals
622210   Alcoholism rehabilitation hospitals; Children’s hospitals, psychiatric or substance abuse; Drug addiction rehabilitation             794        3191      24.9%
         hospitals; Hospitals for alcoholics; Hospitals, addiction; Hospitals, substance abuse; Mental health hospitals
622310   Cancer hospitals; Children’s hospitals, specialty (except psychiatric, substance abuse); Chronic disease hospitals; Extended        1004        5632      17.8%
         care hospitals (except mental, substance abuse); Eye, ear, nose, and throat hospitals
623110   Convalescent homes or convalescent hospitals (except psychiatric); Group homes for the disabled with nursing care; Homes            3291        23883     13.8%
         for the aged with nursing care; Hospices, inpatient care; Nursing homes; Rest homes with nursing care
623210   Group homes, intellectual and developmental disability; Hospitals, intellectual and developmental disability; Intellectual and       568        1817      31.3%
         developmental disability facilities (e.g., homes, hospitals, intermediate care facilities), residential
623220   Alcoholism rehabilitation facilities (except licensed hospitals), residential; Drug addiction rehabilitation facilities (except      534        1227      43.5%
         licensed hospitals), residential; Mental health halfway houses; Substance abuse facilities, residential
623312   Assisted-living facilities without on-site nursing care facilities; Homes for the aged without nursing care; Homes for the           706        3266      21.6%
         elderly without nursing care; Old age homes without nursing care; Old soldiers’ homes without nursing care
623990   Boot camps for delinquent youth; Boys’ and girls’ residential facilities (e.g., homes, ranches, villages); Child group foster       2621        10163     25.8%
         homes; Children’s villages; Group foster homes for children; Homes for unwed mothers
 6241    Individual and family services
624110   Adoption agencies; Adoption services, child; Aid to families with dependent children (AFDC); Child guidance agencies;               2913        7115      40.9%
         Child welfare services; Community centers (except recreational only), youth; Foster care placement agencies
624120   Activity centers for disabled persons, the elderly, and persons diagnosed with intellectual and developmental disabilities;         5305        14778     35.9%
         Centers, senior citizens’; Community centers (except recreational only), adult; Senior citizens centers
624190   Alcoholism and drug addiction self-help organizations; Crisis intervention centers; Exoffender rehabilitation agencies;             8478        32377     26.2%
         Exoffender self-help organizations; Family social service agencies; Family welfare services
624210   Community meals, social services; Food banks; Meal delivery programs; Mobile soup kitchens; Soup kitchens                            183         499      36.7%
624230   Disaster relief services; Emergency relief services; Emergency shelters for victims of domestic or international disasters or        582        1403      41.5%
         conflicts; Immigrant resettlement services; Refugee settlement services; Relief services, disaster
                                                                                                                                              Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS    NAICS Description (Examples)                                                                                                          Count       Estab.’s   Profit
624310   Job counseling, vocational rehabilitation or habilitation; Sheltered workshops (i.e., work experience centers); Vocational             2919        9586      30.5%
         habilitation job counseling; Vocational habilitation job training facilities (except schools)
624410   Babysitting services in provider’s own home, child day care; Babysitting services, child day care; Child day care centers;             7472        58746     12.7%
         Child day care services; Head start programs, separate from schools; Preschool centers
711110   Broadway theaters; Comedy troupes; Community theaters; Dinner theaters; Improvisational theaters; Musical theater                      1004        2500      40.1%
         companies or groups; Opera companies; Puppet theaters; Repertory companies, theatrical; Theaters, musical
711120   Ballet companies; Classical dance companies; Contemporary dance companies; Dance productions, live theatrical; Dance                    76          155      49.0%
         theaters; Dance troupes; Folk dance companies; Interpretive dance companies; Jazz dance companies
711130   Bands; Chamber musical groups; Choirs; Classical musical artists, independent; Classical musical groups; Concert artists,               932        7566      12.3%
         independent; Country musical groups; Drum and bugle corps (i.e., drill teams); Symphony orchestras
711211   Baseball teams, professional or semiprofessional; Basketball teams, professional or semiprofessional; Boxing clubs,                     269        2009      13.4%
         professional or semiprofessional; Football teams, professional or semiprofessional
711310   Air show managers with facilities; Arena operators; Arts event managers with facilities; Arts event organizers with facilities;         367        2695      13.6%
         Arts festival managers with facilities; Boxing event organizers with facilities; Sports arena operators
711320   Arts event organizers without facilities; Arts festival organizers without facilities; Arts festival promoters without facilities;     1010        4715      21.4%
         Boxing event organizers without facilities; Sports event managers without facilities
712110   Art museums; Community museums; Contemporary art museums; Herbariums; Historical museums; Marine museums;                              3207        12009     26.7%
         Natural history museums; Natural science museums; Planetariums; Wax museums
712120   Archeological sites (i.e., public display); Battlefields; Heritage villages; Historical forts; Historical sites; Pioneer villages       555        1422      39.0%
712130   Animal exhibits, live; Animal safari parks; Aquariums; Arboreta; Arboretums; Aviaries; Botanical gardens; Conservatories,               243         811      30.0%
         botanical; Gardens, zoological or botanical; Petting zoos; Wild animal parks; Zoological gardens; Zoos
713910   Country clubs; Golf and country clubs; Golf courses (except miniature, pitch-n-putt)                                                    2772       13310     20.8%
713990   Amateur sports teams, recreational; Athletic clubs (i.e., sports teams) not operating sports facilities, recreational; Baseball       3413692      28640     12.9%
         clubs, recreational; Boating clubs without marinas; Bridge clubs, recreational; Lawn bowling clubs
721214   Boys’ camps (except day, instructional); Camps (except day, instructional); Children’s camps (except day, instructional);               999        4835      20.7%
         Dude ranches; Girls’ camps (except day, instructional); Hunting camps with accommodation facilities
721310   Boarding houses; Dormitories, off campus; Fraternity houses; Residential clubs; Sorority houses; Workers’ dormitories                   428        2512      17.0%
812220   Animal cemeteries; Cemeteries; Columbariums; Crematories (except combined with funeral homes); Mausoleums;                              981        5876      16.7%
         Memorial gardens (i.e., burial places); Pet cemeteries
813110   Bible societies; Churches; Convents (except schools); Missions, religious organization; Monasteries (except schools);                  73178      228934     32.0%
         Mosques, religious; Places of worship; Shrines, religious; Synagogues; Temples, religious
813211   Charitable trusts, awarding grants; Community foundations; Educational trusts, awarding grants; Philanthropic trusts,                  4761        12624     37.7%
         awarding grants; Trusts, educational, awarding grants; Trusts, religious, awarding grants
813219   Community chests; Federated charities; United fund councils; United funds for colleges                                                 1812         3277     55.3%
813312   Animal welfare associations or leagues; Environmental advocacy organizations; Humane societies                                         1642         3672     44.7%
813319   Accident prevention associations; Antipoverty advocacy organizations; Aviation advocacy organizations; Community action                6837        16606     41.2%
         advocacy organizations; Drug abuse prevention advocacy organizations; Public safety advocacy organizations
813410   Alumni associations; Alumni clubs; Book discussion clubs; Booster clubs; Civic associations; Classic car clubs; Fraternal              14839       44974     33.0%
         organizations; Parent-teachers’ associations; Retirement associations, social; Scouting organizations
813910   Agricultural organizations (except youth farming organizations, farm granges); Animal breeders’ associations; Bankers’                 9376        23707     39.5%
         associations; Better business bureaus; Boards of trade; Business associations; Chambers of commerce
813920   Accountants’ associations; Architects’ associations; Bar associations; Health professionals’ associations; Learned societies;          3946        12231     32.2%
         Medical associations; Professional associations; Scientific associations; Social workers’ associations
                                                                                                                                                 Non-Profit        Total        % Non-
  NAICS       NAICS Description (Examples)                                                                                                          Count         Estab.’s       Profit
  813930      Federation of workers, labor organizations; Federations of labor; Industrial labor unions; Labor federations; Labor unions            2892           11966         24.2%
              (except apprenticeship programs); Trade unions, local; Unions (except apprenticeship programs), labor
   813940     Campaign organizations, political; Local political organizations; PACs (Political Action Committees); Political action                 328            1857         17.7%
              committees (PACs); Political campaign organizations; Political organizations or clubs; Political parties
   813990     Athletic associations, regulatory; Condominium owners’ associations; Cooperative owners’ associations; Homeowners’                    7886           17947         43.9%
              associations; Sports governing bodies; Tenants’ associations (except advocacy)
   921110     Advisory commissions, executive government; City and town managers’ offices; Executive offices, federal, state, and local             6387           29792         21.4%
              (e.g., governor, mayor, president); Governors’ offices; Mayor’s offices
   921120     Advisory commissions, legislative; Boards of supervisors, county and local; City and town councils; Congress of the United             829            5369         15.4%
              States; County commissioners; Legislative assemblies; Study commissions, legislative
   921130     Assessor’s offices, tax; Budget agencies, government; Federal Reserve Board of Governors; Internal Revenue Service;                   1026            6165         16.6%
              Property tax assessors’ offices; Taxation departments; Treasurers’ offices, government
   921140     Executive and legislative office combinations; Legislative and executive office combinations                                           124            1172         10.6%
   921190     Auditor’s offices, government; Civil rights commissions; Civil service commissions; Election boards; General public                   1167            7710         15.1%
              administration; Human rights commissions, government; Indian affairs programs, government
   922110     Administrative courts; Circuit courts; City or county courts; Sheriffs’ offices, court functions only; Traffic courts                 1277           10513         12.1%
   922120     DEA (Drug Enforcement Administration); Drug enforcement agencies and offices; Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI);                  3125           14154         22.1%
              Housing police, government; Park police; Police departments (except American Indian or Alaska Native);
   922130     Attorney generals’ offices; District attorneys’ offices; Legal counsel offices, government; Public defenders’ offices; Public          359            3016         11.9%
              prosecutors’ offices; Solicitors’ offices, government; U. S. attorneys’ offices
   922160     Ambulance and fire service combined; Fire and rescue service; Firefighting (except forest), government and volunteer                  4715           18083         26.1%
              (except private); Firefighting services (except forest and private)
   922190     Criminal justice statistics centers, government; Disaster preparedness and management offices, government; Law enforcement             371            2585         14.4%
              statistics centers, government; Public safety statistics centers, government
   923110     Certification of schools and teachers; County supervisors of education (except school boards); Education program                       385            2691         14.3%
              administration; Education statistics centers, government; State education departments; Teacher certification bureaus
   923120     Community health programs administration; Coroners’ offices; Environmental health program administration; Food service                 915            7592         12.1%
              health inspections; Health planning and development agencies, government; Health program administration
   924110     Enforcement of environmental and pollution control regulations; Environmental protection program administration                       1033            5232         19.7%
   925110     Building standards agencies, government; Housing authorities, nonoperating; Housing programs, planning and                            1268            5119         24.8%
              development, government
   925120     Community development agencies, government; County development agencies; Land redevelopment agencies, government;                      501            1852         27.1%
              Redevelopment land agencies, government; Regional planning and development program administration
   926110     Arts and cultural program administration, government; Consumer protection offices; Economic development agencies,                      257            2224         11.6%
              government; Energy development and conservation agencies, nonoperating; Trade commissions, government
   926130     Communications commissions; Federal Communications Commission (FCC); Irrigation districts, nonoperating; Licensing                     275            1167         23.6%
              and inspecting of utilities; Regulation of utilities; Sanitation districts, nonoperating
Note: Tabulations based on the National Establishment Time Series. Percent non-profit is based on observations with non-missing legal status field. For more complete descriptions,
see on-line appendix and https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/ (viewed March 30, 2017). In the NETS data, some establishments were never assigned a 6-digit code. So instead of
dropping these, we include them as is. One of these (NAICS 4-digit code 6241) appears in our list of industries with a high share of non-profit establishments. Industries highlighted
in boldface were retained in the Elastic Net estimation, with significant effects, as explained in notes to Table 4.
 Table 3: Demographic, Prior Social Capital Measures, and Neighborhood Labor Market Network Regressions, Using Per Worker
                             Network Measure NIcW and Per Person Network Measure NIcP, OLS Estimates
                                                        NIcW                                                          NIcP
                                                                             + state FEs                                              + state FEs
Variables                           (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)
Poor                             1.080***      1.040***       0.935***         1.100***        0.345***      0.314***       0.390***     0.472***
                                 (0.099)       (0.096)        (0.058)          (0.058)         (0.054)       (0.053)        (0.031)      (0.031)
Hispanic                        -1.130***     -0.645***      -0.534***        -0.564***       -0.728***     -0.363***      -0.285***    -0.284***
                                 (0.056)       (0.060)        (0.044)          (0.053)         (0.032)       (0.033)        (0.023)      (0.029)
Black, non-Hispanic             -0.753***     -0.397***         0.032           -0.014        -0.577***     -0.347***        -0.018       -0.006
                                 (0.032)       (0.041)        (0.027)          (0.033)         (0.019)       (0.024)        (0.015)      (0.019)
Asian, non-Hispanic              0.282***      0.687***       0.608***         0.487***        0.142**       0.473***       0.423***     0.366***
                                 (0.106)       (0.108)        (0.094)          (0.106)         (0.061)       (0.061)        (0.053)      (0.061)
Other race, non-Hispanic          -0.388        0.491        -0.430***        -0.585***       -0.881***       -0.254       -0.492***    -0.469***
                                 (0.424)       (0.418)        (0.140)          (0.189)         (0.212)       (0.205)        (0.074)      (0.096)
Non-native                       0.407***      0.725***       1.102***         1.040***        0.282***      0.464***       0.702***     0.642***
                                 (0.094)       (0.093)        (0.081)          (0.085)         (0.054)       (0.053)        (0.044)      (0.047)
Currently married                2.750***      1.820***       0.727***         0.817***        1.540***      0.927***       0.313***     0.364***
                                 (0.135)       (0.128)        (0.062)          (0.061)         (0.075)       (0.072)        (0.035)      (0.034)
Education < high school          0.429***      0.510***       0.696***         0.810***          0.078       0.138**        0.326***     0.427***
                                 (0.101)       (0.100)        (0.065)          (0.066)         (0.060)       (0.058)        (0.037)      (0.038)
Education ≥                       0.048        0.211***       0.819***         0.938***         -0.052         0.024        0.463***     0.571***
  Bachelor’s degree              (0.055)       (0.057)        (0.042)          (0.043)         (0.033)       (0.033)        (0.024)      (0.025)
Commute < 10 minutes             5.100***      4.660***       1.070***         1.020***        3.110***      2.820***       0.621***     0.572***
                                 (0.121)       (0.118)        (0.072)          (0.072)         (0.073)       (0.071)        (0.040)      (0.040)
Commute by driving alone        -0.504***     -0.667***      -0.478***        -0.300***       -0.153***     -0.224***      -0.192***    -0.071***
                                 (0.074)       (0.073)        (0.044)          (0.046)         (0.041)       (0.040)        (0.024)      (0.025)
Share did not move               1.080***       1.33***       0.824***         0.433***        0.780***      0.910***       0.574***     0.289***
  in last year                   (0.094)       (0.094)        (0.061)          (0.063)         (0.054)       (0.054)        (0.036)      (0.038)
Share housing                     0.090*        0.038         0.282***         0.326***        0.072**         0.033        0.178***     0.210***
  owner-occupied                 (0.052)       (0.050)        (0.032)          (0.033)         (0.031)       (0.030)        (0.019)      (0.020)
Observed tract average              …             …           1.250***         1.260***           …              …          1.230***     1.250***
  transport isolation index,                                  (0.014)          (0.015)                                      (0.011)      (0.011)
  per worker
Count of NETS                       …             …           0.061***         0.064***           …              …          0.035***     0.037***
  establishments (100s)                                       (0.006)          (0.006)                                      (0.003)      (0.004)
Number of districts                 …          0.045***       0.058***         0.059***           …          0.031***       0.040***     0.036***
                                               (0.008)        (0.007)          (0.007)                       (0.005)        (0.005)      (0.005)
Average number of tracts            …         -0.021***       -0.005**        -0.006***           …         -0.010***        -0.002      -0.002**
  in school district(s)                        (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.002)                       (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)
Student/teacher ratio               …         -0.039***      -0.024***         -0.0004            …         -0.032***      -0.019***      -0.002
                                               (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.003)                       (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.002)
Free/reduced-price                  …         -0.180***      -0.144***        -0.069***           …         -0.204***      -0.147***    -0.100***
  lunch share                                  (0.032)        (0.022)          (0.023)                       (0.019)        (0.013)      (0.014)
Majority vote share                 …          0.705***         0.002           0.074             …          0.458***       0.0002        0.056*
                                               (0.093)        (0.057)          (0.058)                       (0.055)        (0.033)      (0.034)
Democratic vote share               …         -1.660***      -0.859***        -0.878***           …         -1.050***      -0.574***    -0.620***
                                               (0.076)        (0.046)          (0.055)                       (0.045)        (0.027)      (0.032)
Voter turnout                       …          0.200***        0.039*           0.032             …          0.151***       0.042***      0.032**
                                               (0.030)        (0.022)          (0.022)                       (0.018)        (0.013)        (0.013)
R2                                0.284         0.322           0.686           0.700            0.326         0.373          0.721         0.734
Notes: Results are for Ordinary Least Squares with robust standard errors in parentheses. There are approximately 34,000 Census tract
observations. See Tables 1 and 2 for variable definitions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level.
 Table 4: Social Capital and Neighborhood Labor Market Network Regressions, Using Per Worker Network
          Measure NIcW or Per Person Network Measure NIcP, Elastic Net with Alternative Controls
                                                     NIcW                                   NIcP
                                                                     + state FEs                  + state FEs
Variables                                    (1)       (2)       (3)             (4)      (2’)        (4’)
Poor                                       1.100†    0.921†    1.420†          1.080†    0.392†      0.470†
                                          (0.057)   (0.046)   (0.059)         (0.046)   (0.027)     (0.028)
Hispanic                                  -0.593†   -0.484†   -0.560†         -0.518†   -0.262†     -0.264†
                                          (0.039)   (0.030)   (0.045)         (0.033)   (0.017)     (0.020)
Black, non-Hispanic                       -0.532†   0.0871†   -0.574†
                                          (0.035)   (0.025)   (0.038)
Asian, non-Hispanic                        0.745†    0.637†    0.506†          0.534†    0.440†     0.388†
                                          (0.072)   (0.051)   (0.079)         (0.056)   (0.031)    (0.033)
Other race, non-Hispanic                            -0.308†    -0.328         -0.537†   -0.416†    -0.436†
                                                    (0.105)   (0.179)         (0.125)   (0.062)    (0.075)
Non-native                                0.631†     1.130†    0.690†          1.050†    0.706†     0.642†
                                          (0.071)   (0.053)   (0.077)         (0.056)   (0.032)    (0.034)
Currently married                         2.030†     0.746†    2.080†          0.808†    0.321†     0.354†
                                          (0.066)   (0.051)   (0.068)         (0.051)   (0.030)    (0.031)
Education < high school                              0.519†                    0.645†    0.239†     0.333†
                                                    (0.063)                   (0.063)   (0.037)    (0.038)
Education ≥ Bachelor’s degree                        0.806†                    0.918†    0.467†     0.578†
                                                    (0.033)                   (0.032)   (0.019)    (0.019)
Commute < 10 minutes                       4.040†    1.000†    3.730†          0.964†    0.575†     0.545†
                                          (0.077)   (0.056)   (0.076)         (0.055)   (0.033)    (0.033)
Commute by driving alone                  -0.664†   -0.486†   -0.410†         -0.344†   -0.206†    -0.119†
                                          (0.049)   (0.035)   (0.052)         (0.036)   (0.021)    (0.022)
Share did not move in last year            1.280†    0.735†    0.673†          0.402†    0.516†     0.272†
                                          (0.062)   (0.050)   (0.072)         (0.052)   (0.030)    (0.031)
Share housing owner-occupied                         0.315†    0.223†          0.336†    0.195†     0.221†
                                                    (0.027)   (0.038)         (0.027)   (0.016)    (0.016)
Observed tract average transport            …        1.250†      …             1.250†    1.230†     1.240†
 isolation index, per worker                        (0.007)                   (0.007)   (0.006)    (0.006)
Count of NETS establishments (100s)         …        0.074†      …             0.073†    0.047†     0.048†
                                                    (0.003)                   (0.003)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Number of districts                        0.033†    0.053†    0.043†          0.055†    0.035†     0.032†
                                          (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.007)         (0.005)    (0.03)    (0.003)
Average number of tracts in               -0.017†   -0.005†   -0.020†         -0.006†    -0.002     -0.002
  school district(s)                      (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)         (0.002)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Student/teacher ratio                     -0.035†   -0.022†   -0.027†                   -0.018†
                                          (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.004)                   (0.001)
Free/reduced-price lunch share            -0.111†   -0.135†                    -0.059   -0.133†    -0.089†
                                          (0.029)   (0.020)                   (0.020)   (0.012)    (0.012)
Majority vote share                        0.753†              0.952†
                                          (0.067)             (0.067)
Democratic vote share                     -1.510†   -0.790†   -1.700†         -0.789†   -0.514†    -0.536†
                                          (0.052)   (0.033)   (0.059)         (0.031)   (0.018)    (0.019)
Voter turnout                                                                            0.038†
                                                                                        (0.012)
NAICS codes (description, see Table 2)
114210 (fishing preserves,                 0.084†              0.094†
 hunting preserves)                       (0.038)             (0.037)
115111 (cotton ginning)                    0.245†    0.101     0.296†        0.131       0.061      0.080
                                          (0.123)   (0.086)   (0.119)       (0.084)     (0.051)    (0.050)
221122 (distribution of electric power)             -0.131†                 -0.117†     -0.068†    -0.061†
                                                    (0.028)                 (0.028)     (0.017)    (0.017)
221310 (irrigation system operation,       0.051†              0.046†
 water distribution)                      (0.013)             (0.013)
221320 (sewage disposal, waste             0.126†              0.093†
 collection)                              (0.035)             (0.004)
Continued on next page.
Table 4 (continued)
                                                                NIcW                                 NIcP
                                                                        + state Fes                     + state FEs
NAICS codes (description-see Table 2)         (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)      (2’)           (4’)
522294 (Federal National Mortgage                      -0.062                     -0.059    -0.023         -0.023
 Association, etc.)                                   (0.036)                    (0.036)   (0.022)        (0.022)
524114 (health insurance carriers)                     -0.015      -0.030†        -0.010
                                                      (0.010)      (0.014)       (0.010)
525110 (union pension funds)                                                                0.031†
                                                                                           (0.013)
525120 (union health and                     0.102     0.231†       0.124        0.236†     0.171†           0.170†
 welfare funds)                             (0.082)   (0.058)      (0.080)      (0.056)    (0.035)          (0.034)
531311 (apartment managers offices,          0.029     -0.013       0.023       -0.031†                      -0.015
 condominium managers offices)              (0.016)   (0.011)      (0.016)      (0.011)                     (0.007)
541720 (social sciences research and                  -0.020†                   -0.022†    -0.018†          -0.016†
 development services)                                (0.007)                   (0.007)    (0.004)          (0.004)
561499 (fundraising campaign                          -0.022†                   -0.019†    -0.012†           -0.011
 organization services)                               (0.092)                   (0.009)    (0.006)          (0.005)
611110 (elementary, junior, secondary        0.045†    0.013†       0.040†       0.010†     0.009†           0.007†
  schools)                                  (0.004)   (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.002)          (0.002)
611310 (colleges, universities)             -0.012†    -0.004      -0.014†       -0.003                      -0.002
                                            (0.003)   (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)                     (0.001)
611513 (apprenticeship training             -0.063†   -0.025†      -0.059†      -0.027†     -0.012           -0.012
 programs)                                  (0.017)   (0.012)      (0.016)      (0.012)    (0.007)          (0.007)
611630 (foreign language schools)                                                -0.031    -0.046†          -0.042†
                                                       -0.023                   (0.017)    (0.010)          (0.010)
611699 (Bible schools, yoga                  0.024    (0.017)       0.039†
  instruction)                              (0.012)                (0.012)
611710 (education support and                0.014†    -0.004       0.014†       -0.006    -0.008†          -0.007†
  testing services)                         (0.005)   (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.004)    (0.002)          (0.002)
621498 (clinics/centers of health           -0.034†    -0.012       -0.027       -0.011     -0.009           -0.009
 practitioners, community health centers)   (0.016)   (0.011)      (0.016)      (0.011)    (0.007)          (0.007)
621610 (home health agencies)                         -0.018†                   -0.014†    -0.010†          -0.008†
                                                      (0.005)                   (0.005)    (0.003)          (0.003)
621910 (ambulance or rescue                  0.070†    0.027†       0.056†                  0.019†
  services)                                 (0.016)   (0.011)      (0.016)                 (0.007)
622310 (children’s hospitals)                          0.022†       0.022        0.021†     0.015†           0.012†
                                                      (0.009)      (0.013)      (0.010)    (0.006)          (0.006)
623110 (nursing homes, group homes,          0.032†    0.010†       0.033†                  0.008†           0.008†
  convalescent homes)                       (0.006)   (0.004)      (0.006)                 (0.003)          (0.003)
623990 (boot camps, group foster                      -0.016†                   -0.017†    -0.009†          -0.009†
 homes)                                               (0.007)                   (0.007)    (0.004)          (0.004)
6241 (individual and family services)                 -0.009†                   -0.011†                     -0.007†
                                                      (0.003)                   (0.003)                     (0.002)
624190 (alcoholism and drug addiction                 -0.006†       -0.007                 -0.005†
 self-help organizations)                             (0.002)      (0.003)                 (0.001)
624310 (vocational habilitation job                   -0.019†                    -0.015    -0.014†          -0.010†
 counseling)                                          (0.008)                   (0.007)    (0.005)          (0.004)
624410 (child care and preschool             0.005†   -0.030†       0.015†      -0.019†    -0.018†          -0.011†
  centers, Head Start)                      (0.003)   (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.001)          (0.001)
711120 (ballet companies,                   -0.249†                -0.204†       -0.076
 dance troupes)                             (0.079)                (0.076)      (0.054)
711130 (chamber music groups)                0.021†    0.011†       0.025†       0.012†     0.005†           0.006†
                                            (0.005)   (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.003)    (0.002)          (0.002)
711211 (baseball teams, football teams)     -0.045†                 -0.031                                   -0.011
                                            (0.017)                (0.017)                                  (0.007)
711310 (arena operators, sports arena        -0.034
 operators)                                 (0.018)
712110 (art museums, historical              0.012     0.016†       0.015†       0.013†     0.006†
 museums)                                   (0.007)   (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.005)    (0.003)
Continued on next page.
Table 4 (continued)
                                                                        NIcW                                         NIcP
                                                                                  + state FEs                              + state FEs
NAICS codes (description-see Table 2)              (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)               (2’)            (4’)
713910 (country clubs and golf                   0.170†        0.115†        0.173†         0.113†             0.071†         0.069†
  courses)                                      (0.015)       (0.010)       (0.014)        (0.010)            (0.006)        (0.006)
713990 (amateur/recreational sports              0.045†                      0.039†
  teams, and sports-related clubs)              (0.006)                     (0.005)
721214 (children’s camps, vacation               0.071†        0.050†        0.064†         0.051†             0.033†         0.032†
 camps)                                         (0.023)       (0.016)       (0.023)        (0.016)            (0.010)        (0.010)
812220 (cemeteries, memorial                     0.045†                      0.036†                            0.008
  gardens)                                      (0.014)                     (0.013)                           (0.006)
813110 (churches, mosques,                       0.027†        0.004†        0.029†         0.006†             0.002†         0.003†
  synagogues, missions)                         (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.001)
813211 (charitable trusts, community             0.033†        0.026†        0.044†         0.025†             0.009†         0.009†
 foundations)                                   (0.007)       (0.005)       (0.007)        (0.005)            (0.003)        (0.003)
813312 (humane societies)                                     -0.031†                      -0.027†            -0.020†         -0.015
                                                              (0.013)                      (0.013)            (0.008)        (0.008)
813319 (advocacy organizations)                 -0.028†                     -0.022†                           -0.008†         -0.005
                                                (0.004)                     (0.007)                           (0.003)        (0.003)
813410 (hobby clubs, Scouts, PTAs,               0.023†        0.012†        0.022†         0.011†             0.005†         0.005†
  civic and fraternal associations)             (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.002)            (0.002)        (0.002)
813920 (professional associations)              -0.023†       -0.014†       -0.017†        -0.013†            -0.007†        -0.006†
                                                (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.005)            (0.003)        (0.003)
813930 (labor unions)                                          0.011†                       0.012†             0.006†         0.007†
                                                              (0.004)                      (0.004)            (0.003)        (0.003)
813940 (campaign organizations,                 -0.068†       -0.045†       -0.061†        -0.041†            -0.019†        -0.019†
  political organizations, PACs)                (0.019)       (0.013)       (0.018)        (0.013)            (0.008)        (0.008)
813990 (homeowners’ associations)                             -0.008†                      -0.007†            -0.006†        -0.005†
                                                              (0.002)                      (0.002)            (0.001)        (0.001)
921110 (advisory commissions, city,              0.042†        0.031†        0.043†         0.032†             0.019†         0.019†
  executive, and mayors’ offices)               (0.008)       (0.006)       (0.008)        (0.006)            (0.003)        (0.003)
921120 (city and town councils)                                0.035†                       0.026†             0.023†         0.016†
                                                              (0.012)                      (0.011)            (0.007)        (0.007)
921190 (auditor’s offices, government,          -0.027†       -0.023†        -0.016        -0.018†            -0.011†         -0.008
 civil rights commissions)                      (0.010)       (0.007)       (0.009)        (0.007)            (0.004)        (0.004)
922120 (housing police, park police,             0.035†        0.040†        0.030†         0.032†             0.022†         0.019†
 police departments)                            (0.012)       (0.009)       (0.012)        (0.009)            (0.005)        (0.005)
922160 (fire and rescue services                 0.133†        0.063†        0.101†         0.036†             0.043†         0.026†
  including volunteer fire dept.’s)             (0.013)       (0.009)       (0.012)        (0.009)            (0.005)        (0.005)
923120 (health planning and                                                 -0.016†         -0.007                            -0.006
 development agencies)                                                      (0.008)        (0.006)                           (0.003)
924110 (environment protection                   0.026†        0.021†        0.022          0.024†             0.012†         0.014†
 program administration)                        (0.012)       (0.008)       (0.012)        (0.008)            (0.005)        (0.005)
925110 (housing programs, planning               0.061†        0.019         0.053†          0.011             0.005
 and development)                               (0.017)       (0.012)       (0.016)        (0.012)            (0.007)
926110 (arts/cultural, econ. devel.,            -0.060†       -0.049†       -0.059†        -0.050†            -0.028†        -0.028†
  etc., administration)                         (0.018)       (0.012)       (0.017)        (0.012)            (0.008)        (0.007)
926130 (communications commissions,             -0.076†       -0.053†        -0.079         -0.040            -0.031†         -0.019
 licensing and inspecting of utilities)         (0.036)       (0.025)       (0.035)        (0.024)            (0.015)        (0.015)
R2                                               0.366         0.696         0.347           0.679             0.729           0.709
Notes: Results are for Ordinary Least Squares with robust standard errors in parentheses. For all models, variables are shown if
they are selected by the Elastic Net procedure and were statistically significant at the 5-percent level or less based on
conventional OLS standard errors; that is, all coefficients reported in the table are significant at the 5-percent level based on
OLS standard errors. The superscript † indicates that the estimate was statistically significant at the 5% level based on the Lee et
al. (2016, LSST) confidence intervals. There are approximately 34,000 Census tract observations. See Tables 1 and 2 for
variable definitions. However, columns (4) and (4’) are estimated on residualized models where are variables are first regressed
on the fixed state effects. The R2 values shown are for these residualized variables. Finally, as in Table 3, we omit from the
estimation in columns (1) and (3) the transport isolation index and establishment count controls.
Table 5: Industries with Consistent Positive Effects of Non-Profit Counts on Network Measures (5+ Specifications
                                     in Table 4), Longer NAICS Descriptions
611110          Academies, elementary or secondary; Boarding schools, elementary or secondary; Elementary and secondary
                schools; Finishing schools, secondary; Handicapped, schools for, elementary or secondary; High schools; Junior high
                schools; Kindergartens; Middle schools; Military academies, elementary or secondary; Montessori schools,
                elementary or secondary; Parochial schools, elementary or secondary; Preparatory schools, elementary or secondary;
                Primary schools; Private schools, elementary or secondary; School boards, elementary and secondary; School districts,
                elementary or secondary; Schools for the handicapped, elementary or secondary; Seminaries, below university grade
623110          Convalescent homes or convalescent hospitals (except psychiatric); Group homes for the disabled with nursing care;
                Homes for the aged with nursing care; Homes for the elderly with nursing care; Hospices, inpatient care; Nursing
                homes; Rest homes with nursing care; Retirement homes with nursing care; Skilled nursing facilities
711130          Bands; Chamber musical groups; Chamber orchestras; Choirs; Classical musical artists, independent; Classical
                musical groups; Concert artists, independent; Country musical groups; Drum and bugle corps (i.e., drill teams);
                Ensembles, musical; Jazz musical groups; Musical artists, independent; Musical productions (except musical theater
                productions), live; Musicians, independent; Opera singers, independent; Orchestras; Popular musical artists,
                independent; Popular musical groups; Rock musical artists, independent; Rock musical groups; Singers, independent;
                Soloists, independent musical; Symphony orchestras; Vocalists, independent
712110          Art galleries (except retail); Art museums; Community museums; Contemporary art museums; Decorative art
                museums; Fine arts museums; Galleries, art (except retail); Halls of fame; Herbariums; Historical museums; Human
                history museums; Interactive museums; Marine museums; Military museums; Mobile museums; Multidisciplinary
                museums; Museums; Natural history museums; Natural science museums; Observatories (except research
                institutions); Planetariums; Science and technology museums; Sports halls of fame; Traveling museum exhibits; War
                museums; Wax museums
713910          Country clubs; Golf and country clubs; Golf courses (except miniature, pitch-n-putt)
721214          Boys’ camps (except day, instructional); Camps (except day, instructional); Children’s camps (except day,
                instructional); Dude ranches; Fishing camps with accommodation facilities; Girls’ camps (except day, instructional);
                Guest ranches with accommodation facilities; Hunting camps with accommodation facilities; Nudist camps with
                accommodation facilities; Outdoor adventure retreats with accommodation facilities; Recreational camps with
                accommodation facilities (except campgrounds); Summer camps (except day, instructional); Trail riding camps with
                accommodation facilities; Vacation camps (except campgrounds, day instructional); Wilderness camps
813110          Bible societies; Churches; Convents (except schools); Missions, religious organization; Monasteries (except schools);
                Mosques, religious; Places of worship; Religious organizations; Retreat houses, religious; Shrines, religious;
                Synagogues; Temples, religious
813211          Charitable trusts, awarding grants; Community foundations; Corporate foundations, awarding grants; Educational
                trusts, awarding grants; Grantmaking foundations; Philanthropic trusts, awarding grants; Scholarship trusts (i.e.,
                grantmaking, charitable trust foundations); Trusts, charitable, awarding grants; Trusts, educational, awarding grants;
                Trusts, religious, awarding grants
813410          Alumni associations; Automobile clubs (except road and travel services); Book discussion clubs; Booster clubs; Boy
                guiding organizations; Civic associations; Classic car clubs; Computer enthusiasts clubs; Ethnic associations; Farm
                granges; Fraternal organizations; Fraternities (except residential); Garden clubs; Girl guiding organizations; Golden
                age clubs; Granges; Historical clubs; Membership associations, civic or social; Parent-teachers’ associations; Poetry
                clubs; Public speaking improvement clubs; Retirement associations, social; Scouting organizations; Senior citizens’
                associations, social; Singing societies; Social clubs; Sororities (except residential); Speakers’ clubs; Student clubs;
                Students’ unions; University clubs; Veterans’ membership organizations; Women’s auxiliaries; Women’s clubs;
                Writing clubs; Youth civic clubs; Youth farming organizations; Youth scouting organizations; Youth social clubs
921110          Advisory commissions, executive government; City and town managers’ offices; County supervisors’ and
                executives’ offices; Executive offices, federal, state, and local (e.g., governor, mayor, president); Governors’ offices;
                Mayor’s offices; President’s office, United States
922120          Alcohol, tobacco, and firearms control; Criminal investigation offices, government; DEA (Drug Enforcement
                Administration); Drug enforcement agencies and offices; Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI); Federal police
                services; Highway patrols, police; Housing police, government; Marshals’ offices; Park police; Police academies;
                Police and fire departments, combined; Police departments (except American Indian or Alaska Native); Sheriffs’
                offices (except court functions only); State police; Transit police
922160          Ambulance and fire service combined; Fire and rescue service; Fire departments (e.g., government, volunteer (except
                private)); Fire marshals’ offices; Fire prevention offices, government; Firefighting (except forest), government and
                volunteer (except private); Firefighting services (except forest and private)
924110          Enforcement of environmental and pollution control regulations; Environmental protection program
                administration; NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration); Pollution control program
                administration; Sanitation engineering agencies, government; Waste management program administration; Water
                control and quality program administration
See the on-line appendix for full NAICS descriptions.
                     Table 6: Non-Profit Counts by Tract, Any NAICS Codes Retained by LASSO
Non-profit counts by tract                                                   Mean    Std. Dev.   Pos. effects in Table 4
114210 (fishing preserves, hunting preserves)                                0.016     0.129                X
115111 (cotton ginning)                                                      0.001     0.039                X
221122 (distribution of electric power)                                      0.010     0.124
221310 (irrigation system operation, water distribution)                     0.084     0.378               X
221320 (sewage disposal, waste collection)                                   0.017     0.141               X
522294 (Federal National Mortgage Association, etc.)                         0.007     0.099
524114 (health insurance carriers)                                           0.076     0.367
525110 (union pension funds)                                                 0.022     0.174               X
525120 (union health and welfare funds)                                      0.003     0.059               X
531311 (apartment managers offices, condominium managers offices)            0.068     0.312
541720 (social sciences research and development services)                   0.191     0.599
561499 (fundraising campaign organization services)                          0.127     0.413
611110 (elementary, junior, secondary schools)                               1.501     1.492               X
611310 (colleges, universities)                                              0.230     1.711
611513 (apprenticeship training programs)                                    0.074     0.302
611630 (foreign language schools)                                            0.034     0.211
611699 (Bible schools, yoga instruction)                                     0.141     0.422               X
611710 (education support and testing services)                              0.689     1.148               ?
621498 (clinics/centers of health practitioners, community health centers)   0.078     0.315
621610 (home health agencies)                                                0.297     0.792
621910 (ambulance or rescue services)                                        0.067     0.306               X
622310 (children’s hospitals)                                                0.102     0.382               X
623110 (nursing homes, group homes, convalescent homes)                      0.352     0.850               X
623990 (boot camps, group foster homes)                                      0.215     0.530
6241 (individual and family services)                                        0.798     1.369
624190 (alcoholism and drug addiction self-help organizations)               0.981     2.024
624310 (vocational habilitation job counseling)                              0.187     0.498
624410 (child care and preschool centers, Head Start)                        1.870     1.926               ?
711120 (ballet companies, dance troupes)                                     0.004     0.062
711130 (chamber music groups)                                                0.519     1.125               X
711211 (baseball teams, football teams)                                      0.069     0.293
711310 (arena operators, sports arena operators)                             0.065     0.282
712110 (art museums, historical museums)                                     0.227     0.840               X
713910 (country clubs and golf courses)                                      0.088     0.337               X
713990 (amateur/recreational sports teams, and sports-related clubs)         0.623     0.978               X
721214 (children’s camps, vacations camps)                                   0.042     0.212               X
812220 (cemeteries, memorial gardens)                                        0.100     0.361               X
813110 (churches, mosques, synagogues, missions)                             4.431     3.875               X
813211 (charitable trusts, community foundations)                            0.352     0.902               X
813312 (humane societies)                                                    0.053     0.291
813319 (advocacy organizations)                                              0.335     0.817
813410 (hobby clubs, Scouts, PTAs, civic and fraternal associations)         1.182     1.939               X
813920 (professional associations)                                           0.311     1.090
813930 (labor unions)                                                        0.270     0.909               X
813940 (campaign organizations, political organizations, PACs)               0.056     0.304
813990 (homeowners’ associations)                                            0.886     2.225
921110 (advisory commissions, city, executive, and mayors’ offices)          0.190     0.781               X
922120 (housing police, park police, police departments)                     0.126     0.479               X
922160 (fire and rescue services including volunteer fire dept.’s)           0.132     0.417               X
923120 (health planning and development agencies)                            0.095     0.746
924110 (environment protection program administration)                       0.058     0.516               X
925110 (housing programs, planning and development)                          0.063     0.314               X
926110 (arts/cultural, econ. devel., etc., administration)                   0.031     0.360
926130 (communications commissions, licensing and inspecting of utilities)   0.013     0.147
On-line Appendix Table: NETS Tabulations of 6-Digit NAICS Industries with > 10 Percent of Establishments Non-Profit (Corresponds to Table
                                                    2, with Full NAICS Descriptions)
                                                                                                                                              Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
 NAICS12    NAICS Description                                                                                                                  Count       Estab.’s   Profit
  114210    Animal trapping, commercial; Fishing preserves; Game preserves, commercial; Game propagation; Game retreats;                         139        1063      13.1%
            Hunting preserves
   115111   Cotton ginning; Ginning cotton                                                                                                       103         728      14.0%
   221122   Distribution of electric power; Electric power brokers; Electric power distribution systems                                          361        1727      20.9%
   221310   Canal, irrigation; Filtration plant, water; Impounding reservoirs, irrigation; Irrigation system operation; Water                   1744        8586      20.3%
            distribution (except irrigation); Water distribution for irrigation; Water filtration plant operation; Water supply systems;
            Water treatment and distribution; Water treatment plants
   221320   Collection, treatment, and disposal of waste through a sewer system; Sewage disposal plants; Sewage treatment plants or              292        1938      15.1%
            facilities; Sewer systems; Waste collection, treatment, and disposal through a sewer system
   311313   Beet pulp, dried, manufacturing; Beet sugar refining; Brown beet sugar refining; Brown sugar made from beet sugar;                   14          51       27.5%
            Confectioner's beet sugar manufacturing; Granulated beet sugar manufacturing; Liquid beet syrup manufacturing; Liquid
            sugar made from beet sugar; Molasses made from sugar beets; Raw beet sugar manufacturing; Sugar, confectionery, made
            from sugar beets; Sugar, granulated, made from sugar beets; Sugar, invert, made from sugar beets; Sugar, liquid, made from
            sugar beets; Syrup made from sugar beets
   485113   Bus line, local (except mixed mode); Bus services, urban and suburban (except mixed mode); Bus transit systems (except               78          696      11.2%
            mixed mode); City bus services (except mixed mode); Commuter bus operation (except mixed mode); Local bus services
            (except mixed mode); Suburban bus line services (except mixed mode); Urban bus line services (except mixed mode)
   519120   Archives; Bookmobiles; Centers for documentation (i.e., archives); Circulating libraries; Film archives; Lending libraries;         3470        16800     20.7%
            Libraries (except motion picture stock footage, motion picture commercial distribution); Motion picture film libraries,
            archives; Music archives; Reference libraries
   522294   Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation; Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC); Federal Intermediate                      38          313      12.1%
            Credit Bank; Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA); FHLMC (Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation);
            Financing, secondary market; FNMA (Federal National Mortgage Association); GNMA (Government National Mortgage
            Association); Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA); Government-sponsored enterprises providing
            secondary market financing; Real estate mortgage investment conduits (REMICs) issuing, private; REMICs (real estate
            mortgage investment conduits) issuing, private; Repackaging loans for sale to others (i.e., private conduits); Secondary
            market financing (i.e., buying, pooling, repackaging loans for sale to others); SLMA (Student Loan Marketing Association);
            Student Loan Marketing Association (SLMA)
   523991   Administrators of private estates; Bank trust offices; Escrow agencies (except real estate); Fiduciary agencies (except real         383        3240      11.8%
            estate); Personal investments trust administration; Securities custodians; Trust administration, personal investment; Trust
            companies, nondepository
   522130   Corporate credit unions; Credit unions; Federal credit unions; State credit unions; Unions, credit                                  2962        12821     23.1%
   524114   Dental insurance carriers, direct; Group hospitalization plans without providing health care services; Health insurance              397         3497     11.4%
            carriers, direct; Hospital and medical service plans, direct, without providing health care services; Hospitalization
            insurance carriers, direct, without providing health care services; Insurance carriers, health, direct; Insurance underwriting,
            health and medical, direct; Medical insurance carriers, direct; Medical service plans without providing health care services
   525110   Employee benefit pension plans; Funds, employee benefit pension; Funds, pension; Pension funds; Pension plans (e.g.,                 98          863      11.4%
            employee benefit, retirement); Plans, pension; Retirement pension plans; Union pension funds
   525120   Union health and welfare funds                                                                                                       29          159      18.2%
                                                                                                                                              Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                    Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 525920   Bankruptcy estates; Personal estates (i.e., managing assets); Personal investment trusts; Personal trusts; Private estates (i.e.,      230         814      28.3%
          administering on behalf of beneficiaries); Testamentary trusts; Trusts, estates, and agency accounts
531311    Apartment managers’ offices; Condominium managers’ offices, residential; Cooperative apartment managers’ offices;                      663        3239      20.5%
          Managers’ offices, residential condominium; Managers’ offices, residential real estate; Managing cooperative apartments;
          Managing residential condominiums; Managing residential real estate; Property managers’ offices, residential real estate;
          Property managing, residential real estate; Real estate property managers’ offices, residential; Residential property
          managing; Residential real estate property managers’ offices
541720    Archeological research and development services; Behavioral research and development services; Business research and                  1183        8242      14.4%
          development services; Cognitive research and development services; Demographic research and development services;
          Economic research and development services; Historic and cultural preservation research and development services;
          Humanities research and development services; Language research and development services; Learning disabilities
          research and development services; Psychology research and development services; Social science research and
          development services; Sociological research and development services; Sociology research and development services
561499    Address bar coding services; Bar code imprinting services; Fundraising campaign organization services on a contract or                 796        4497      17.7%
          fee basis; Mail consolidation services; Mail presorting services; Teleconferencing services; Videoconferencing services
561591    Convention and visitors bureaus; Convention bureaus; Tourism bureaus; Tourist information bureaus; Visitors bureaus                    211         808      26.1%
611110    Academies, elementary or secondary; Boarding schools, elementary or secondary; Elementary and secondary schools;                      30846      119478     25.8%
          Elementary schools; Finishing schools, secondary; Handicapped, schools for, elementary or secondary; High schools; High
          schools offering both academic and technical courses; High schools offering both academic and vocational courses; Junior
          high schools; Kindergartens; Middle schools; Military academies, elementary or secondary; Montessori schools,
          elementary or secondary; Parochial schools, elementary or secondary; Preparatory schools, elementary or secondary;
          Primary schools; Private schools, elementary or secondary; School boards, elementary and secondary; School districts,
          elementary or secondary; Schools for the handicapped, elementary or secondary; Schools for the intellectually and
          developmentally disabled (except preschool, job training, vocational rehabilitation); Schools for the physically disabled,
          elementary or secondary; Schools, elementary; Schools, secondary; Secondary schools offering both academic and
          technical courses; Seminaries, below university grade
611210    Academies, junior college; Colleges, community; Colleges, junior; Community colleges; Community colleges offering a                    838        2691      31.1%
          wide variety of academic and technical training; Junior colleges; Junior colleges offering a wide variety of academic and
          technical training; Schools, junior college; Schools, junior college vocational
611310    Academies, college or university; Academies, military service (college); Business colleges or schools offering                        5666        17482     32.4%
          baccalaureate or graduate degrees; Colleges (except junior colleges); Colleges, universities, and professional schools;
          Conservatories of music (colleges or universities); Dental schools; Hospital management schools offering baccalaureate or
          graduate degrees; Hospitality management schools offering baccalaureate or graduate degrees; Law schools; Medical
          schools; Military academies, college level; Military service academies (college); Parochial schools, college level; Private
          colleges (except community or junior college); Professional schools (e.g., business administration, dental, law, medical);
          Schools, correspondence, college level; Schools, medical; Schools, professional (colleges or universities); Seminaries,
          theological, offering baccalaureate or graduate degrees; Theological seminaries offering baccalaureate or graduate degrees;
          Universities
611513    Apprenticeship training programs; Carpenters’ apprenticeship training; Craft union apprenticeship training programs;                   426        3241      13.1%
          Electricians’ apprenticeship training; Mechanic’s apprenticeship training; Plumbers’ apprenticeship training; Sheet metal
          workers’ apprenticeship training; Steam fitters’ apprenticeship training; Trade union apprenticeship training programs;
          Vocational apprenticeship training
                                                                                                                                              Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                    Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 611630   Foreign language schools; Language schools; Schools, language; Second language instruction; Sign language instruction;                 99          910      10.9%
          Sign language schools
611699    Bible schools (except degree granting); Bridge and other card game instruction; Charm schools; CPR (cardiac pulmonary                  343        3166      10.8%
          resuscitation) training and certification; Diction schools; First aid instruction; Life guard training; Public speaking training;
          Self defense (except martial arts) instruction; Speed reading instruction; Survival training instruction; Yoga instruction,
          camps, or schools
611710    College selection services; Educational consultants; Educational guidance counseling services; Educational support                    4544        24088     18.9%
          services; Educational testing evaluation services; Educational testing services; School bus attendant services; Student
          exchange programs; Test development and evaluation services, educational; Testing services, educational
621410    Abortion clinics; Birth control clinics; Childbirth preparation classes; Counseling services, family planning; Family                  619        1420      43.6%
          planning centers; Family planning counseling services; Fertility clinics; Pregnancy counseling centers; Reproductive health
          services centers
621420    Alcoholism treatment centers and clinics (except hospitals), outpatient; Detoxification centers and clinics (except hospitals),       1926        6128      31.4%
          outpatient; Drug addiction treatment centers and clinics (except hospitals), outpatient; Mental health centers and clinics
          (except hospitals), outpatient; Outpatient mental health centers and clinics (except hospitals); Outpatient treatment centers
          and clinics (except hospitals) for substance abuse (i.e., alcoholism, drug addiction); Outpatient treatment centers and clinics
          for alcoholism; Outpatient treatment centers and clinics for drug addiction; Psychiatric centers and clinics (except
          hospitals), outpatient; Substance abuse treatment centers and clinics (except hospitals), outpatient
621491    Group hospitalization plans providing health care services; Health maintenance organization (HMO) medical centers and                  252        1325      19.0%
          clinics; HMO (health maintenance organization) medical centers and clinics
621498    Biofeedback centers and clinics, outpatient; Clinics/centers of health practitioners from more than one industry practicing            907        4453      20.4%
          within the same establishment; Clinics/centers of health practitioners with multi-industry degrees; Community health
          centers and clinics, outpatient; Infusion therapy centers and clinics, outpatient; Pain therapy centers and clinics, outpatient;
          Sleep disorder centers and clinics, outpatient
621610    Home care of elderly, medical; Home health agencies; Home health care agencies; Home nursing services (except private                 1677        16718     10.0%
          practices); Hospice care services, in home; Nurse associations, visiting; Nursing agencies, primarily providing home
          nursing services; Visiting nurse associations
621910    Air ambulance services; Ambulance services, air or ground; Emergency medical transportation services, air or ground;                  1197        5342      22.4%
          Rescue services, air; Rescue services, medical
621991    Blood banks; Blood donor stations; Eye banks; Organ banks, body; Organ donor centers, body; Placenta banks;                            427        1570      27.2%
          Plasmapheresis centers; Sperm banks, human
622110    Children’s hospitals, general; General medical and surgical hospitals; Hospitals, general medical and surgical; Hospitals,            3986        9913      40.2%
          general pediatric; Osteopathic hospitals
622210    Alcoholism rehabilitation hospitals; Children’s hospitals, psychiatric or substance abuse; Detoxification hospitals; Drug              794        3191      24.9%
          addiction rehabilitation hospitals; Hospitals for alcoholics; Hospitals, addiction; Hospitals, mental (except intellectual and
          developmental disability); Hospitals, psychiatric (except convalescent); Hospitals, psychiatric pediatric; Hospitals,
          substance abuse; Mental (except intellectual and developmental disability) hospitals; Mental health hospitals; Psychiatric
          hospitals (except convalescent); Rehabilitation hospitals, alcoholism and drug addiction
622310    Cancer hospitals; Children’s hospitals, specialty (except psychiatric, substance abuse); Chronic disease hospitals;                   1004        5632      17.8%
          Extended care hospitals (except mental, substance abuse); Eye, ear, nose, and throat hospitals; Hospitals, specialty (except
          psychiatric, substance abuse); Leprosy hospitals; Maternity hospitals; Neurological hospitals; Obstetrical hospital;
          Orthopedic hospitals; Physical rehabilitation hospitals; Rehabilitation hospitals (except alcoholism, drug addiction);
          Tuberculosis and other respiratory illness hospitals
                                                                                                                                            Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                  Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 623110   Convalescent homes or convalescent hospitals (except psychiatric); Group homes for the disabled with nursing care;                  3291        23883     13.8%
          Homes for the aged with nursing care; Homes for the elderly with nursing care; Hospices, inpatient care; Nursing homes;
          Rest homes with nursing care; Retirement homes with nursing care; Skilled nursing facilities
623210    Group homes, intellectual and developmental disability; Homes with or without health care, intellectual and developmental            568        1817      31.3%
          disability; Hospitals, intellectual and developmental disability; Intellectual and developmental disability facilities (e.g.,
          homes, hospitals, intermediate care facilities), residential; Intellectual and developmental disability homes; Intellectual and
          developmental disability hospitals; Intellectual and developmental disability intermediate care facilities; Intermediate care
          facilities, intellectual and developmental disability
623220    Alcoholism rehabilitation facilities (except licensed hospitals), residential; Convalescent homes or hospitals for psychiatric       534        1227      43.5%
          patients; Drug addiction rehabilitation facilities (except licensed hospitals), residential; Halfway houses for patients with
          mental health illnesses; Halfway houses, substance abuse (e.g., alcoholism, drug addiction); Homes for emotionally
          disturbed adults or children; Homes, psychiatric convalescent; Hospitals, psychiatric convalescent; Mental health facilities,
          residential; Mental health halfway houses; Psychiatric convalescent homes or hospitals; Residential group homes for the
          emotionally disturbed; Substance abuse (i.e., alcoholism, drug addiction) halfway houses; Substance abuse facilities,
          residential
623312    Assisted-living facilities without on-site nursing care facilities; Homes for the aged without nursing care; Homes for the           706        3266      21.6%
          elderly without nursing care; Old age homes without nursing care; Old soldiers’ homes without nursing care; Rest homes
          without nursing care; Retirement homes without nursing care; Senior citizens’ homes without nursing care
623990    Boot camps for delinquent youth; Boys’ and girls’ residential facilities (e.g., homes, ranches, villages); Camps, boot or           2621        10163     25.8%
          disciplinary (except correctional), for delinquent youth; Child group foster homes; Children’s villages; Delinquent youth
          halfway group homes; Disabled group homes without nursing care; Disciplinary camps for delinquent youth; Group foster
          homes for children; Group homes for the disabled without nursing care; Group homes for the hearing impaired; Group
          homes for the visually impaired; Halfway group homes for delinquents and ex-offenders; Homes for children with health
          care incidental; Homes for unwed mothers; Juvenile halfway group homes; Orphanages
 6241     Individual and family services
624110    Adoption agencies; Adoption services, child; Aid to families with dependent children (AFDC); Child guidance agencies;               2913        7115      40.9%
          Child welfare services; Community centers (except recreational only), youth; Foster care placement agencies; Foster home
          placement services; Self-help organizations, youth; Teen outreach services; Youth centers (except recreational only); Youth
          guidance organizations; Youth self-help organizations
624120    Activity centers for disabled persons, the elderly, and persons diagnosed with intellectual and developmental disabilities;         5305        14778     35.9%
          Centers, senior citizens’; Community centers (except recreational only), adult; Companion services for disabled persons,
          the elderly, and persons diagnosed with intellectual and developmental disabilities; Day care centers for disabled persons,
          the elderly, and persons diagnosed with intellectual and developmental disabilities; Day care centers, adult; Disability
          support groups; Home care of elderly, non-medical; Homemaker’s service for elderly or disabled persons, non-medical;
          Self-help organizations for disabled persons, the elderly, and persons diagnosed with intellectual and developmental
          disabilities; Senior citizens activity centers; Senior citizens centers
                                                                                                                                           Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                 Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 624190   Alcoholism and drug addiction self-help organizations; Alcoholism counseling (except medical treatment),                           8478        32377     26.2%
          nonresidential; Alcoholism self-help organizations; Community action service agencies; Counseling services; Crisis
          intervention centers; Drug addiction self-help organizations; Exoffender rehabilitation agencies; Exoffender self-help
          organizations; Family social service agencies; Family welfare services; Hotline centers; Individual and family social
          services, multi-purpose; Marriage counseling services (except by offices of mental health practitioners); Mediation, social
          service, family, agencies; Multiservice centers, neighborhood; Offender self-help organizations; Parenting support services;
          Parole offices, privately operated; Probation offices, privately operated; Rape crisis centers; Referral services for personal
          and social problems; Rehabilitation agencies for offenders; Self-help organizations (except for disabled persons, the elderly,
          persons diagnosed with intellectual and developmental disabilities); Social service agencies, family; Social service centers,
          multipurpose; Suicide crisis centers; Support group services; Telephone counseling services; Travelers’ aid centers; Welfare
          service centers, multi-program
624210    Community meals, social services; Food banks; Meal delivery programs; Mobile soup kitchens; Soup kitchens                           183         499      36.7%
624230    Disaster relief services; Emergency relief services; Emergency shelters for victims of domestic or international disasters or       582        1403      41.5%
          conflicts; Immigrant resettlement services; Refugee settlement services; Relief services, disaster; Relief services,
          emergency; Shelters for victims of domestic or international disasters or conflicts, emergency
624310    Habilitation job counseling and training, vocational; Job counseling, vocational rehabilitation or habilitation; Job training,     2919        9586      30.5%
          vocational rehabilitation or habilitation; Rehabilitation job counseling and training, vocational; Sheltered workshops (i.e.,
          work experience centers); Vocational habilitation job counseling; Vocational habilitation job training facilities (except
          schools); Vocational rehabilitation agencies; Vocational rehabilitation job counseling; Vocational rehabilitation job training
          facilities (except schools); Vocational rehabilitation or habilitation services (e.g., job counseling, job training, work
          experience); Work experience centers (i.e., sheltered workshops); Workshops for persons with disabilities
624410    Babysitting services in provider’s own home, child day care; Babysitting services, child day care; Child day care centers;         7472        58746     12.7%
          Child day care services; Child day care services in provider’s own home; Child day care, before or after school, separate
          from schools; Day care centers, child or infant; Day care services, child or infant; Group day care centers, child or infant;
          Head start programs, separate from schools; Infant day care centers; Infant day care services; Nursery schools; Pre-
          kindergarten centers (except part of elementary school system); Preschool centers
711110    Broadway theaters; Burlesque companies; Comedy troupes; Community theaters; Dinner theaters; Improvisational theaters;             1004        2500      40.1%
          Mime theaters; Musical theater companies or groups; Musical theater productions, live; Opera companies; Puppet theaters;
          Repertory companies, theatrical; Road companies, theatrical; Stock companies, theatrical; Summer theaters; Theater
          companies (except dance); Theater companies (except dance), amateur; Theaters, dinner; Theaters, live theatrical
          production (except dance); Theaters, musical; Theatrical repertory companies; Theatrical road companies; Theatrical stock
          companies; Vaudeville companies
711120    Ballet companies; Ballet productions, live theatrical; Classical dance companies; Contemporary dance companies; Dance               76          155      49.0%
          companies; Dance productions, live theatrical; Dance theaters; Dance troupes; Folk dance companies; Interpretive dance
          companies; Jazz dance companies; Modern dance companies; Tap dance companies; Theater companies, dance; Theaters,
          dance; Theatrical dance productions, live
711130    Bands; Bands, dance; Bands, musical; Chamber musical groups; Chamber orchestras; Choirs; Classical musical artists,                 932        7566      12.3%
          independent; Classical musical groups; Concert artists, independent; Country musical artists, independent; Country musical
          groups; Dance bands; Drum and bugle corps (i.e., drill teams); Ensembles, musical; Jazz musical artists, independent; Jazz
          musical groups; Musical artists, independent; Musical groups (except musical theater groups); Musical productions (except
          musical theater productions), live; Musicians, independent; Opera singers, independent; Orchestras; Popular musical artists,
          independent; Popular musical groups; Rock musical artists, independent; Rock musical groups; Singers, independent;
          Soloists, independent musical; Symphony orchestras; Vocalists, independent
                                                                                                                                                 Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                       Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 711211   Baseball clubs, professional or semiprofessional; Baseball teams, professional or semiprofessional; Basketball clubs,                     269        2009      13.4%
          professional or semiprofessional; Basketball teams, professional or semiprofessional; Boxing clubs, professional or
          semiprofessional; Football clubs, professional or semiprofessional; Football teams, professional or semiprofessional;
          Hockey clubs, professional or semiprofessional; Hockey teams, professional or semiprofessional; Ice hockey clubs,
          professional or semiprofessional; Jai alai teams, professional or semiprofessional; Major league baseball clubs; Minor
          league baseball clubs; Professional baseball clubs; Professional football clubs; Professional sports clubs; Roller hockey
          clubs, professional or semiprofessional; Semiprofessional baseball clubs; Semiprofessional football clubs; Semiprofessional
          sports clubs; Soccer clubs, professional or semiprofessional; Soccer teams, professional or semiprofessional; Sports clubs,
          professional or semiprofessional; Sports teams, professional or semiprofessional
711310    Air show managers with facilities; Air show organizers with facilities; Air show promoters with facilities; Arena                         367        2695      13.6%
          operators; Arts event managers with facilities; Arts event organizers with facilities; Arts event promoters with facilities;
          Arts festival managers with facilities; Arts festival organizers with facilities; Arts festival promoters with facilities; Beauty
          pageant managers with facilities; Beauty pageant organizers with facilities; Beauty pageant promoters with facilities;
          Boxing event managers with facilities; Boxing event organizers with facilities; Boxing event promoters with facilities;
          Concert hall operators; Concert managers with facilities; Concert organizers with facilities; Concert promoters with
          facilities; Dance festival managers with facilities; Dance festival organizers with facilities; Dance festival promoters with
          facilities; Ethnic festival promoters with facilities; Fair managers with facilities, agricultural; Fair organizers with facilities,
          agricultural; Fair promoters with facilities; Fair promoters with facilities, agricultural; Festival managers with facilities;
          Festival of arts managers with facilities; Festival of arts organizers with facilities; Festival of arts promoters with facilities;
          Festival organizers with facilities; Festival promoters with facilities; Heritage festival managers with facilities; Heritage
          festival organizers with facilities; Heritage festival promoters with facilities; Horse show managers with facilities; Horse
          show organizers with facilities; Horse show promoters with facilities; Live arts center operators; Live theater operators;
          Managers of agricultural fairs with facilities; Managers of arts events with facilities; Managers of festivals with facilities;
          Managers of live performing arts productions (e.g., concerts) with facilities; Managers of sports events with facilities;
          Music festival managers with facilities; Music festival organizers with facilities; Music festival promoters with facilities;
          Organizers of agricultural fairs with facilities; Organizers of arts events with facilities; Organizers of festivals with
          facilities; Organizers of live performing arts productions (e.g., concerts) with facilities; Organizers of sports events with
          facilities; Performing arts center operators; Professional sports promoters with facilities; Promoters of agricultural fairs with
          facilities; Promoters of arts events with facilities; Promoters of festivals with facilities; Promoters of live performing arts
          productions (e.g., concerts) with facilities; Promoters of sports events with facilities; Rodeo managers with facilities; Rodeo
          organizers with facilities; Rodeo promoters with facilities; Sports arena operators; Sports event managers with facilities;
          Sports event organizers with facilities; Sports event promoters with facilities; Sports stadium operators; Stadium operators;
          Theater festival managers with facilities; Theater festival organizers with facilities; Theater festival promoters with
          facilities; Theater operators; Theatrical production managers with facilities; Theatrical production organizers with facilities;
          Theatrical production promoters with facilities; Wrestling event managers with facilities; Wrestling event organizers with
          facilities; Wrestling event promoters with facilities
                                                                                                                                               Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                     Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 711320   Agricultural fair managers without facilities; Agricultural fair organizers without facilities; Agricultural fair promoters            1010        4715      21.4%
          without facilities; Air show managers without facilities; Air show organizers without facilities; Air show promoters without
          facilities; Arts event managers without facilities; Arts event organizers without facilities; Arts event promoters without
          facilities; Arts festival managers without facilities; Arts festival organizers without facilities; Arts festival promoters
          without facilities; Beauty pageant managers without facilities; Beauty pageant organizers without facilities; Beauty pageant
          promoters without facilities; Booking agencies, theatrical (except motion picture); Boxing event managers without
          facilities; Boxing event organizers without facilities; Boxing event promoters without facilities; Concert booking agencies;
          Concert managers without facilities; Concert organizers without facilities; Concert promoters without facilities; Dance
          festival managers without facilities; Dance festival organizers without facilities; Dance festival promoters without facilities;
          Ethnic festival managers without facilities; Ethnic festival organizers without facilities; Ethnic festival promoters without
          facilities; Fair managers without facilities, agricultural; Fair organizers without facilities, agricultural; Fair promoters
          without facilities; Fair promoters without facilities, agricultural; Festival managers without facilities; Festival of arts
          managers without facilities; Festival of arts organizers without facilities; Festival of arts promoters without facilities;
          Festival organizers without facilities; Festival promoters without facilities; Heritage festival managers without facilities;
          Heritage festival organizers without facilities; Heritage festival promoters without facilities; Horse show managers without
          facilities; Horse show organizers without facilities; Horse show promoters without facilities; Managers of agricultural fairs
          without facilities; Managers of arts events without facilities; Managers of festivals without facilities; Managers of live
          performing arts productions (e.g., concerts) without facilities; Managers of sports events without facilities; Music festival
          managers without facilities; Music festival organizers without facilities; Music festival promoters without facilities;
          Organizers of agricultural fairs without facilities; Organizers of arts events without facilities; Organizers of festivals without
          facilities; Organizers of live performing arts productions (e.g., concerts) without facilities; Organizers of sports events
          without facilities; Professional sports promoters without facilities; Promoters of agricultural fairs without facilities;
          Promoters of arts events without facilities; Promoters of festivals without facilities; Promoters of live performing arts
          productions (e.g., concerts) without facilities; Promoters of sports events without facilities; Rodeo managers without
          facilities; Rodeo organizers without facilities; Rodeo promoters without facilities; Sports event managers without facilities;
          Sports event organizers without facilities; Sports event promoters without facilities; Theater festival managers without
          facilities; Theater festival organizers without facilities; Theater festival promoters without facilities; Theatrical booking
          agencies (except motion picture); Theatrical production managers without facilities; Theatrical production organizers
          without facilities; Theatrical production promoters without facilities; Wrestling event managers without facilities; Wrestling
          event organizers without facilities; Wrestling event promoters without facilities
712110    Art galleries (except retail); Art museums; Community museums; Contemporary art museums; Decorative art museums;                       3207        12009     26.7%
          Fine arts museums; Galleries, art (except retail); Halls of fame; Herbariums; Historical museums; Human history
          museums; Interactive museums; Marine museums; Military museums; Mobile museums; Multidisciplinary museums;
          Museums; Natural history museums; Natural science museums; Observatories (except research institutions); Planetariums;
          Science and technology museums; Sports halls of fame; Traveling museum exhibits; War museums; Wax museums
712120    Archeological sites (i.e., public display); Battlefields; Heritage villages; Historical forts; Historical ships; Historical sites;      555        1422      39.0%
          Pioneer villages
712130    Animal exhibits, live; Animal safari parks; Aquariums; Arboreta; Arboretums; Aviaries; Botanical gardens; Conservatories,               243         811      30.0%
          botanical; Gardens, zoological or botanical; Menageries; Parks, wild animal; Petting zoos; Reptile exhibits, live; Wild
          animal parks; Zoological gardens; Zoos
713910    Country clubs; Golf and country clubs; Golf courses (except miniature, pitch-n-putt)                                                   2772        13310     20.8%
                                                                                                                                             Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                    Count      Estab.’s   Profit
 713990   Amateur sports teams, recreational; Amusement device (except gambling) concession operators (i.e., supplying and                    3413692      28640     12.9%
          servicing in others’ facilities); Amusement ride concession operators (i.e., supplying and servicing in others’ facilities);
          Archery ranges; Athletic clubs (i.e., sports teams) not operating sports facilities, recreational; Aviation clubs, recreational;
          Ballrooms; Baseball clubs, recreational; Basketball clubs, recreational; Bathing beaches; Beach clubs, recreational;
          Beaches, bathing; Billiard parlors; Billiard rooms; Boating clubs without marinas; Boccie ball courts; Bowling leagues or
          teams, recreational; Boxing clubs, recreational; Boys’ day camps (except instructional); Bridge clubs, recreational; Camps
          (except instructional), day; Canoeing, recreational; Carnival ride concession operators (i.e., supplying and servicing in
          others’ facilities); Coin-operated nongambling amusement device concession operators (i.e., supplying and servicing in
          others’ facilities); Concession operators, amusement device (except gambling) and ride; Curling facilities; Dance halls;
          Discotheques (except those serving alcoholic beverages); Driving ranges, golf; Fireworks display services; Fishing clubs,
          recreational; Fishing guide services; Fishing piers; Flying clubs, recreational; Football clubs, recreational; Galleries,
          shooting; Girls’ day camps (except instructional); Gocart raceways (i.e., amusement rides); Gocart tracks (i.e., amusement
          rides); Golf courses, miniature; Golf courses, pitch-n-putt; Golf driving ranges; Golf practice ranges; Guide services (i.e.,
          fishing, hunting, tourist); Guide services, fishing; Guide services, hunting; Guide services, tourist; Gun clubs, recreational;
          Hockey clubs, recreational; Hockey teams, recreational; Horse rental services, recreational saddle; Horseback riding,
          recreational; Hunting clubs, recreational; Hunting guide services; Ice hockey clubs, recreational; Jukebox concession
          operators (i.e., supplying and servicing in others’ facilities); Kayaking, recreational; Lawn bowling clubs; Miniature golf
          courses; Mountain hiking, recreational; Nightclubs without alcoholic beverages; Nudist camps without accommodations;
          Observation towers; Outdoor adventure operations (e.g., white water rafting) without accommodations; Pack trains (i.e.,
          trail riding), recreational; Paintball, laser tag, and similar fields and arenas; Para sailing, recreational; Picnic grounds;
          Pinball machine concession operators (i.e., supplying and servicing in others’ facilities); Ping pong parlors; Pool halls; Pool
          parlors; Pool rooms; Racetracks, slot car (i.e., amusement devices); Raceways, gocart (i.e., amusement rides); Recreational
          camps without accommodations; Recreational day camps (except instructional); Recreational sports clubs (i.e., sports
          teams) not operating sports facilities; Recreational sports teams and leagues; Riding clubs, recreational; Riding stables;
          Rifle clubs, recreational; River rafting, recreational; Rowing clubs, recreational; Saddle horse rental services, recreational;
          Sailing clubs without marinas; Sea kayaking, recreational; Shooting clubs, recreational; Shooting galleries; Shooting
          ranges; Skeet shooting facilities; Slot car racetracks (i.e., amusement devices); Snowmobiling, recreational; Soccer clubs,
          recreational; Sports clubs (i.e., sports teams) not operating sports facilities, recreational; Sports teams and leagues,
          recreational or youth; Stables, riding; Summer day camps (except instructional); Tourist guide services; Trail riding,
          recreational; Trampoline facilities, recreational; Trapshooting facilities, recreational; Waterslides (i.e., amusement rides);
          White water rafting, recreational; Yacht clubs without marinas; Youth sports league teams
721214    Boys’ camps (except day, instructional); Camps (except day, instructional); Children’s camps (except day, instructional);             999        4835      20.7%
          Dude ranches; Fishing camps with accommodation facilities; Girls’ camps (except day, instructional); Guest ranches with
          accommodation facilities; Hunting camps with accommodation facilities; Nudist camps with accommodation facilities;
          Outdoor adventure retreats with accommodation facilities; Recreational camps with accommodation facilities (except
          campgrounds); Summer camps (except day, instructional); Trail riding camps with accommodation facilities; Vacation
          camps (except campgrounds, day instructional); Wilderness camps
721310    Boarding houses; Clubs, residential; Dormitories, off campus; Fraternity houses; Migrant workers’ camps; Off campus                   428        2512      17.0%
          dormitories; Residence clubs, organizational; Residential clubs; Rooming and boarding houses; Sorority houses; Workers’
          camps; Workers’ dormitories
812220    Animal cemeteries; Cemeteries; Cemetery associations (i.e., operators); Cemetery management services; Columbariums;                   981        5876      16.7%
          Crematories (except combined with funeral homes); Mausoleums; Memorial gardens (i.e., burial places); Pet cemeteries
                                                                                                                                          Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 813110   Bible societies; Churches; Convents (except schools); Missions, religious organization; Monasteries (except schools);             73178      228934     32.0%
          Mosques, religious; Places of worship; Religious organizations; Retreat houses, religious; Shrines, religious; Synagogues;
          Temples, religious
813211    Charitable trusts, awarding grants; Community foundations; Corporate foundations, awarding grants; Educational trusts,            4761        12624     37.7%
          awarding grants; Grantmaking foundations; Philanthropic trusts, awarding grants; Scholarship trusts (i.e., grantmaking,
          charitable trust foundations); Trusts, charitable, awarding grants; Trusts, educational, awarding grants; Trusts, religious,
          awarding grants
813219    Community chests; Federated charities; United fund councils; United funds for colleges                                            1812        3277      55.3%
813312    Animal rights organizations; Animal welfare associations or leagues; Conservation advocacy organizations; Environmental           1642        3672      44.7%
          advocacy organizations; Humane societies; Natural resource preservation organizations; Wildlife preservation
          organizations
813319    Accident prevention associations; Antipoverty advocacy organizations; Aviation advocacy organizations; Community                  6837        16606     41.2%
          action advocacy organizations; Drug abuse prevention advocacy organizations; Drunk driving prevention advocacy
          organizations; Firearms advocacy organizations; Gun control organizations; Neighborhood development advocacy
          organizations; Peace advocacy organizations; Public safety advocacy organizations; Social change advocacy organizations;
          Social service advocacy organizations; Substance abuse prevention advocacy organizations; Taxpayers’ advocacy
          organizations; Temperance organizations; Tenants’ advocacy associations; Tenants’ associations, advocacy; World peace
          and understanding advocacy organizations
813410    Alumni associations; Alumni clubs; Automobile clubs (except road and travel services); Book discussion clubs; Booster             14839       44974     33.0%
          clubs; Boy guiding organizations; Civic associations; Classic car clubs; Computer enthusiasts clubs; Ethnic associations;
          Farm granges; Fraternal associations or lodges, social or civic; Fraternal lodges; Fraternal organizations; Fraternities
          (except residential); Garden clubs; Girl guiding organizations; Golden age clubs; Granges; Historical clubs; Membership
          associations, civic or social; Parent-teachers’ associations; Poetry clubs; Public speaking improvement clubs; Retirement
          associations, social; Scouting organizations; Senior citizens’ associations, social; Singing societies; Social clubs; Social
          organizations, civic and fraternal; Sororities (except residential); Speakers’ clubs; Student clubs; Students’ associations;
          Students’ unions; University clubs; Veterans’ membership organizations; Women’s auxiliaries; Women’s clubs; Writing
          clubs; Youth civic clubs; Youth clubs (except recreational only); Youth farming organizations; Youth scouting
          organizations; Youth social clubs
813910    Agricultural organizations (except youth farming organizations, farm granges); Animal breeders’ associations; Bankers’            9376        23707     39.5%
          associations; Better business bureaus; Boards of trade; Business associations; Chambers of commerce; Construction
          associations; Contractors’ associations; Distributors’ associations; Farmers’ associations; Farmers’ unions; Growers’
          associations; Hospital associations; Industrial associations; Insurers’ associations; Junior chambers of commerce;
          Manufacturers’ associations; Merchants’ associations; Mining associations; Producers’ associations; Public utility
          associations; Real estate boards; Restaurant associations; Retailers’ associations; Service industries associations; Shipping
          companies’ associations; Trade associations; Warehousing associations; Wholesalers’ associations
813920    Accountants’ associations; Architects’ associations; Bar associations; Consultants’ associations; Dentists’ associations;         3946        12231     32.2%
          Dietitians’ associations; Educators’ associations; Engineers’ associations; Health professionals’ associations; Hospital
          administrators’ associations; Learned societies; Medical associations; Nurses’ associations; Occupational therapists’
          associations; Optometrists’ associations; Peer review boards; Personnel management associations; Pharmacists’
          associations; Professional associations; Professional membership associations; Professional standards review boards;
          Psychologists’ associations; Scientific associations; Social workers’ associations; Standards review committees,
          professional
                                                                                                                                           Non-Profit    Total     % Non-
NAICS12   NAICS Description                                                                                                                 Count       Estab.’s   Profit
 813930   Employees’ associations for improvement of wages and working conditions; Federation of workers, labor organizations;               2892        11966     24.2%
          Federations of labor; Industrial labor unions; Labor federations; Labor unions (except apprenticeship programs); Trade
          unions (except apprenticeship programs); Trade unions, local; Unions (except apprenticeship programs), labor
813940    Campaign organizations, political; Constituencies’ associations, political party; Local political organizations; PACs               328        1857      17.7%
          (Political Action Committees); Political action committees (PACs); Political campaign organizations; Political
          organizations or clubs; Political parties
813990    Athletic associations, regulatory; Athletic leagues (i.e., regulating bodies); Condominium corporations; Condominium               7886        17947     43.9%
          owners’ associations; Cooperative owners’ associations; Homeowners’ associations; Homeowners’ associations,
          condominium; Property owners’ associations; Sports governing bodies; Sports leagues (i.e., regulating bodies); Tenants’
          associations (except advocacy)
921110    Advisory commissions, executive government; City and town managers’ offices; County supervisors’ and executives’                   6387        29792     21.4%
          offices; Executive offices, federal, state, and local (e.g., governor, mayor, president); Governors’ offices; Mayor’s offices;
          President’s office, United States
921120    Advisory commissions, legislative; Boards of supervisors, county and local; City and town councils; Congress of the                 829        5369      15.4%
          United States; County commissioners; Legislative assemblies; Legislative bodies (e.g., federal, local, and state); Legislative
          commissions; Study commissions, legislative
921130    Assessor’s offices, tax; Board of Governors, Federal Reserve; Budget agencies, government; Controllers’ and comptrollers’          1026        6165      16.6%
          offices, government; Customs bureaus; Federal Reserve Board of Governors; Gambling control boards, nonoperating;
          Internal Revenue Service; Lottery control boards, nonoperating; Property tax assessors’ offices; State tax commissions;
          Taxation departments; Treasurers’ offices, government
921140    Executive and legislative office combinations; Legislative and executive office combinations                                        124        1172      10.6%
921190    Auditor’s offices, government; Civil rights commissions; Civil service commissions; Election boards; General                       1167        7710      15.1%
          accounting offices, government; General public administration; General services departments, government; Human rights
          commissions, government; Indian affairs programs, government; Personnel offices, government; Public property
          management services, government; Purchasing and supply agencies, government; Supply agencies, government
922110    Administrative courts; Circuit courts; City or county courts; Courts of law, civilian (except American Indian or Alaska            1277        10513     12.1%
          Native); Courts, civilian (except American Indian or Alaska Native); Courts, small claims; Sheriffs’ offices, court functions
          only; Traffic courts
922120    Alcohol, tobacco, and firearms control; Criminal investigation offices, government; DEA (Drug Enforcement                          3125        14154     22.1%
          Administration); Drug enforcement agencies and offices; Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI); Federal police services;
          Highway patrols, police; Housing police, government; Marshals’ offices; Park police; Police academies; Police and fire
          departments, combined; Police departments (except American Indian or Alaska Native); Sheriffs’ offices (except court
          functions only); State police; Transit police
922130    Attorney generals’ offices; District attorneys’ offices; Legal counsel offices, government; Public defenders’ offices; Public       359        3016      11.9%
          prosecutors’ offices; Solicitors’ offices, government; U. S. attorneys’ offices
922160    Ambulance and fire service combined; Fire and rescue service; Fire departments (e.g., government, volunteer (except                4715        18083     26.1%
          private)); Fire marshals’ offices; Fire prevention offices, government; Firefighting (except forest), government and
          volunteer (except private); Firefighting services (except forest and private)
922190    Consumer product safety commissions; Criminal justice statistics centers, government; Disaster preparedness and                     371        2585      14.4%
          management offices, government; Emergency planning and management offices, government; Law enforcement statistics
          centers, government; Public safety bureaus and statistics centers, government; Public safety statistics centers, government
                                                                                                                                                 Non-Profit        Total      % Non-
  NAICS12         NAICS Description                                                                                                                 Count         Estab.’s    Profit
   923110         Certification of schools and teachers; County supervisors of education (except school boards); Education offices,                   385           2691      14.3%
                  nonoperating; Education program administration; Education statistics centers, government; State education departments;
                  Teacher certification bureaus; University regents or boards, government
     923120       Cancer detection program administration; Communicable disease program administration; Community health programs                     915           7592      12.1%
                  administration; Coroners’ offices; Environmental health program administration; Food service health inspections; Health
                  planning and development agencies, government; Health program administration; Health statistics centers, government;
                  Immunization program administration; Maternity and child health program administration; Mental health program
                  administration; Public health program administration, nonoperating
     924110       Enforcement of environmental and pollution control regulations; Environmental protection program administration;                   1033           5232      19.7%
                  NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration); Pollution control program administration; Sanitation
                  engineering agencies, government; Waste management program administration; Water control and quality program
                  administration
     925110       Building standards agencies, government; Housing authorities, nonoperating; Housing programs, planning and                         1268           5119      24.8%
                  development, government
     925120       Community development agencies, government; County development agencies; Land redevelopment agencies,                               501           1852      27.1%
                  government; Redevelopment land agencies, government; Regional planning and development program administration;
                  Urban planning commissions, government; Zoning boards and commissions
     926110       Arts and cultural program administration, government; Consumer protection offices; Councils of Economic Advisers;                   257           2224      11.6%
                  Cultural and arts development support program administration; Development assistance program administration; Economic
                  development agencies, government; Energy development and conservation agencies, nonoperating; Energy program
                  administration; Enterprise development program administration; General economics statistical agencies; Industrial
                  development program administration; Labor statistics agencies; Small business development agencies; Tourism
                  development offices, government; Trade commissions, government; Trade development program administration
     926130       Communications commissions; Communications licensing commissions and agencies; Energy development and                               275           1167      23.6%
                  conservation programs, government; Federal Communications Commission (FCC); Irrigation districts, nonoperating;
                  Licensing and inspecting of utilities; Mosquito eradication districts; Nuclear energy inspection and regulation offices;
                  Public service (except transportation) commissions, nonoperating; Public utility (except transportation) commissions,
                  nonoperating; Regulation of utilities; Sanitation districts, nonoperating; Solar energy regulation; Wind generated electrical
                  power regulation
Note: Tabulations based on the National Establishment Time Series. Percent non-profit is based on observations with non-missing legal status field. Observations are rank-ordered by
this percentage. For descriptions, see https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/ (viewed March 30, 2017). In the NETS data, some establishments were never assigned a 6-digit code.
So instead of dropping these, we include them as is. One of these (NAICS 4-digit code 6241) appears in our list of industries with a high share of non-profit establishments.
