NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGY AND THE EFFECTIVENESS OF REGULATORY PROGRAMS OVER TIME:
VEHICLE EMISSIONS AND SMOG CHECKS WITH A CHANGING FLEET
Nicholas J. Sanders
Ryan Sandler
Working Paper 23966
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23966

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

We are grateful to Dan Hosken, Mark Jacobsen, Thomas Koch, Devesh Raval, Joseph Shapiro and
participants in the Economics Brownbag at the Federal Trade Commission for helpful comments
and suggestions. Any opinions in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or the United States. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Nicholas J. Sanders and Ryan Sandler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Technology and the Effectiveness of Regulatory Programs Over Time: Vehicle Emissions
and Smog Checks with a Changing Fleet
Nicholas J. Sanders and Ryan Sandler
NBER Working Paper No. 23966
October 2017
JEL No. Q52,Q53,Q58
ABSTRACT
Personal automobile emissions are a major source of urban air pollution. Many U.S. states control
emissions through mandated vehicle inspections and repairs. But there is little empirical evidence
directly linking mandated inspections, maintenance, and local air pollution levels. To test for a
link, we estimate the contemporaneous effect of inspections on local air quality. We use day-today, within-county variation in the number of vehicles repaired and recertified after failing an
initial emissions inspection, with individual-level data from 1998–2012 from California’s
inspection program. Additional re-inspections of pre-1985 model year vehicles reduce local
carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide, and particulate matter levels, while re-inspections of newer
vehicles with more modern engine technology have no economically significant effect on air
pollution. This suggests emissions inspections have become less effective at reducing local air
pollution as more high-polluting vehicles from the 1970s and 1980s leave the road, and provides
an example of how the social efficiency of programs can change under improving technologies.
We also estimate the importance of station quality, using a metric devised for California’s new
STAR certification program. We show re-inspections of older vehicles conducted by low quality
inspection stations do not change air pollution, while inspections at high quality stations have a
moderate effect on pollution concentrations, which suggests the potential for ineffective
monitoring at low quality inspection stations. We find little effect on ambient ozone levels,
regardless of station quality or vehicle age.

Nicholas J. Sanders
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
MVR Hall, Room 105
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
njsanders@cornell.edu
Ryan Sandler
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
1275 1st Street NE
Washington, DC 20002
ryan.sandler@cfpb.gov

1

Introduction

Automobile pollution has substantial impacts on health, and regulating ambient air pollution from automobile traffic is a public concern both in the United States and abroad.1
Despite regulatory advancements and improvements in engine technology, motor vehicles
remain responsible for 75% of carbon monoxide (CO) emissions in the United States, and
over 50% of nitrogen oxide (NOx ) emissions.2 Governments in both developed and developing countries have tried a number of policies to reduce pollution from personal automobiles. Improving fuel standards can decrease emissions per mile driven, but such programs
disproportionally impact low-income households and decrease average road safety (Jacobsen, 2013a,b). Driving restriction programs have varied success rates when it comes to
actually reducing local pollution (Davis, 2008; Wolff, 2014). Scrappage programs, often
referred to as “Cash for Clunkers,” can directly remove the dirtiest vehicles from the road,
but recent work shows that such programs have substantial problems with adverse selection and may only slightly shift forward the timing of vehicle replacement (Sandler, 2012;
Mian and Sufi, 2012; Li et al., 2013; Hoekstra et al., 2014). Inspection and maintenance
programs (I/M), the focus of this paper, attempt to limit tailpipe emissions through regular inspections and repairs, without changing driving behavior or fleet composition. Such
programs are costly both to governments and individuals (Ando et al., 2000), are subject
to potential fraud (Oliva, 2015), and although mandated repairs of high-emitting vehicles
often show reduced tailpipe emissions in a testing environment, there exists no large-scale
analysis of how I/M programs affect local air pollution. Understanding the effectiveness
of I/M in practice is especially important in light of the recent emissions test cheating
scandal involving Volkswagen diesel vehicles in U.S. and Europe, where vehicles recorded
as passing EPA tests actually produced emissions far above allowable levels on the road.3
We provide the first causal analysis of vehicle inspections and local air pollution,
using extensive Smog Check data from the state of California.4 We find an additional
inspection-driven repair of a faulty vehicle reduces contemporaneous local air pollution.
However, we only find economically meaningful results from inspections of older (1985
and prior) model-year vehicles, suggesting the benefits of I/M programs decline as engine
technology improves. Further, we examine a recent reform to California’s I/M program
1

See Currie and Walker (2011) and Knittel et al. (2016).
Emissions data from http://www.epa.gov/airquality/peg_caa/carstrucks.html (accessed online June 1, 2015). For discussion on automobile NOx regulation, see Fowlie et al. (2012).
3
See
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/business/international/
volkswagen-diesel-car-scandal.html?_r=0 (Accessed September 23, 2015).
4
(Harrington et al., 2000) calculate cost-effectiveness of a similar inspection program in Arizona, but
do not link inspections to ambient air pollution levels.
2

2

that incorporates measures of inspection station quality. We find increasing station quality
may help further reduce some pollutants, but again only through inspections and repairs
of faulty older cars that are becoming scarce on the road.
To identify the effectiveness of the California inspection program, we leverage the
fact that although the implementation of the overall inspection program is endogenous
to air pollution, the timing of individual vehicle repairs—the mechanism through which
inspections should affect pollution—is essentially random and exogenous. We use counts
of final re-inspections following a failed inspection to capture the intensity of I/M-related
vehicle repairs. Controlling for local weather effects and a battery of time and region fixed
effects, we find repairing cars that failed initial inspections reduces local CO and NOx
levels in a statistically and economically significant fashion in the period following the
repairs. Repairing and re-inspecting 1,000 vehicles of 1985 model year or older decreases
ambient CO by 26 parts per billion and ambient NOx by 1.9 parts per billion, about
7% of a standard deviation for each pollutant. For scale, the average California county
re-inspects 1,000 failing vehicles of all ages every 12 days. Re-inspections of vehicles
manufactured after 1985 have much smaller effects on air pollution. This presents a case
where the social efficiency of a program changes as the relevant technology advances —
potentially regulation-driven improvements in engine technology are making smog check
programs, as currently designed, less socially efficient with time.
California recently passed substantial reforms of inspection station requirements, hoping to improve inspection reliability (Bureau of Automotive Repair, 2014). Under the
new “STAR” system, inspection and repair providers must pass certain quality criteria
before the state certifies them to inspect the most high-polluting vehicles.5 Testing the
effectiveness of such a program is subject to a number of confounding factors including
strategic customer and station responses to the rating system. To avoid such problems,
we use historic data to construct the STAR program measures of station quality before
the announcement of the policy, and test the relationship between ambient air pollution
and re-inspections at high scoring stations. We find re-inspections of older vehicles at
high quality stations reduce airborne levels of CO and NOx while re-inspections at low
quality stations yield no change in local air pollution levels. This result is consistent with
the theory that low quality stations allow vehicles to pass re-inspection without appropriate repairs. Much like our findings on the general effectiveness of I/M programs, we
find re-inspections of newer cars have little impact on air pollution, regardless of station
5

The STAR program also requires that newer vehicles with onboard monitoring computers be tested by
computer, rather than by direct tailpipe measurements. In addition, new regulations provide for heavier
penalties for stations that are found cheating, as well as for consumers who try to falsify an inspection.

3

quality.
We then use our empirical results to conduct two policy simulations. We first simulate
the eventual effectiveness of the STAR program, and show that benefits of the more strict
inspection system are likely to fade in the future. We also simulate the impact of removing
the Smog Check program entirely. We find that the benefits of Smog Check fell rapidly
between 2002 and 2009 as older vehicles left the road, while costs remained relatively
constant, being largely a function of the number of inspections per year. Although the
program would still pass a simple cost-benefit test in 2009, the trend suggests this will
not continue indefinitely.
Beyond our focus on vehicle emissions, this paper relates to the broader literature on
the quality of regulatory enforcement. Inconsistent enforcement of regulations can substantially hinder the effectiveness of regulatory programs. In a review of empirical studies
on the productivity of environmental monitoring, (n.d.) find that regular monitoring and
enforcement of regulated facilities can reduce violations both through improving regulated
areas and deterring future violations in areas that are not directly targetted. But if enforcement is lax, the regulator may appear “toothless,” reducing the impact of regulation
overall. Shimshack and Ward (2005) show that a regulator having a strong reputation has
large positive spillovers, and similarly, weak regulators may have large negative spillovers,
undermining compliance overall. Muehlenbachs et al. (2016) show that, in the context
of safety inspections on oil rigs, greater enforcement (as proxied by a greater number of
inspectors) improves inspection outcomes and safety. But in the context of smog checks,
citetOliva2015 shows corruption in I/M programs can be substantial. Our finding that
ineffective inspection stations do nothing to improve air pollution supports prior work
finding both that gaming is prevalent in I/M programs, and that regulation is ineffective
at improving environmental quality when enforcement is weak.
Section 2 outlines the California Smog Check Program and the new STAR system.
Section 3 describes the Smog Check and pollution data. Section 4 describes our identification technique and construction of ex ante STAR quality measures. Section 5 presents
our estimates of how the Smog Check program changed local pollution levels, and section
6 uses these results to simulate the impact of the STAR program. Section 7 concludes.

4

2

Background on California’s Emissions Testing Program

California provides an excellent backdrop for the study of tailpipe emissions programs.
Of the approximately 110 million registered automobiles in the United States in 2012,
almost 13 million were in California, more than any other single state.6 California has
a history of extensive automobile pollution regulation, and other states often adopt or
build off California regulations (Engel, 2015). Prompted by the federal 1977 Clean Air
Act Amendments, California began mandating biennial emissions inspections in 1984.
Current California law allows the Bureau of Automotive Repair (BAR) to mandate regular
measures of tailpipe emissions through “Smog Checks.” Most vehicles in California must
obtain a Smog Check every two years before renewing their annual vehicle registration.
If a vehicle displays emissions levels above the threshold for any regulated pollutant, the
owner must repair the vehicle and demonstrate passing levels in a later “re-inspection”
before registering it, thereby removing high-polluting vehicles from the fleet by inducing
repairs or forcing irreparable vehicles off the road.
The California Smog Check program is a decentralized system. Privately-owned repair
shops conduct vehicle inspections and, should the vehicle fail initial inspection, these
shops make the necessary repairs to bring cars to passing status. Early research found
the first incarnation of the Smog Check program was rife with problems that decreased
or eliminated ambient air pollution benefits (Glazer et al., 1995; Hubbard, 1998), and
identified fraud by private station technicians as a major source of problems.
California passed the first major overhaul of the Smog Check program in 1994 in
response to the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. The state implemented an “Electronic
Transmission System” (ETS) to automatically send test results to the BAR, and created
an “enhanced” inspection regime for the most polluted areas of the state. In addition to
requiring improved testing equipment, the program began directing vehicles in enhanced
regions to specially certified stations authorized only to conduct tests but not make repairs.
A vehicle is directed for inspections in a testing cycle if a BAR statistical model flags it
as meeting a “high emitter profile,” and is directed for all follow-up inspections if it fails
the initial inspection with emissions greater than or equal to double the legal limits. The
BAR also directs a 2% random sample of all vehicles registered in enhanced areas. The
BAR directs 30-40% of Smog Checks each year, and directed inspections are a major
6

Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2014 State Transportation Statistics data, Table 5-1. Available
online at http://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/publications/state_
transportation_statistics/state_transportation_statistics_2014/index.html/chapter5/
table5-1.

5

source of revenue for eligible stations (Eisinger, 2010). The policy of directing vehicles
was intended to make California’s privately run system more like government-run systems
in other states, which were thought to be less prone to fraud. However, test-only stations
were still privately run, and lacked the incentive of a test-and-repair station to profit
from performing necessary repairs. In 2005, the program allowed a special class of “Gold
Shield” test-and-repair stations to inspect directed vehicles as well.
In 2008, the BAR conducted random roadside emissions inspections and compared
the roadside results to the same cars’ most recent official Smog Check. Many cars listed
as passing their last Smog Check failed the equivalent roadside inspection; 19% of older
cars passing inspection less than a year prior failed the roadside test. Of the cars that
failed roadside testing, approximately half had failed their initial official inspection, but
then (supposedly) obtained the necessary repairs and passed their final re-inspection at
a Smog Check station.7 A potential implication of the discrepancy is that these cars did
not truly pass the re-inspections: someone had instead manipulated the testing outcome.8
In response to the roadside inspection study, the California State Legislature further
overhauled the Smog Check program. California Assembly Bill AB2289, passed in 2010,
directed the BAR to design a new system for certifying stations to inspect directed vehicles, using metrics based on testing results. The system the BAR proposed and eventually
implemented was dubbed STAR. Under the new regulations, owners of directed vehicles
must obtain checks at STAR-certified locations. STAR stations could be either Test-andRepair stations or Test-Only, and had to meet specific thresholds on three metrics based
on the Smog Check inspection data reported to the BAR. We discuss the three thresholds
in detail below.
The BAR finalized regulations for the STAR Program in November 2011, and published STAR scores for all stations in the spring of 2012. The program officially began
the next year—all directed vehicles must be inspected at STAR stations as of January 1,
2013.

3

Data

To measure the volume of re-inspections and generate our versions of the STAR quality metrics, we employ inspection-level data from the California Smog Check program.
7

“Evaluation of the California Smog Check Program Using Random Roadside Data”, 2010 Addendum, California Air Resources Board, February 2010. Available online at http://www.bar.ca.gov/80_
BARResources/02_SmogCheck/addendum_with_report.pdf.
8
An alternative explanation is that the effects of most emissions repairs are short-lived, lasting long
enough to pass the follow-up inspection, but degrading to the pre-repair state within a few months.

6

Stations conduct all Smog Check inspections using equipment attached to the ETS that
automatically sends results of the test to the California BAR.9 Our data consist of the
population of vehicle inspections conducted in California between 1996 and 2012 and
transmitted through ETS.10
Each observation in the Smog Check data represents a single inspection, and includes
the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) of the vehicle tested, the date and time of the
inspection, the odometer reading, an indicator for the outcome of the test, and emissions
readings for hydrocarbons (HCs), NOx , and CO. Each Smog Check inspection record
further contains a 6-digit station identifier, which we join to a crosswalk giving the zipcode
of each station.11
We determine model year and vehicle type from the included VIN.12 We also utilize
the provided odometer reading in calculating our hypothetical STAR scores.13
We use pollution data from the CARB Air Quality Database, a collection of air monitors taking hourly pollution readings. We use data from 1998 to 2009, and focus on
CO, NOx , ozone (O3), and particulate matter (PM). We aggregate hourly readings for
CO, NOx and O3 to the county-day level by averaging individual monitor readings in a
given county, and aggregate daily PM readings to the weekly level (most PM monitors
take measurements once every six days). We do not weight monitors by any distance
metric, and use an unbalanced panel of monitors to maximize available data. To improve
readability of our results, we scale pollution readings for CO, NOx and O3 to parts per
billion (PPB).
O3, a major component of the atmospheric condition commonly known as smog, is
a secondary pollutant, generated by atmospheric mixing of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) and NOx . Depending on the current state of local VOC and NOx levels, additional
NOx can either increase or decrease O3, which makes O3 a difficult pollutant to analyze
9
We obtained access to the Smog Check data via a Public Records Act request, the California equivalent of the Freedom of Information Act.
10
Data from 1996 and 1997 are incomplete, as the BAR was phasing in the ETS during these years.
When available, we use these data to construct any lagged measures for inspections in later years, but
our contemporary analysis does not begin until 1998 when the data are more reliable.
11
We are grateful to Emily Wimberger for providing this crosswalk.
12
Although the Smog Check data contain some direct information on vehicle types, it is messy and at
times unreliable when compared to known VIN information. All vehicles manufactured after 1980 have
a standardized 17-digit VIN: the first 8 digits plus the 10th and 11th precisely indicate the vehicle type,
at the level of make/model/engine/body type/transmission/year/plant. For earlier vehicles, different
manufacturers used their own formats. We determine make, model year and an approximation of the
vehicle-identifying prefix for most of the vehicles manufactured 1975-1980.
13
We employ an algorithm to “clean” the odometer variable, correcting for rollovers, typos and other
glitches that produce unbelievable values for miles traveled between inspections. Specifics of our algorithm
are available upon request.

7

on a large scale. Regardless, a primary interest of the program was to reduce smog, so we
test for general impacts of O3. The link between PM and automobile use is also largely
secondary. The largest sources of PM from automobile traffic are combustion of diesel
fuel and wear from road and engine friction. We expect little change in these sources from
Smog Check—California does not require Smog Checks for diesel vehicle from model years
prior to 1997, and Smog Checks should do nothing to change road wear. However, through
atmospheric reactions NOx can form fine particles, providing a vector for an impact, and
given the literature on the negative health effects of PM, we include this pollutant as
well.14 Our PM data gives the concentration of particles less than 10 micrometers (PM10 )
in units of micrograms per cubic meter (µ/m3 ). Local weather influences both general air
pollution and the types of emissions automobiles generate (Knittel et al., 2016). Ambient
temperature can also influence inspection results, as emissions control systems function
better when warm. We control for daily high and low temperatures and daily precipitation
at the county level. We generate weather data following the methodology of Schlenker
and Roberts (2006): taking spatially detailed monthly weather data generated by Oregon
State University’s PRISM model, aggregating the resulting grid of weather data by county
using GIS, and using historical daily averages to interpolate a daily weather.15 We note
weather fluctuations should be exogenous to inspection timing, and their inclusion should
do little to change our primary estimates.

4

Empirical Methodology

We estimate the impact of the Smog Check program, and the projected impact the new
STAR program in particular, by leveraging random variation in the timing and location
of repairs of failing vehicles. Unfortunately, we cannot observe actual repairs. Instead,
we focus on the timing of final re-inspections following a failed inspection. A passing
re-inspection theoretically indicates a repair took place to reduce a vehicle’s emissions
below the legal thresholds. Thus, we use final re-inspections in an inspection cycle as a
proxy for repairs.
The effectiveness of I/M depends on inspections accurately assessing vehicle-level emissions, and both inspectors and vehicle owners can influence test results through dishonest
behavior (Oliva, 2015). Evaluating the environmental benefits of the STAR program using
a simple pre/post examination of air pollution levels is problematic due to the possibility
14

See http://www3.epa.gov/airtrends/aqtrnd95/pm10.html, (accessed October 30th, 2015). See
also Dominici et al. (2014) for a review of recent literature on particulates.
15
We are grateful to Wolfram Schlenker for providing code to create the interpolated daily weather
series.

8

of stations attempting to game the rating system. Drivers of marginal cars have an incentive to seek test providers that are more lax in testing or willing to falsify tests, which in
turn provides an incentive for test providers to engage in such duplicitous behavior to draw
business. To avoid such problems, we examine the role of “better” stations, as measured
by the STAR metrics, before the development of the program. We generate retrospective
STAR scores for the period 1998–2009 based on the metrics the BAR eventually used.
This allows us to establish the link between station quality and local air pollution using
what would be “better” stations by STAR standards before the state even proposed the
program, such that no gaming behavior is possible. This section describes our methodology in detail, including construction of our retrospective station quality metric and our
identification of the effects of Smog Check and STAR.

4.1

STAR-based Station Quality Metrics

The STAR program certifies stations based on past inspection results. To qualify for the
program and receive business from “directed” vehicles as defined in section 2, stations must
have a passing grade on three metrics, based on the results of their inspections in the Smog
Check database. These include a short-term measure called the Similar Vehicle Failure
Rate (SVFR) using inspections taking place in the most recent calendar quarter, and a
longer-term measure called the Follow-up Pass Rate (FPR), based on current inspection
results of vehicles that a station inspected and passed on the previous inspection. The
other measure involves deviations from standard Smog Check test procedure.16
All STAR metrics compare test outcomes at the station in question to average rates for
similar vehicles statewide. The BAR defines “similar” vehicles as having the same make,
model, year, engine displacement, transmission type, and body style. Both the long-term
FPR and the key short-term measure, the SVFR, construct expected total failure rates
based on similar vehicles. The BAR compares these measures to the actual failure rate
for vehicles inspected at a given station. Although the BAR did not start calculating
these measures until after our sample period, we have all available information the STAR
program uses and can construct our own measures of both the FPR and SVFR using
observed historical inspection results.
Vehicles registered in basic and enhanced Smog Check areas must be inspected every
two years. We use the term “cycle” to refer to each time the vehicle is up for inspection
16
If a station deviates from procedure more than the average for similar vehicles, the station can be
ineligible for STAR. The STAR program separates out one of these deviations, selecting the incorrect gear
during the test, from seven other deviations. Stations can fail on up to one of the set of seven deviations
and still be eligible for STAR, but cannot fail the incorrect gear selection metric.

9

before registration. Each cycle may involve multiple inspections if the initial inspection
is failed, culminating with a final re-inspection where the vehicle eventually passes. Let
s index inspection station, n index vehicle, m vehicle type, c inspection cycle, and q
calendar quarter. We index inspections within cycles with i ∈ {1...I}. If a vehicle passes
the first inspection of a cycle, I = 1. Let ηs (c, i) denote the set of vehicles that receive
their ith inspection at station s during cycle c . We define the general expected failure
rate for station s as:
Θ(ηs (c, i), c0 , i0 ) =

X
1
P (f ailnc0 i0 = 1|mn , q, Xnmc0 ),
|ηs (c, i)|
n∈ηs (c,i)

where f ailnc0 i0 is an indicator equal to one if vehicle n fails the i0 inspection of cycle c0 ,
and Xnmqc0 is a vector of time-varying vehicle characteristics (e.g., mileage). We calculate
P (f ailnc0 i0 = 1|mn , q, Xnmc0 ) as:
P (f ailnc0 i0 = 1|mn , q, Xnmc0 ) = F (m, q) + (Xnmc0 − X̄mc0 )β,
where F (m, q) is the proportion of type m vehicles that fail during quarter q, X̄mc0 denotes
the type-specific mean of Xnmc0 during cycle c0 and β is derived from the following linear
probability model using only initial inspections (i = 1):
P (f ailnc1 = 1) = αm + γq + Xnmc β + εm ,
where αm and γq are vehicle type and quarter fixed effects, respectively. Following the
BAR procedure, X includes odometer reading at the time of the inspection and days since
last inspection. In words, the expected failure rate is the mean of the predicted failure
probability for vehicles inspected during the relevant cycle at the station in question.
Using the notation above, we define the SVFR for station s in quarter q as:
SV F Rsq =

1
|ηs (c,1)|

P

n∈ηs (c,1)

f ailnc1

Θ(ηs (c, 1), c, 1)

.

The SVFR is the ratio of the actual failure rate for initial inspections at the station
during the current period to the expected failure rate for those inspections.
The BAR calculates the FPR score used by the STAR program as the p-value of the
following hypothesis test:

10

h0 :
hA :

1
|ηs (c − 1, I)|
1
|ηs (c − 1, I)|

X

f ailnc1 ≤ Θ(ηs (c − 1, I), c, 1)

(1)

f ailnc1 > Θ(ηs (c − 1, I), c, 1)

(2)

n∈ηs (c−1,I)

X
n∈ηs (c−1,I)

The FPR tests whether vehicles given final inspections by station s on the previous cycle
fail more than expected during the current cycle. Note the vehicles in ηs (c − 1, I) need
not be inspected at station s during cycle c.17
We use the Smog Check inspection data to test how well these measures reflect the
ability of stations to reduce measured vehicle emissions. We calculate our STAR metrics
for the period before the program was in place, and thus not subject to gaming or any
other responses to implementation of STAR. We regress emissions at a vehicle’s initial
current inspection on the SVFR or FPR of the station that conducted the final, passing
inspection of the previous inspection cycle. If STAR metrics capture station quality,
vehicles passed by higher scoring stations should be less likely to fail, and thus have lower
emissions, on their next inspection. To flexibly estimate the relationship between quality
scores and later emissions, we use indicators for 10 bins of equal width to measure the
STAR scores, and interact the indicator for each bin with an indicator for whether each
vehicle failed the initial inspection of the previous cycle—i.e., whether it should have been
repaired before eventually passing. We control for the SVFR of the station conducting
the current initial inspection, to hold constant the probability of failing independent of
underlying emissions, and include controls for the type of inspection and vehicle type,
vehicle age, year, and county fixed effects
Figure 1 plots the coefficients on the STAR score indicators for CO emissions—results
for NOx emissions are similar, and versions of figure 1 are available in the appendix as
figure A1. Panel (A) shows results for bins of SVFR, and panel (B) shows results for bins
of FPR. For both measures, vehicles that fail the initial inspection on the previous cycle
are more likely to fail (have higher emissions) on the initial test of the next inspection
cycle. While we do see lower emissions for vehicles passed by stations with higher SVFR
scores, the effect flattens out at higher levels, reflecting an undesirable feature of the SVFR
as a quality metric: a very high SVFR does not necessarily mean a station is high quality.
Low failure rates may indicate fraud against the Smog Check program, but unusually
17
The STAR program actually calculates FPR at the technician level, and assigns stations the lowest
score of all their registered technicians. Because we calculate our version of the FPR at the station level,
we abstract from this distinction for clarity of notation.

11

high failure rates may indicate fraud against consumers rather than rigorous inspections
(Schneider, 2012). For the FPR, the relationship is the opposite of that intended. For
vehicles that failed the initial inspection on the previous cycle, the relationship between
emissions and FPR is essentially flat. For vehicles that pass the initial inspection, higher
FPR correlates with higher CO emissions at the next initial inspection. This counterintuitive result suggests vehicles inspected and passed at nominally higher quality stations,
as measured by the FPR, have greater emissions in the future.
What explains this odd result? The theoretical appeal of the FPR for measuring station quality is that it captures whether or not failing vehicles inspected at a station are
correctly repaired before eventually being certified. As we discuss in the next section,
this assumption is critical for any I/M program to reduce pollution levels—inspections
only reduce pollution if they lead to repairs that reduce emissions. The downside of the
FPR score used by the STAR program is that it is necessarily retrospective, capturing
a station’s performance generally two years in the past. This lagged performance metric may not correlate with current performance, which presents a potential problem for
implementation and effectiveness of the current STAR program. We discuss this issue in
detail in section 5.
As we use retrospective data, and have the entire history of each station’s inspections
up through 2012, we can calculate an alternate version of the FPR capturing contemporaneous final inspections, including re-inspections. We refer to this contemporaneous FPR
as the C-FPR. This score is the p-value from the following hypothesis test:

h0 :
hA :

1
|ηs (c, I)|
1
|ηs (c, I)|

X

f ailn(c+1)1 ≤ Θ(s, η(c + 1, I), c, 1)

(3)

f ailn(c+1)1 > Θ(s, η(c + 1, I), c, 1)

(4)

n∈ηs (c,I)

X
n∈ηs (c,I)

Our C-FPR tests whether vehicles given their final inspections by station s in the
current cycle fail more than average on their initial inspections in the next cycle (which
may be conducted at other stations). Panel (C) of figure 1 shows the relationship between
the C-FPR score and future emissions rates. Not only are higher C-FPR scores associated
with lower CO emissions on the next inspection, the relationship is nearly linear. We focus
on measuring station quality using the C-FPR for our air pollution results in the section
5.

12

4.2

The Effect of Smog Checks on Local Air Pollution

Counties and air quality management districts must implement the basic or enhanced
Smog Check program when pollution levels cross thresholds set by the federal Clean Air
Act. As a result, not only will the pre-trend of increasing emissions lead to bias in estimating the effect of the Smog Check program, exceeding the federal air pollution standards
may trigger additional policy responses. For instance, policymakers may respond to high
pollution levels by increasing mass transit options, or subsidizing engine modifications
on commercial trucks. Further, any kind of before/after comparison risks confounding
effects of Smog Check with effects of state- and nation-wide policy changes, particularly
emissions standards on new vehicles.
To avoid such issues, we estimate the effect of Smog Check and the new STAR program
by exploiting a key realization about the nature of vehicle inspection programs. Initial
inspections, passed or failed, correct or not, cannot directly impact air pollution. That
is, to a first approximation, inspections do not affect local air pollution levels; detection
of faulty engines and subsequent repairs do. The only way inspections affect air pollution
is through inducing repairs. If a vehicle is actually in a failing status but is incorrectly
passed on an initial inspection, this should not change air pollution levels—emissions will
be high both before and after the inspection. However, local air pollution levels would
improve if stations conduct repairs as a result of a failed initial inspection, and correctly
verify the effectiveness of the repair by re-inspecting the failing vehicle. Station quality
is thus important, as a sham initial inspection, or an omitted repair followed by a sham
re-inspection, should have no more effect on air pollution than no inspection program at
all.
Conveniently, the timing of inspections is exogenous to both levels and (non-Smog
Check) policy-driven changes in local air pollution. An annual vehicle registration notice
from the California DMV prompts vehicle owners to obtain a Smog Check every two
years. Vehicle registrations are due on the anniversary of the date the vehicle was initially
registered in California, and the registration notice comes in the mail around 60 days
before the vehicle’s registration expires. In California, the expiration date for a vehicle’s
registration stays constant even if the vehicle is sold. Thus, if a vehicle ever changes
owners, the timing of the biennial Smog Check is unrelated to any choice on the part of
the current vehicle owner. This provides variation in registration dates, variation in when
the vehicle owner obtains the initial inspection, variation in whether a vehicle fails the
initial inspection, and variation in how quickly the owner repairs the vehicle and schedules
the re-inspection in the event of an inspection failure. None of these sources of variation
should correlate with levels of air pollution, except possibly through seasonality, which
13

we control for using fixed effects.
We create a daily panel of re-inspection counts aggregated by county of the station conducting each inspection. Choosing an overly fine geography risks attributing inspections
to the wrong location and ignoring spillover effects from pollutants blown to neighboring
areas. At the same time, broad geographic definitions reduce our sample size and may
obscure important variation. We aggregate at the county level as a compromise between
these constraints. Counties in California are large relative to other parts of the country,
and a county is a reasonable approximation of the area in which a vehicle owner does
most of their commute driving.18 Data on county-to-county migration flows from the
2000 Census show that 82% California workers live and work in the same county.19 Further, the EPA determines Clean Air Act attainment status at the county level, making it
a policy-relevant level of aggregation.
Although daily variation in re-inspections is useful for identification, there is a lag
between the repair of a failed vehicle and when we expect to see a change in air pollution
levels. Pollutants like NOx and CO persist in the air and may take time to drift to a
sensor, and there may be a period of days between a repair and the date the station
records the re-inspection. Thus, associating air pollution levels on a specific day with
re-inspections on the same day is overly restrictive. To address this issue, we use a 90-day
rolling total of re-inspections as our measure of the intensity of re-inspections.20
Because older vehicles are more polluting on average and thus more likely to be targeted by California’s policy of directing vehicles, we split results by vehicle age to estimate
separate effects for re-inspections of older vs. newer vehicles. This requires we formally
define “older” in our context. Beginning in 1980 three major improvements in engine technology led to significant reductions in vehicle emissions: the three-way catalytic converter,
introduced in 1980; fuel-injection systems, introduced in 1985; and second-generation onboard monitoring computers (called OBDII), introduced in 1996. Each of these technologies were adopted rapidly, and affected emissions both under normal operating conditions
and potentially under “failing” conditions as measured by Smog Checks.
To help determine a reasonable cutpoint for old versus new vehicles, we plot average
CO and NOx emissions measured at passed and failed Smog Checks by model year.21
Figure 2 shows that, for both pollutants, emissions at passing inspections are decreasing
18

We obtain qualitatively similar results when we aggregate at the air basin level instead.
See http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/commuting/index.html, accessed August
1, 2015.
20
We obtain qualitatively similar results using a 30-, 60- or 120-day window.
21
O3 and PM10 are not tailpipe pollutants and as such are not measured directly by Smog Check
inspections.
19

14

across model years in a largely continuous fashion as general automobile technology improves. For failed inspections, average Smog Check test results exhibit a strong decline
in CO levels beginning with the 1985 model year, and a strong decline in NOx levels
beginning with the 1994 model year. To be more conservative in what we call “older”
cars, we opt for 1985 as the cut-off year between old and new vehicles.22
We estimate the effect of re-inspections on levels of a pollutant p ∈ {N Ox , CO, O3, P M10 }
as:
ptg =

90
X
i=0

!
old
Rg(t−i)

β1 +

90
X

!
new
Rg(t−i)

β2 + γXgt + εgt ,

(5)

i=0

old
new
where Rct
and Rct
denote the number of re-inspections of older and newer vehicles,
respectively, occurring in county g on date t, Xgt is a vector of covariates, and εgt is an error
term. We specify re-inspections in levels. Holding weather, county geography and related
factors constant via fixed effects, to a first approximation repairing one failing vehicle
should remove the same quantity of emissions, and by extension reduce air pollution
levels by the same amount, regardless of whether this represents a 1% change or a 0.001%
change in the level of re-inspections. This will cause the model to predict much larger
effects for densely populated areas such as Los Angeles County, a desirable feature of our
specification. Los Angeles County is heavily polluted in part because it has a very large
number of cars on the road, and we expect it to experience large reductions in pollution
relative to the counterfactual if the Smog Check program causes large numbers of highpolluting vehicles to receive repairs.23 β1 and β2 give the causal effect of additional reinspections on air pollution levels. In our preferred specification, Xgt includes controls for
weather, county fixed effects, calendar-week fixed effects to control for statewide trends,
and county-specific cubic time trends.
Identification of the effect of station quality follows from the same logic as the effect
of re-inspections. The number of re-inspections at higher- and lower-quality stations will
fluctuate over time with the variation in the timing of the initial Smog Checks of vehicles
eventually taken to those stations. As our quality metric was unobservable during the
period covered by our air pollution data, and the study of roadside inspections leading to
the development of the STAR program was not even released until 2010, the distribution
of vehicles across high- and low-quality stations is exogenous.24 Given our argument that
22

If we separate out effects into three groups, one for each “era” of pollution control technology, we
obtain essentially identical effects from re-inspections of the 1985–1995 and 1995+ vehicles, with no change
in the effect of 1975–1985 vehicles, indicating that the split at 1985 is appropriate. See appendix table A1.
23
Our results are robust to excluding Los Angeles County.
24
This further assumes consumers had no other way to identify low-quality stations willing to pass

15

only accurate re-inspections reduce local air pollution, we expect to see smaller or zero
effects from re-inspections at low-quality stations, and larger effects from re-inspections
at high-quality stations.
Conducting analysis at the county rather than station level requires we construct a
county-level measure of station quality. We estimate the interaction of station quality and
re-inspections using two different approaches. First, we calculate a 90-day rolling average
of the C-FPR score at the county level, weighting our individual station C-FPR scores by
the number of re-inspections at each station. We interact this county-level average with
the count of re-inspections:

ptg =

90
X

!
old
Rg(t−i)

90

90

β1 +

X
1 X
old
old
CF P Rg(t−i)
·
Rg(t−i)
91 i=0
i=0

+

90
90
X
1 X
new
new
CF P Rg(t−i) ·
Rg(t−i)
91 i=0
i=0

i=0

!
δ1 +

90
X

!
new
Rg(t−i)

β2

(6)

i=0

!
δ2 + γXgt + εg ,

new
old
denote the county average C-FPR of stations conducting
and CF P Rgt
where CF P Rgt
re-inspections of older and newer cars, respectively.
We next take a more flexible semi-parametric approach, equivalent to interacting reinspections with bins of average county-level C-FPR scores. Because our air pollution
analysis uses aggregated data, this takes the form of counting re-inspections of older and
newer cars at stations falling into each of 20 equal-size C-FPR bins:

ptg =

20
X
b=1

β1b

90
X
i=0

!
old
Rbg(t−i)

+

20
X

β2b

b=1

90
X

!
new
Rbg(t−i)

β2 + γXgt + εg ,

(7)

i=0

old
where Rbg(t−i)
counts total re-inspections of older vehicles conducted at stations with Cnew
FPR scores falling in bin b within a county, and Rbg(t−i)
is the corresponding count for
newer vehicles.

a failing vehicle before STAR. One way to test this assumption is to compare the average C-FPR of
stations inspecting older vehicles to the average for stations inspecting newer vehicles. Pre-1985 model
year vehicles are more likely to fail and likely more expensive to fix. If consumers had any systematic
way of identifying “bad” stations willing to give a sham inspection, we would expect to see older vehicles
disproportionately inspected at lower quality stations. We observe the mean C-FPR for older and newer
vehicles is essentially the same.
25
Researchers often show CO in parts per million (ppm), so at first glance our CO numbers appear
larger than prior studies looking at CO in California. For example, Currie and Neidell (2005) show that

16

5

Results

Panel A of table 1 summarizes our variables of interest. For consistency with our regression
results, we show NOx , O3 and CO in parts per billion (ppb).25 Average levels of both NOx
and CO fell across our sample period, dropping almost 350 ppb (0.35 ppm) for CO and 10
ppb for NOx . O3 was largely unchanged, remaining within 0.5 ppb of initial 1998 levels.
We note the number of personal automobiles on the road in California increased by almost
1.5 million vehicles across this period, so no change in O3 levels does not necessarily mean
that the Smog Check program had no impact on O3. PM10 levels fluctuate from year to
year with no obvious pattern.
California is a large and geographically diverse state, with very different climate,
topology and population density in the northern and southern regions. For southern
California, panel B shows averages for Los Angeles County, the county with the most
annual inspections. Improvements in CO were more drastic in Los Angeles County than
the state as a whole, decreasing by over 800 ppb (0.8 ppm). NOx decreased around 40
ppb, just over 50% of 1998 levels, while O3 levels increased. For northern California, panel
C shows averages for the 9 counties that make up the San Francisco Bay Area.26 The San
Francisco Bay Area follows the general pattern of California, with similar improvements
in both CO and NOx and little change in O3 and PM10 .
Turning to the data on Smog Check, two general trends appear. First, increases
in inspections (and re-inspections) correlate with decreases in both CO and NOx but
with little change in O3. Second, neither total inspections nor re-inspections increase
monotonically with time. Total inspections peak in 2004 and then drop, likely due to a
2005 Smog Check policy change that exempted pre-1975 vehicles from inspections.27 In
most of the state, re-inspections decline around 2002, corresponding to a decrease in the
overall failure rate (and thus the need for re-inspection/repair). As a caveat, we note the
San Francisco Bay Area seems to be missing a large number of inspections from 2002
through mid-2003—we exclude these years for these counties from our empirical analysis.
We are not aware as to why these counties are “missing” inspections for this period,
though we note the timing corresponds to a shift in the Smog Check regime in these
counties, during which stations in the region were upgrading the machines used for Smog
Checks. Results are robust to inclusion of this period for these counties.
in 2000, the average California 8-hour high CO level was 1.3 ppm (1,300 ppb), compared to a full day
average of 649 ppb for the same period in our data.
26
The counties in the San Francisco Bay Area are: Alameda County, Contra Costa County, Marin
County, Napa County, San Francisco County, San Mateo County, Santa Clara County, Solano County
and Sonoma County.
27
Note we control flexibly for such state-level changes across time in our regressions.

17

5.1

Effect of Re-inspections

To establish a causal link between re-inspections (our proxy for repairs) and local air pollution, we estimate a series of regression models based on equation (5), where the coefficient
of interest is the effect of re-inspections of failing cars on local air pollution. Specifically,
in table 2 we estimate the link between the number of county-level re-inspections and
county-level measures of the direct pollutants CO and NOx . We scale our results to show
the effect per 1,000 re-inspections in the past 90 days. Using values from table 1, the
average California county sees 1,000 re-inspections of all vehicle ages every 12 days, while
Los Angeles County has an average of just over 1,000 re-inspections every day. The nine
counties making up the San Francisco Bay Area conduct about 1,000 re-inspections every
two days.
Column 1, the most basic model, includes no controls. Both CO and NOx show a
positive correlation between county pollution levels and the number of re-inspections for
older cars: an additional 1,000 re-inspections correlates with a 41.7 ppb increase in CO
(0.09 of a standard deviation) and a 1.9 ppb increase in NOx . When we focus on newer
cars, the sign flips for CO to a 2.2 ppb decrease per additional 1,000 re-inspections. The
sign on NOx remains positive, but is smaller at 0.2 ppb per 1,000 cars. All results are
statistically significant at either the 5% or 1% level.
Adding county fixed effects (Column 2) increases the negative effect of newer car reinspections on CO to 10.5 ppb per 1,000 re-inspections, but the impact from older cars
remains similar. The sign on NOx is now negative for newer cars, with an additional 1,000
re-inspections lowering ambient levels by 0.5 ppb. Adding controls for weather (Column
3) does little to change the size or sign of our results—while weather can influence the
relationship between emissions and ambient pollution levels, we expect it to be exogenous
to the number of re-inspections. Thus, controlling for weather serves largely to increase
precision of our estimates. Column 4 adds calendar week effects to flexibly control for
state-wide trends and within-year seasonality.28 Controlling for state-wide time effects
pushes coefficients toward zero for both vehicle age groups and both pollutants, but the
coefficients on re-inspections of older cars remain positive.
Finally, Column 5 controls for local trends using a third-order polynomial time trend
for each county, in addition to county fixed effects, weather controls, and calendar week
fixed effects. After controlling for differential trends across counties, increasing re-inspections
(repairs) of both older and newer cars reduces ambient CO and NOx . This suggests coun28

While weather is exogenous to the number of inspections, time of year is not: inspection timing
corresponds with time of initial purchase, and the number of new cars sold varies systematically across
time of year.

18

ties with increasing air quality saw decreases in the number of re-inspections of older
cars over time. Older cars are more polluting than newer cars, but also more likely to
be scrapped or sold out of state, especially if these vehicles cannot pass a Smog Check
without significant repairs. Counties with many older cars early in our sample period
would see fewer re-inspections of older cars over time due to increased scrappage and
thus declining air pollution that is not directly related to Smog Check inspections and
repairs. Failing to account for such trends biases the estimated impact of repairing older
cars. In our preferred specification, re-inspecting an additional 1,000 older cars decreases
ambient CO by 26.6 ppb and ambient NOx by 1.9 ppb (0.07 of a standard deviation of
both pollutants). An additional 1,000 newer car re-inspections decreases ambient CO by
4.8 ppb and NOx by 0.8 ppb (0.01 and 0.03 of a standard deviation, respectively).
As a whole, we find the Smog Check program’s requirements to repair and re-inspect
high-polluting vehicles moderately improved local CO and NOx levels, particularly when
repairing older model-year cars. We next consider how station quality controls, as proposed in the new STAR program, affect the benefits of I/M.

5.2

Station Quality

To test for the role of station quality, we examine how our C-FPR score correlates with
the effect of re-inspections. We first calculate the C-FPR score for all stations in the
county, then aggregate up to the county level, weighting by the number of re-inspections
conducted over the previous 90 days (see section 4).
Table 3 shows our results. All columns use the controls from Column 5 of table 2:
weather controls, county fixed effects, county cubic trends, and calendar week fixed effects.
Column 1 repeats the model of table 2 Column 5 for comparison. Column 2 includes an
additional interaction between the number of re-inspected vehicles in the last 90 days
with the continuous C-FPR measure. Higher C-FPR corresponds to the county having
a greater share of re-inspections at stations the STAR program would consider to be of
better quality, had STAR existed at the time.
Column 2 shows station quality clearly matters in the case of older vehicles. As an
extreme example, re-inspections in a county with an average C-FPR of zero would have
essentially zero effect on either pollutant, but the effect of re-inspections increases with
average station quality. For ease of interpretation, we present the estimated effect for
each vehicle age calculated at the average county-level C-FPR in our sample. For older
cars, this suggests an additional 1,000 re-inspections in a county of average C-FPR would
29

We calculate the effect at the average level using the margins command in Stata.

19

decrease ambient CO levels by 55.44 ppb and average NOx levels by 4.55 ppb.29 Both
average effects are statistically significant at 1%.
The case for station quality when testing newer vehicles is less clear. The signs of
both the baseline effect and the interaction effect are reversed from that of older vehicles:
a greater share of re-tests at higher quality stations reduces the effect of re-inspections
on ambient pollution for both CO and NOx . Importantly, these results are precisely
estimated but economically insignificant, which is clear when considering the marginal
effect at the mean. At the average county C-FPR of around 0.59, an additional 1,000 reinspected newer cars would decrease pollution levels by around 0.004 standard deviations
for CO and 0.016 standard deviations for NOx . The result is not statistically significant
for CO, and the average effects on both pollutants are about half the size of the already
small overall effects for newer cars from table 2.
Figure 3 clearly illustrates the effect of station quality for newer cars is effectively
zero. Following equation (7), we generate 20 bins of C-FPR scores, in units of 0.05, from
0 to 1. We include sets of 20 variables each for older and newer cars, giving the counts of
re-inspections at stations in the appropriate C-FPR bin. Figure 3 plots each coefficient
on the bin-specific count variables, and provides a LOWESS fit with bandwidth N ∗ 0.8
to illustrate the general patterns across the C-FPR distribution.
Panel A shows results for CO, and panel B shows results for NOx . For newer cars, the
effect of a re-inspection is approximately constant at zero across our estimated measure
of station quality. Visual analysis shows the puzzling positive results from table 3 are a
result of effects for counties with average FPRs very close to 1, which represent a small
share of re-inspections overall. For example, only 24% of total newer vehicle re-inspections
across our entire sample occurred at stations with C-FPR levels greater than 0.9. Panel B
shows that with older cars, there is a clear differential between a re-inspection at a lowerquality vs. a higher-quality station. Increasing re-inspections in areas with C-FPR scores
below approximately 0.3 has no effect on local air pollution, with increasing benefits of
re-inspections for higher-quality stations.
Table 3 and figure 3 jointly suggest increasing re-inspections of older cars in areas with
higher estimated station quality reduces air pollution in an economically and statistically
significant manner. However, there is no effect for areas with lower station quality, and
economically insignificant effects regardless of quality when considering newer model-year
cars.
The small effect of re-inspections of newer cars on air pollution is to be expected,
to some extent. As we showed in figure 2, the average differential in tailpipe emissions
between a passing and a failing vehicle decreases with model year. Bringing an average
20

failing 1984 model year vehicle up to passing standard reduces the CO concentration in
its tailpipe emissions by around 14,000 parts per million, while fixing an average 2001
model year vehicle reduces CO emissions by about 1,300 parts per million, more than
10 times less. With a smaller effect on emissions per vehicle of conducting repairs, it
should not be surprising that the effect of repairing 1,000 vehicles on ambient pollution
is smaller. The small effect of re-inspections and the zero effect of station quality may
also have to do with the OBDII computers installed in vehicles manufactured after 1996.
These computers trigger the familiar “check engine” light when they detect an emissions
failure, possibly leading to repairs outside the Smog Check inspection cycle. Station
quality at the biennial inspection would then have little effect, as most serious emissions
failures would have already been fixed. More troublingly, OBDII systems may make it
easier to consistently defeat detection of emissions failures, as was the case in the recent
scandal involving Volkswagen diesel vehicles. The STAR quality metrics, including our CFPR variant, are designed to catch cheating stations by comparing their results to others
statewide. However, if a vehicle passes incorrectly at every inspection, this will lead
to scores that are uncorrelated with actual inspection results, especially if the cheating
behavior is on the part of the vehicle owner or manufacturer rather than the inspection
station. A related issue with inspection programs, identified by Mérel et al. (2014), is
that vehicle repairs may not last for the full period between inspections. Depending on
the rate of repair decay, the benefits of passed re-inspections could be highly transient.
Regardless of the reason, the small effect of re-inspections of newer cars and the
negligible effect of station quality for those vehicles is problematic for the efficacy of the
Smog Check program in general, and STAR in particular going forward. Newer vehicles
make up the majority of inspections, and the majority of the costs of both inspections and
repairs come from these vehicles. If the Smog Check program, even enhanced by STAR,
is not delivering air pollution benefits from newer vehicles, the value of the program is
diminished.

5.3

Effects of Re-inspections on Secondary Pollutants

We focus on the effect of Smog Checks on CO and NOx because these pollutants are
directly emitted by motor vehicles and thus we most expect to see an effect on levels
of these pollutants. However, the main social harms from NOx and the policy interest
in controlling it stem from its role in forming secondary pollutants, principally O3 and
particulate matter. O3 in particular has a complicated formation process, and it is possible
that the moderate reductions in NOx caused by Smog Check might not translate into

21

reductions in O3. In table 4 we estimate our empirical model using ambient O3 as
the outcome. Columns 1 and 2 replicate the analysis of tables 2 and 3 using ozone
levels in parts per billion as the outcome variable. The point estimates have the wrong
sign, indicating re-inspections increase ozone levels, but although some estimates are
statistically significant, they are economically zero. For the average county, re-testing an
additional 1,000 cars increases ambient ozone by 0.0007 of a standard deviation for older
cars and increases ambient ozone by 0.014 of a standard deviation for newer cars.
O3 levels are negatively correlated with CO and NOx levels in our sample, and so
the small effect and “wrong sign” for our ozone results could simply reflect that correlation. The process by which NOx and VOCs form ozone resembles a Leontieff production
function, such that when NOx levels are high, reducing NOx emissions may have limited
effect on ozone levels.30 To test this, in columns 3 and 4 we control for the level of NOx
and NOx squared. Our coefficients acquire the “right” sign, with re-inspections of older
cars reducing O3 levels, but the magnitudes are still very small. In appendix table A3
we allow the coefficients on re-inspections to vary depending on whether the NOx level is
high or low on a given day. We get similar results as those in table 4. It does not appear
our zero findings for ozone are a result of the availability of NOx . Finally, figure 6 plots
results by C-FPR bins, and we see no visual effect.
We next test for the effect of re-inspections on levels of PM10 . Because PM10 sensors
only take readings every 6 days, we collapse to the county-week level. For counties with
more than one sensor and thus more than one observation per week, we take the average
PM10 reading for each week and use the weather controls and the rolling total of reinspections for the day of the last reading. Table 5 repeats the analysis of table 3 with
PM10 as the dependent variable. Without controlling for station quality, our estimates
are imprecise, but the point estimates indicate re-inspections of older vehicles have a
small negative effect on PM10 levels, while re-inspections of newer cars have a near-zero
effect. Adding an interaction with county-average C-FPR, we find that re-inspections
of older vehicles have no effect on PM10 levels when conducted at poor quality stations,
while re-inspections at high quality stations moderately reduce PM10 levels, a result that
is statistically significant at 5%. At the average C-FPR, 1,000 re-inspections of older
vehicles leads to a 1.9 µ/m3 reduction in PM10 levels, about 0.08 of a standard deviation.
As with CO and NOx , re-inspections of newer cars have the wrong relationship with station
quality, although the effect at the mean C-FPR is economically insignificant. Figure 4
plots results for PM10 by C-FPR bins, and shows that the effect of re-inspections of older
30

There is an additional process by which certain forms of NOx can actually reduce ozone when NOx
is sufficiently abundant. See Muller et al. (2009).

22

cars increases with the C-FPR score of the stations doing the inspections, while the effect
re-inspections of newer cars is effectively zero at all station quality levels.

6

Simulation Exercises

We can use our estimates to simulate the impact of California’s recently implemented
STAR program, aimed at improving station quality, and the impact of the Smog Check
program as a whole. We first predict what average pollution levels would have been under
STAR during our sample period. We take our estimate for the last year of or sample,
2009, as a rough estimate of the predicted impact of STAR at the time of implementation
in 2013. We then predict what pollution levels would have been throughout our sample
absent any smog check program. In addition to predicting pollution levels, we conduct
a rough cost-benefit analysis considering the benefits of abating the pollutants we study
and the costs of Smog Check and STAR.
The benefits of pollution reduction predominantly arise from reduced infant and elder
mortality—although pollution impacts other health outcomes, the value of a statistical
life (VSL) is generally high enough that it dwarfs morbidity effects, which are also more
difficult to measure. We use estimates from prior literature in economics on the impacts
of CO and PM10 on mortality, which largely focus on infants. As such, these benefit
estimates ignore mortality effects for those age 1 and older and morbidity effects for all
ages. CO and PM10 have documented direct effects on infant mortality, while the harms
of NOx derive from its role in forming ozone and particulate matter, which also have
documented health effects. As we find no economically significant effect of the Smog
Check program on ozone, we focus on benefits from reducing PM10 and CO.
Instrumental variables estimates from Knittel et al. (2016), Chay and Greenstone
(2003), and Arceo et al. (2015) all find that a one unit reduction in ambient PM10 results
in approximately 10 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 births. However, these studies do not
provide useful estimates of the harms of CO: Chay and Greenstone (2003) do not estimate
CO effects, CO results from Knittel et al. (2016) are too imprecise to draw conclusions,
and estimates from Arceo et al. (2015), which use data from Mexico, are less applicable
to our setting given nonlinearities in the effect of CO and the higher CO levels in Mexico.
Instead, for the benefits of CO reduction we use estimates Currie and Neidell (2005) and
Currie et al. (2009), which both estimate fixed effects models with U.S. data and find a 1
part per million (1,000 ppb) reduction in CO lowers the infant mortality rate by 18.1 and
17.6 deaths per 100,000 live births, respectively. Currie and Neidell (2005) and Currie
et al. (2009) find essentially zero effect of PM10 on infant mortality, which suggests the
23

possibility of co-pollutant effects. That is, the instrumental variables studies mentioned
above place all mortality effects on PM, while fixed effects models place it all on CO, when
in fact the total weight likely is shared between the two. By drawing results from different
estimation strategies, we may over-attribute effects to any single pollutant, making our
benefits an over-estimate. With this in mind, we use the 17.6 deaths per 100,000 live
births estimate from Currie et al. (2009) to estimate the benefits of CO reductions.

6.1

Predicting the Impact of STAR

We first use our regression results to simulate the effect on CO and PM10 of the specific
requirements of the STAR program at the beginning and end of our sample. Knowing the
theoretical impact of STAR in 1998 is interesting, but tells us little about what to expect
as the policy goes forward. Thus, we focus on the future impact of more stringent I/M
requirements. To predict pollution levels, we use the models whose results are presented
in the second columns of tables 3 and 5 for CO and PM10 , respectively.
To project future impacts of STAR, we ask how increasing mean station quality would
change the impact of the existing level of re-inspections. The minimum acceptable FPR
for STAR certification is 0.4. Thus, we estimate changes in air pollution if every reinspection of an older vehicle were conducted at a station with our C-FPR score of 0.4
or higher. We take every station with a C-FPR below 0.4, and re-assign re-inspections
of older vehicles from those stations to stations in the same county with C-FPR greater
than or equal to 0.4. Re-inspections are redistributed to “good” stations in proportion
to each station’s share of re-inspections in same county and the current quarter. Then,
given the simulated distribution of re-inspections over inspection stations, we recalculate
the 90-day county-level moving average C-FPR, and predict counterfactual air pollution
levels using the model and results from column 2 of table 3. One can think of this exercise
as simulating the effect of an idealized certification program targeting true station quality,
as distinct from observable quality. Recall our C-FPR measure is not feasible for use in
certifying stations. The actual STAR program uses the FPR, which uses contemporaneous
inspections to evaluate lagged station performance, and as we showed in section 4 the FPR
metric poorly predicts future vehicle emissions.
Figure 5 maps our predicted results by county for the years 1998 (top) and 2009
(bottom), with results for CO and NOx on the left and right, respectively. The counties
making up the San Francisco Bay Area see relatively small changes in 1998, in part because
these counties historically had what would be high C-FPR score stations to begin with:
our theoretical exercise of removing “bad” station re-inspections thus has little bite. But

24

improving station quality in 1998 would have substantially reduced CO and NOx levels
in a number of California’s urban areas, with Los Angeles County and nearby portions
of southern California receiving the greatest benefit. Although relatively few counties see
a large change in pollution levels, in 1998 more than 15 million people lived in counties
with counterfactual decreases of 20% or more, so welfare effects would have been large.
We discuss such welfare effects further below.
The case for improving inspection station quality in 2009 is less clear. As a result
of older vehicles aging out of circulation, the effect of moving older vehicles to higher
quality stations is limited. Many counties, including the most populous in the state, see
reductions of less than 1% from already lower baseline pollution levels.
These estimates likely overstate the potential impact of STAR, as our measure of
station quality, while based on the STAR program methodology, uses future inspection
results to rate current stations. This improves accuracy in measuring low- vs. high-quality
stations, but is impossible to use in practice. To predict the effect of the STAR program
using the standard STAR measures, we conduct another simulation, this time reassigning
re-inspections of pre-1985 vehicles from stations with STAR metrics below the cut-offs
(FPR below 0.4 and SVFR below 0.75) to stations with STAR scores above those cut-offs.
Table 6 shows the results of simulating implementation of the STAR program in 2009.
Assigning all older vehicles to stations with our C-FPR of 0.4 or higher would raise the
average C-FPR of stations inspecting older vehicles from 0.6 to 0.77. This would cause the
average 2009 CO level to decrease by just under 10 ppb, the NOx level by 0.8 ppb, and the
PM10 level by 0.3 µ/m3 . The statewide effect of implementing the STAR program is much
smaller, with a 3.1 ppb reduction in CO, a 0.26 ppb reduction in NOx , and a 0.1 µ/m3
reduction in PM10 . The statewide effect hides substantial variation across the state’s most
polluted areas. The average C-FPR in Los Angeles County was 0.39 in 2009. Moving
re-inspections at low quality stations to stations with C-FPR of 0.4 or higher would raise
the average C-FPR to 0.65, lowering CO levels by 68 ppb, lowering NOx levels by 6.4 ppb,
and lowering PM10 by 3 µ/m3 . Implementing the actual STAR program in Los Angeles
County in 2009 would raise the C-FPR to just 0.46, with an effect on all three pollutants
roughly one fourth as large as the idealized program. The San Francisco Bay Area had
higher than average C-FPR in 2009, and either of our simulations has only a small effect
on both average station quality and air pollution. In contrast, San Diego County had
an average C-FPR score of 0.33 in 2009, and as in Los Angeles County, implementing
the actual STAR program would have about one fourth the effect of using the C-FPR to
certify stations.
The effect of increasing station quality is quite small in either simulation for 2009.
25

Even this overestimates the future effect of STAR, as the number of older model year
vehicles on the road falls with time.
6.1.1

Welfare Effects of STAR

Our simulations suggest the current incarnation of the STAR program will do little to further improve local air pollution in California. Because the gains from inspections mostly
derive from older vehicles that are becoming scarce on the road, even an inspection program using our contemporaneous quality measure would have a small impact by 2013.
Further, the STAR quality metrics available in practice appear to do a poor job of measuring current station quality. As a result, moving vehicle inspections to STAR-approved
stations is unlikely to meaningfully reduce air pollution. However, while STAR is unlikely
to have a substantial impact on air pollution levels, it is a relatively inexpensive policy,
and may have net positive effects on welfare.
Using 2009 county-level birth rates, our predicted effect of STAR on CO would have
prevented an expected 0.64 infant deaths over the year statewide. Using the U.S. EPA’s
preferred estimate of the VSL, $7.6 million, this translates to annual benefits of about $4.9
million. If PM10 affects infant mortality, STAR would have prevented an additional 16.5
infant deaths in California, with welfare benefits of about $125 million. Note that these
results assume a lasting decrease in pollution levels following faulty car repairs. If the
benefits of repairs degrade with time, the health gains will be more short lived and thus
the social benefits lower. As an important caveat, our estimated pollution reductions are
on a large geographic scale, effectively estimating the average reductions across a county.
PM in particular can travel large distances, so this may be the relevant geographic scale.
But if reductions more local and the health gains of reduction are non-linear, then health
benefits could be much higher.
While the benefits of STAR for CO in particular are modest, STAR is a fairly inexpensive program. The California State Legislature estimated administrative costs of
$350,000-$450,000 per year.31 The more significant source of costs is in time—directing
vehicles to STAR stations instead of the more abundant test-only stations might lead to
increased driving times. In 2009, there were about 3.6 million directed inspections in the
state of California. At the 2009 average hourly wage for California, $23.82,32 if STAR
caused owners of directed vehicles to drive an extra 10 minutes round trip to their Smog
Checks, the time costs would total more than $14.5 million that year.
31

See http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/09-10/bill/asm/ab_2251-2300/ab_2289_cfa_20100617_
172946_sen_comm.html (Accessed September 23, 2015).
32
See http://www.bls.gov/oes/2009/may/oes_ca.htm, (accessed November 9, 2015)

26

6.2

Do Smog Checks Affect Smog?

We next estimate the effect of the Smog Check Program as a whole on California pollution
levels. The methodology for this simulation is simple–we predict pollution levels in each
year of our sample with the number of re-inspections set to zero for all days and counties.
That is, we estimate pollution levels for the counterfactual world where California had
no Smog Check Program at all. We again use our regression models presented in the
second columns of 3 and 5. However, we assume for purposes of our simulations that
re-inspections of newer vehicles have zero effect on PM10 . Our regression results have a
positive effect at the mean C-FPR level, but both the base effect and interaction term
are noisily estimated and statistically indistinguishable from zero, and the marginal effect
at the mean C-FPR is only marginally significant. Taken literally, our point estimates
would imply that eliminating the Smog Check Program would drastically reduce PM10
levels, which seems unlikely.
For the costs of Smog Check, we assume that each inspection has a social cost of
$20.33 We further assume that each inspection takes 20 minutes of consumer time, which
we again value at the 2009 average hourly wage for California, $23.82. An additional cost
of the Smog Check Program is the required repairs when vehicles fail an inspection. To
estimate this cost, we employ an additional set of data from the Smog Check program,
containing records on repairs logged by Smog Check stations. We assume that the number
of Smog Check-related repairs each year are equal to the number of official Smog Check
repair records–i.e., there are no additional repairs that are not logged. A subset of the
repair records indicate the cost of repairs,34 and we use these records to calculate the
average repair cost by year. We only have repair data beginning in 2002, and so our
welfare estimates will begin in that year. Our estimate of the total cost of Smog Check
in a given year is then the total number of inspections, multiplied by $20 plus 0.33 times
$23.82, plus the total number of repairs times the average repair cost.
We note that this exercise will to some extent understate the benefits of Smog Check,
as it implicitly assumes away long-term effects of regular inspections on vehicle emissions. Vehicle emissions controls deteriorate over time. Even if many inspections are low
quality, without any inspection the average emissions rate might climb above what we
33

There is no database of Smog Check station prices that we are aware of. However, anecdotal evidence indicates that inspection stations typically charge at between $30 and $70 for an inspection (see,
e.g. http://www.smogtips.com/smog_program.cfm). We use $20 as an estimate of cost both to be conservative and to account for the fact that some portion of the price of a Smog Check inspection is a
transfer from the consumer to either the station or the state, rather than a true social cost.
34
Specifically, actual repair costs are reported for repairs where the consumer applied to the Consumer
Assistance Program, or CAP, a program that subsidizes emissions repairs for low-income consumers.

27

observe in our data, as the emissions controls fail to an extent that even an ineffective
inspection system would not permit. We see some evidence of this in the Smog Check
data. California requires vehicles that are imported from other states to receive a Smog
Check before getting an initial registration, and the data indicates which inspections are
“initial registration inspections” of this nature. As not all states have I/M programs,
any difference between emissions at initial registration inspections and normal biennial
inspections will partially capture the long-term effects of having no I/M program. As
we show in appendix table A4, newer vehicles imported from out of state have emissions
readings as much as 20% higher than in-state vehicles, even after controlling for vehicle
type, age, and odometer reading (however, we find much smaller differences among the
oldest and dirtiest vehicles). Note also that we are predicting significantly out of sample
in this simulation. In contrast to our STAR simulation, where we observe a range of
station quality in our data, we do not observe a period with no Smog Checks. Thus,
while we take the trends in the welfare analysis to be informative, the levels may be off
significantly in either direction.
The results of our simulation are displayed in Figure 7, which plots by year our estimates of the health benefits of CO reductions, the health benefits of PM10 reductions,
and the costs, of the Smog Check program. Two things stand out. First, despite the
relatively small effect of re-inspections on PM10 , particulate matter is so harmful that
the aggregate benefits were quite large, particularly earlier in our sample. Second, the
benefits of the Smog Check Program declined rapidly, while the costs remained relatively
constant. We predict that the program still had positive net benefits in 2009, but the
ratio of benefits to costs fell precipitously between 2002 and 2009. In 2002, the benefits
from CO reductions alone exceeded the costs of the program, and the total benefits of
pollution reduction were more than 10 times the costs. By 2009, the benefits of the much
smaller reductions in CO were less than a quarter of the cost of the program, and the
combined benefits of CO and PM10 reductions are only about twice the costs. Given this
trend, it seems likely that the benefits fell below the costs between 2009 and the present.

7

Conclusion

Motor vehicles generate a number of pollutants, many of which have an established negative impact on human health. To reduce the public damages of automobile use, governments may use inspection and maintenance (I/M) programs, where stations routinely
test engines for compliance with emissions standards, and require repairs and further
tests in the event of failure. These inspections and repairs are costly to consumers, and
28

while follow-up tests can show repairs improve emissions at the tailpipe, there is little
causal evidence of how such programs change local air quality. We test two important
questions related to such programs. First, do I/M programs improve local air pollution
in an observable manner on a large scale, beyond laboratory conditions? Using over a
decade of data from the state of California, we show an increase in emissions-related repairs, as proxied by passing post-repair inspections, corresponds to local improvement in
CO, NOx and PM10 levels, but with little change in local O3. This relationship persists
after controlling for a wide variety of location and time fixed effects and ambient weather
controls, and shows California’s Smog Check program has successfully improved local air
pollution. However, additional gains from the Smog Check program are decreasing with
time, as almost all benefits of repairs and re-inspections come from fixing failing older
model cars (1985 and prior) with inferior emissions control technology. As older technology cars disappear from the road, the differential between failing and repaired emissions
decreases. This is a case where growth of regulated technology, potentially driven by the
program itself, is reducing the social efficiency of the regulatory program over time.
We combine information on estimated costs of emissions inspections, our estimated
regional pollution improvements, and pollution mortality effects from prior economics
literature to perform a back-of-the-envelope cost/benefit analysis of the California I/M
program. Our estimates suggest that, while the costs of the program remained largely
constant during our sample, the benefits declined sharply with each passing year as the
older-model cars that benefit most from Smog Checks disappear from the road. Even so,
as of the end of our data sample in 2009, the benefits of the program still exceeded the
costs by approximately 2 to 1, suggesting it would have passed a basic cost/benefit test
at that time, although given the trend it is questionable whether the program would pass
such a test today. Moreover, there remains the question of efficiency relative to other
policies. I/M programs like California’s Smog Check Program are intended to reduce O3
levels by controlling emissions from all vehicles. Given that we find the primary benefit
of Smog Check is from inspections of a shrinking number of very old cars, and manifests
primarily through reductions in ambient particulate matter we must ask—is there a better
policy to achieve these pollution reductions?
We partially address this issue in our second question as we consider whether using a
certifying high quality stations using inspection results can further reduce air pollution.
Given fears of false or low-quality repairs of failing vehicles followed by potentially fraudulent re-inspections, the new California STAR program uses a “Follow-up Pass Rate”
(FPR) measure based on inspection data to determine which stations the state allows
to provide repairs and re-inspections to the dirtiest cars. A number of factors, including
29

potential system fraud, complicate measuring the role of the FPR after the implementation of the program, making estimation of program effects difficult. We use the California
Smog Check data from 1998-2009 to construct a modified station-level FPR that conveys
information similar to that of the STAR program, but without concerns of secondary program effects. We show how local air pollution changes with an increase in average quality
of local stations allowed to administer inspections and repairs. When a greater share
I/M stations are of high quality, an additional repair corresponds to a greater marginal
improvement in contemporaneous air pollution. However, the gains of estimated station
quality are again limited to repairs and re-inspections of older model. For newer cars with
modern emissions control technology, there is no economically meaningful benefit to restricting repairs to high-quality stations. Between a decline in effectiveness of the overall
Smog Check program as older vehicles age out of the fleet and poor predictive power of
the actual STAR quality metrics, it is unlikely the new STAR program as designed will
further improve the effectiveness of Smog Check for reducing air pollution.

References

Ando, Amy, Virginia McConnel, and Winston Harrington, “Costs, Emissions
Reductions and Vehicle Repair: Evidence from Arizona,” Journal of the Air Waste
Management Association, 2000, 50 (4), 509–521.
Arceo, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva, “Does the Effect of Pollution on
Infant Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from
Mexico City,” The Economic Journal, 2015.
Bureau of Automotive Repair, “Smog Check Performance Report (AB2289),” Technical Report 2014. Accessed from https://www.bar.ca.gov/pdf/ab_2289_bill_
20100924_chaptered[1].pdf.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
Recession,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 1121–1167.
Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell, “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can
We Learn from California’s Recent Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Eocnomics, 2005,
120 (3), 1003–1030.
30

and Reed Walker, “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-ZPass,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 65–90.
, Mathew Neidell, and Johannes F. Schmieder, “Air Pollution and Infant Health:
Lessons from New Jersey,” Journal of Health Economics, 2009, 28, 688–703.
Davis, Lucas W, “The effect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico City,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (1), 38–81.
Dominici, Francesca, Michael Greenstone, and Cass R. Sunstein, “Particulate
Matter Matters,” Science, 2014, 344, 257–259.
Eisinger, Douglas S, Smog Check: Science, Federalism, and the Politics of Clean Air,
Routledge, 2010.
Engel, Kirsten H., “The Enigma of State Climate Change Policy Innovation,” in
Kalyani Robbins and Erin Ryan, eds., The Law and Policy of Environmental Federalim:
A Comparative Analysis, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 2015.
Fowlie, Meredith, Christopher R Knittel, and Catherine Wolfram, “Sacred cars?
Cost-effective regulation of stationary and nonstationary pollution sources,” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (1), 98–126.
Glazer, Amihai, Daniel B. Klein, and Charles Lave, “Clean on Paper, Dirty on
the Road: Troubles with California’s Smog Check,” Journal of Transport Economics
and Policy, 1995, 29 (1), 85–92.
Harrington, Winston, Virginia McConnell, and Amy Ando, “Are vehicle emission inspection programs living up to expectations?,” Transportation Research Part D:
Transport and Environment, 2000, 5 (3), 153–172.
Hoekstra, Mark, Steven L. Puller, and Jeremy West, “Cash for Corollas: When
stimulus reduces spending,” 2014. NBER Working Paper 20349.
Hubbard, Thomas N., “An Empirical Examination of Moral Hazard in the Vehicle
Inspection Market,” RAND Journal of Economics, 1998, 29 (2), 406–426.
Jacobsen, Mark R, “Evaluating US fuel economy standards in a model with producer
and household heterogeneity,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5
(2), 148–187.

31

, “Fuel Economy and Safety: The Influences of Vehicle Class and Driver Behavior,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (3), 1–26.
Knittel, Christopher R., Douglas L. Miller, and Nicholas J. Sanders, “Caution
Drivers! Children Present: Traffic, pollution and infant health,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 2016, 98 (2), 350–366.
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Elisheba Spiller, “Evaluating “Cash-for-Clunkers”:
Program Effects on Auto Sales and the Environment,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2013, 65 (2), 175–193.
Mérel, Pierre, Aaron Smith, Jeffrey Willams, and Emily Wimberger, “Cars on
Crutches: How Much Abatement Do Smog Check Repairs Actually Provide?,” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management, 2014, 67 (3), 371–395.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009
‘Cash for Clunkers’ Program,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 1107, 1142.
Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Stefan Staubli, and Mark A. Cohen, “The Impact of Team
Inspections on Enforcement and Deterrence,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2016, 3 (1), 159–204.
Muller, Nicholas, Daniel Tong, and Robert Mendelsohn, “Regulating NOx and
SO2 Emissions in Atlanta,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 2009.
Oliva, Paulina, “Environmental regulations and corruption: Automobile emissions in
Mexico City.,” Journal of Political Economy, 2015, 123 (3), 686–724.
Sandler, Ryan, “Clunkers or Junkers? Adverse selection in a vehicle retirement program,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (4), 253–281.
Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J. Roberts, “Nonlinear Effects of Weather on Corn
Yields,” Review of Agricultural Economics, 2006, 28, 391–398.
Schneider, Henry S., “Agency Problems and Reputation in Expert Services: Evidence
from Auto Repair,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2012, 60 (3), 406–433.
Shimshack, Jay P. and Michael B. Ward, “Regulator reputation, enforcement, and
environmental compliance,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
2005, 50 (3), 519–540.

32

Wolff, Hendrik, “Keep Your Clunker in the Suburb: Low-emission Zones and Adoption
of Green Vehicles,” The Economic Journal, 2014, 124 (578), F481–F512.

33

Table 1: Average Daily Air Quality and Smog Check Inspections in California Counties,
1998-2009
Panel A: All California
Ozone (PPB) PM10 (µ/m3 ) # Inspections

CO (PPB)

NOx (PPB)

1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

703.0
716.2
649.6
612.1
600.8
562.6
499.6
458.4
466.8
431.7
422.3
363.5

28.89
32.40
30.19
27.68
28.18
26.36
24.20
24.23
23.41
22.05
20.38
18.03

28.04
28.32
26.65
27.60
29.04
28.69
27.66
26.60
28.19
27.61
28.93
27.66

25.50
31.00
27.16
27.79
30.10
26.78
26.38
24.05
26.14
25.90
26.75
22.18

587.5
678.5
706.2
755.2
719.6
825.0
795.7
669.7
678.3
667.6
671.6
688.5

63.07
74.12
85.29
93.99
96.61
107.2
101.7
84.99
78.04
73.65
72.64
73.90

Average

551.9

25.57

27.89

26.61

701.5

83.19

CO (PPB)

NOx (PPB)

1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

1254.5
1203.6
1029.1
936.9
869.9
814.0
663.9
580.2
548.8
506.6
470.3
417.4

71.45
79.36
70.98
64.25
60.89
58.35
51.49
47.09
47.35
43.86
40.49
35.99

Average

774.6

55.96

Panel B: Los Angeles County
Ozone (PPB) PM10 (µ/m3 ) # Inspections
21.73
20.78
20.73
21.58
24.30
25.27
26.49
24.48
25.48
25.05
25.93
26.59
24.04

# Re-Inspections

# Re-Inspections

37.60
32.40
32.41
30.45
29.98
33.32
30.66
29.86

7064.1
8324.6
8489.6
9015.2
9255.0
9328.7
9418.5
7838.1
7880.1
7644.7
7600.5
7781.6

814.8
1023.0
1121.0
1253.4
1318.1
1316.7
1271.9
1042.3
962.3
900.2
871.8
895.2

32.06

8303.5

1065.9

Panel C: San Francisco Bay Area
Ozone (PPB) PM10 (µ/m3 ) # Inspections

CO (PPB)

NOx (PPB)

1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

756.8
769.7
699.7
636.5
599.5
569.4
502.9
486.7
466.9
418.2
387.5
350.4

33.81
37.48
35.02
31.51
31.08
27.56
25.80
25.51
24.93
23.18
21.82
21.08

19.76
19.84
18.41
19.86
20.61
20.41
20.43
20.21
21.90
21.68
22.80
21.24

18.00
21.40
18.45
20.16
21.67
16.55
17.32
16.31
18.34
16.47
17.44
14.21

5078.1
5571.8
5941.3
6223.4
865.1
3849.2
6820.2
5731.4
5867.2
5795.3
5820.1
5960.5

422.3
403.6
514.9
567.5
69.89
379.1
831.2
693.5
608.5
561.4
545.0
553.0

Average

553.7

28.23

20.60

18.07

5294.2

512.6

Note: Excludes counties and years where biennial inspections are not required

34

# Re-Inspections

Table 2: Re-Inspections and County-Level Daily Air Quality
A: Outcome is Carbon Monoxide (PPB)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles
1985+ Vehicles
County FE
Weather Controls
Calendar Week FE
County Time Trends

41.68∗∗∗
(9.780)
-2.229∗∗
(1.089)
No
No
No
No
(1)

000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles
1985+ Vehicles
County FE
Weather Controls
Calendar Week FE
County Time Trends
Observations
∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05,

36.96∗∗∗
(9.284)
-10.54∗∗
(4.142)
Yes
Yes
No
No

16.25∗∗∗
(2.219)
-4.480∗∗∗
(1.301)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-26.61∗∗∗
(5.856)
-4.849∗∗
(2.228)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

B: Outcome is NOx (PPB)
(2)
(3)
(4)

1.925∗∗∗ 1.392∗∗∗
(0.287)
(0.221)
0.161∗∗∗ -0.749∗∗∗
(0.0404) (0.249)
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
143440

∗∗∗

35.41∗∗∗
(8.601)
-13.98∗∗
(5.198)
Yes
No
No
No

143440

(5)

1.497∗∗∗
(0.275)
-0.517∗∗∗
(0.174)
Yes
Yes
No
No

0.843∗∗∗
(0.0921)
-0.269∗∗∗
(0.0569)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-1.913∗∗∗
(0.514)
-0.829∗∗∗
(0.164)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

143440

143440

143440

p < .01

Note: Observations are county-days. Standard errors clustered by county reported in parentheses.

35

Table 3: Station Quality and County-Level Air Pollution
A: Outcome is CO (PPB)
(1)
(2)
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles

-26.61∗∗∗
(5.856)

1975-1985 Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR
-4.849∗∗
(2.228)

1985+ Vehicles
1985+ Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR

-6.231
(4.872)
-87.79∗∗∗
(19.55)
-55.44 ∗∗∗
(10.64 )
-13.01∗∗∗
(3.791)
22.13∗∗∗
(7.891)
-0.369
(2.584 )

B: Outcome is NOx (PPB)
(1)
(2)
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles

-1.913∗∗∗
(0.514)

1975-1985 Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR
-0.829∗∗∗
(0.164)

1985+ Vehicles
1985+ Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR
∗

p < .1,

∗∗

p < .05,

∗∗∗

0.0724
(0.444)
-8.347∗∗∗
(1.067)
-4.548 ∗∗∗
(0.820 )
-1.661∗∗∗
(0.278)
2.240∗∗∗
(0.462)
-0.404 ∗∗
(0.172 )

p < .01

Note: Observations are county-days. All regressions control for daily weather,
county fixed effects, calendar week fixed effects, and county-specific cubic time
trends. Standard errors clusted by county reported in parentheses.

36

Table 4: Station Quality and County-Level Ozone Pollution
Base
(1)
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles
1975-1985 Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR
1985+ Vehicles
1985+ Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR
∗

p < .1,

∗∗

p < .05,

∗∗∗

NOx Controls
(2)

-0.230∗
(0.122)
0.632∗
(0.373)
0.137
(0.204 )
0.171∗∗∗ 0.440∗∗
(0.0461) (0.185)
-0.579∗
(0.289)
0.0984 ∗∗
(0.0487 )
0.00951
(0.138)

(3)

(4)

-0.203∗
(0.114)

-0.181
(0.115)
-0.533
(0.383)
-0.476 ∗∗
(0.192 )
0.227
(0.153)
-0.270
(0.245)
0.0752
(0.0468 )

0.0828∗
(0.0412)

p < .01

Note: Observations are county-days. All regressions control for daily weather, county fixed
effects, calendar week fixed effects, and county-specific cubic time trends. Columns (3) and
(4) control for a quadratic in the level of NOx . Standard errors clusted by county reported
in parentheses.

37

Table 5: Station Quality and County-Level PM10 Pollution
Outcome is PM10 (µ/m3 )
(1)
(2)
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles

-0.929
(0.623)

1975-1985 Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR
1985+ Vehicles

0.132
(0.160)

1985+ Vehicles · C-FPR
Effect at Mean C-FPR
∗

p < .1,

∗∗

p < .05,

∗∗∗

0.443
(0.800)
-3.921∗∗
(1.700)
-1.865 ∗∗
(0.801 )
-0.0855
(0.395)
0.589
(0.505)
0.265 ∗
(0.154 )

p < .01

Note: Observations are county-weeks. All regressions control for daily
weather, county fixed effects, calendar week fixed effects, and county-specific
cubic time trends. Standard errors clusted by county reported in parentheses.

38

Table 6: Predicted 2009 Station Quality and Pollution, Simulating an Ideal and Real
STAR Program
All CA

LA County

Bay Area

San Diego

C-FPR Score
Baseline
Re-assign using C-FPR
Reassign using SVFR & FPR

0.596
0.772
0.663

0.393
0.653
0.458

0.631
0.786
0.696

0.327
0.697
0.413

CO Level (PPB)
Baseline
Re-assign using C-FPR
Reassign using SVFR & FPR

363.9
354.0
360.8

457.3
389.3
440.1

340.3
336.9
339.2

612.7
582.1
605.7

NOx Level (PPB)
Baseline
Re-assign using C-FPR
Reassign using SVFR & FPR

17.54
16.78
17.28

38.87
32.41
37.24

20.84
20.52
20.74

23.98
21.07
23.31

PM10 Level (µ/m3 )
Baseline
Re-assign using C-FPR
Reassign using SVFR & FPR

20.92
20.62
20.82

28.62
25.58
27.84

16.75
16.60
16.69

28.74
27.38
28.43

Notes: Baseline scenario shows actual average C-FPR and predicted CO and NOx from the
model in column 2 of table 3. “Reassign using C-FPR” redistributes inspections at stations
with C-FPR below 0.4 to stations which pass these measures, recalculates the county average
C-FPR accordingly, and predicts CO and NOx . “Reassign to STAR Stations” redistributes
inspections at stations failing the SVFR and FPR threshholds to stations which pass these
measures.

39

.2

.1

Coefficient on FPR Bin
.05
.1
.15

Coefficient on SVFR Bin
−.1
0

0

−.2
0

.5

1
1.5
Value of SVFR

2

2.5

0

.2

.4
.6
Value of FPR

Vehicles Passing First Inspection
Vehicles Failing First Inspection

.8

1

Vehicles Passing First Inspection
Vehicles Failing First Inspection

(B) STAR FPR Score

−.2

Coefficient on FPR Current Bin
−.1
0
.1

.2

(A) STAR SVFR Score

0

.2

.4
.6
Value of Current FPR

.8

1

Vehicles Passing First Inspection
Vehicles Failing First Inspection

(C) Contemporaneous FPR (C-FPR)

0

0

200

5000

Combined CO ppm
10000
15000

Combined NOx ppm
400
600

800

20000

1000

25000

Figure 1: STAR Metrics of Re-inspection Station and Log CO Emissions at Next Inspection

1975

1980

1985

1990
1995
Model Year

Failed Inspections

2000

2005

2010

Passed Inspections

1975

1980

1985

1990
1995
Model Year

Failed Inspections

2000

Passed Inspections

Figure 2: Average Smog Check Measured Emissions by Model Year

40

2005

2010

Change in CO (PPB) per 1000 Re−inspections
−400 −200
0
200
400
Change in NOX (PPB) per 1000 Re−inspections
−30 −20 −10 0
10 20

CO

0

.2

.4
.6
Bottom of FPR Bin

.8

1975−1985 Vehicles

1985+ Vehicles

Coefficients

Coefficients

Lowess Best Fit

Lowess Best Fit

1

NOx

0

.2

.4
.6
Bottom of FPR Bin

.8

1975−1985 Vehicles

1985+ Vehicles

Coefficients

Coefficients

Lowess Best Fit

Lowess Best Fit

1

Figure 3: Effect of Reinspections on Daily Air pollution, by FPR Score of Test Stations

41

3

Change in PM10 (µ/m ) per 1000 Re−inspections
−20
−10
0
10
20

PM10

0

.2

.4
.6
Bottom of FPR Bin
1975−1985 Vehicles
Coefficients
Lowess Best Fit

.8

1

1985+ Vehicles
Coefficients
Lowess Best Fit

Figure 4: Effect of Reinspections on Weekly PM10 Levels, by FPR Score of Test Stations

42

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

Figure 5: Predicted Percent Change in Pollution Levels From Re-inspection All 1975–1985
vehicles at STAR stations

43

Change in Ozone (PPB) per 1000 Re−inspections
−10
0
10
20

1985+ Vehicles

Change in Ozone (PPB) per 1000 Re−inspections
−10
0
10
20

1975−1985 Vehicles

0

.2

.4
.6
Bottom of FPR Bin

.8

1

0

.2

.4
.6
Bottom of FPR Bin

.8

High NOx days

Low NOx Days

High NOx days

Low NOx Days

Coefficients

Coefficients

Coefficients

Coefficients

Lowess Best Fit

Lowess Best Fit

Lowess Best Fit

Lowess Best Fit

1

0

Social Costs and Benefits (millions)
500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500

Figure 6: Effect of Reinspections on Daily Ozone Levels, by FPR Score of Test Stations

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Year
CO Benefits
Costs

PM Benefits

Figure 7: Costs and Benefits of the Smog Check Program, by Year

44

A

Appendix

Table A1: Re-Inspections and County-Level Daily Air Quality: Robustness Checks
CO
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975–1985 Vehicles
-26.81∗∗∗
(5.800)
1985-1995 Vehicles
-4.517∗
(2.300)
1995+ Vehicles
-5.520
(3.356)
County FE
Yes
Weather Controls
Yes
Calendar Week FE
Yes
County Time Trends
Yes
Observations

129260

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01

45

NOx
-1.915∗∗∗
(0.494)
-0.826∗∗∗
(0.231)
-0.837∗∗∗
(0.179)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
143440

Table A2: Re-Inspections and County-Level Daily Air Quality: Robustness Checks
A: Outcome is Carbon Monoxide (PPB)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles

-26.61∗∗∗
(5.856)
1985+ Vehicles
-4.849∗∗
(2.228)
County FE
Yes
Weather Controls
Yes
Calendar Week FE
Yes
County Time Trends
Yes
Exclude LA
No
Month-of-Year and Day-of Week FE
No
County-Year FE
No

1985+ Vehicles

Observations
∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05,

∗∗∗

-24.21∗∗∗
(6.917)
-5.929∗∗
(2.663)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes

-28.81∗∗∗
(6.223)
-5.723∗∗
(2.297)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
(5)

-1.909∗∗∗
(0.514)
-0.828∗∗∗
(0.164)

-1.831∗∗∗
(0.443)
-0.987∗∗∗
(0.241)

-2.051∗∗∗
(0.499)
-0.877∗∗∗
(0.158)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

-1.879
(1.519)
-0.687∗∗
(0.311)
0
(.)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

143440

139057

143440

143440

20505

-1.913∗∗∗
(0.514)
-0.829∗∗∗
(0.164)

o.la
County FE
Weather Controls
Calendar Week FE
County Time Trends
Month-of-Year and Day-of Week FE
County-Year FE

-26.59∗∗∗
(5.852)
-4.830∗∗
(2.229)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

B: Outcome is NOx (PPB)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(1)
000s of Re-Inspections Last 90 Days
1975-1985 Vehicles

-38.81∗
(20.53)
-2.910
(5.667)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

p < .01

Note: Observations are county-days. Standard errors clustered by county reported in parentheses.

46

Table A3: Station Quality and County-Level Ozone

Low NOx Days
1975-1985 Vehicles

(1)

(2)

0.163
(0.195)

0.449
(0.464)
-0.933
(1.199)
0.172
(0.239)
0.167
(0.469)

1975-1985 Vehicles · C-FPR
1985+ Vehicles Vehicles

0.207∗∗∗
(0.0621)

1985+ Vehicles · C-FPR
High NOx Days
1975-1985 Vehicles

-0.193∗
(0.108)

-0.442∗∗∗
(0.139)
1975-1985 Vehicles · C-FPR
0.425
(0.401)
1985+ Vehicles Vehicles
0.0606
0.384∗∗∗
(0.0387) (0.132)
1985+ Vehicles · C-FPR
-0.722∗∗
(0.274)

Observations

143049

143049

Note: Observations are county-days. All regressions control for
daily weather, county fixed effects, calendar week fixed effects,
and county-specific cubic time trends. Low and high NOx days
are days with NOx levels below (above) the median NOx level
of 18 ppb. Standard errors clustered by county reported in
parentheses.
∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01

47

Table A4: Emissions levels by Inspection Reason
(1)
Ln(HC)

(2)
Ln(NOx )

(3)
Ln(CO)

(4)
P(Fail)

0.0304∗∗∗
(0.00159)

-0.00708∗∗
(0.00258)

0.0270∗∗∗
(0.00285)

-0.00610∗∗∗
(0.000557)

0.0704∗∗∗
(0.000696)

0.0297∗∗∗
(0.00127)

0.0617∗∗∗
(0.000790)

0.00176∗∗∗
(0.000197)

0.0473∗∗∗
(0.00259)

-0.101∗∗∗
(0.00395)

0.0465∗∗∗
(0.00488)

-0.00195
(0.00104)

0.201∗∗∗
(0.00212)

0.171∗∗∗
(0.00354)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.00243)

0.0149∗∗∗
(0.000254)

Odometer (00000s)

0.340∗∗∗
(1.05e-08)

0.480∗∗∗
(2.67e-08)

0.378∗∗∗
(1.27e-08)

0.0628∗∗∗
(3.25e-10)

Years Since Last Inspection

0.0109∗∗∗
(0.000270)

0.0135∗∗∗
(0.000458)

0.0213∗∗∗
(0.000369)

0.0112∗∗∗
(0.0000982)

ASM Test

0.392∗∗∗
(0.00337)

0.253∗∗∗
(0.00425)

0.478∗∗∗
(0.00474)

0.0339∗∗∗
(0.000519)

Vehicle Age FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Calendar Quarter FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

County FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

VIN Prefix FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

124575462

95543435

124575462

124586809

Change of Ownership
Model Years 1976-1985
Model Years 1985+
Initial Registration
Model Years 1976-1985
Model Years 1985+

N

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

48

.08

.02

Coefficient on FPR Bin
.02
.04
.06

Coefficient on SVFR Bin
−.06
−.04
−.02
0

0

−.08
0

.5

1
1.5
Value of SVFR

2

2.5

0

.2

Vehicles Passing First Inspection
Vehicles Failing First Inspection

.4
.6
Value of FPR

.8

1

Vehicles Passing First Inspection
Vehicles Failing First Inspection

(B) STAR FPR Score

−.04

Coefficient on FPR Current Bin
−.02
0
.02

.04

(A) STAR SVFR Score

0

.2

.4
.6
Value of Current FPR

.8

1

Vehicles Passing First Inspection
Vehicles Failing First Inspection

(C) Contemporaneous FPR (C-FPR)

Figure A1: STAR Metrics of Re-inspection Station and Log NOx Emissions at Next
Inspection

49

