                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   STICKY PRICES VERSUS STICKY INFORMATION:
                     DOES IT MATTER FOR POLICY PARADOXES?

                                     Gauti B. Eggertsson
                                       Vaishali Garga

                                     Working Paper 23961
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23961


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2017




We thank seminar participants at Brown University and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston for
helpful comments and suggestions. All errors are our own.The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Gauti B. Eggertsson and Vaishali Garga. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sticky Prices Versus Sticky Information: Does it Matter for Policy Paradoxes?
Gauti B. Eggertsson and Vaishali Garga
NBER Working Paper No. 23961
October 2017
JEL No. E31,E4,E5,E50,E51,E52,E6,E62

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper shows that government spending multiplier at the zero lower bound (ZLB) is larger
under sticky information than under sticky prices. Similarly, well known paradoxes, e.g., the
paradox of toil and the paradox of flexibility become more severe under sticky information. For
the case of sticky information it is important to assume that the fiscal policy intervention
coincides with the duration of zero interest rates, while such distinction is less important in some
special cases for sticky prices. This allows us to unify and clarify results that may appear to
contradict each other in the literature.


Gauti B. Eggertsson
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu

Vaishali Garga
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
Vaishali_Garga@brown.edu
1   Introduction
A number of papers documented that fiscal policy is extremely effective to increase
demand at the ZLB. In particular the classic government spending multiplier is greater
than one, while under normal circumstances it is not, for then monetary policy can
do the job via interest rate cuts. Examples include Eggertsson (2011), Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2009), Woodford (2011). The literature also uncovered pe-
culiar paradoxes, such as the paradox of toil (Eggertsson (2010)) and the paradox of
flexibility (see Bhattarai, Eggertsson and Schoenle (2014) for an overview of this liter-
ature and some general results). These results could be interpreted either as a serious
challenge to the conventional wisdom or reflect some fundamental flaws of the New
Keynesian framework. These results were, however, derived under the assumption
that prices are sticky, as in Calvo (1983).
    It has long been recognized that the Calvo model of price setting has many pe-
culiar features. This led researchers to explore alternatives, such as information fric-
tions. One of the most prominent proposal to replace the New Keynesian Phillips
curve based upon Calvo prices is the assumption of sticky information, proposed
by Mankiw and Reis (2001). According to their hypothesis, firms adjust their prices
slowly because they do not continously update their information set. Mankiw and
Reis argued that this alternative assumption helps explain the data better along cer-
tain dimensions. A very natural question, in the light of the radical findings docu-
mented in the Calvo model at the ZLB, is if these results carry over to a setting where
information rigidities are assumed instead of sticky prices. The main conclusion of
this paper is that the answer is yes.
    In an important and intriguing recent paper, Kiley (2016), documents experiments
in which the fiscal policy results of the Calvo model are overturned upon assuming
informational frictions as in Mankiw and Reis. The thought experiment Kiley con-
ducts is as follows: Suppose the Central Bank follows an interest rate peg for 100
periods. What happens if the government increases spending for 1, 2, . . . upto 25
periods? What happens if taxes are increased for 1 to 25 periods? Kiley documents
that while under Calvo prices the predictions are in line with the existing literature at
the ZLB, the predictions are different under informational frictions. In particular, the
government spending multiplier is small, tax multiplier is negative and the paradox
of flexibility disappears. Kiley’s experiment is referred to in this paper as an interest
rate peg experiment (PEG-EX). Kiley interprets these findings as suggesting that the
sticky-information model is free from policy paradoxes, and thus to be favored over
the Calvo model. Here, instead, we argue that these findings are an artifact of the
thought experiment considered. The paradoxes in the sticky information framework
in fact get even stronger in policy experiments that correspond more closely to those
considered in the existing literature.
    This paper compares sticky prices and sticky information doing a different ex-
periment. This experiment is identical to the one conducted in Eggertsson (2011),

                                           1
      Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2009), Eggertsson (2010), Woodford (2011). The
      ZLB is binding due to exogenous fundamental shocks. Once the shocks are over, the
      policy is given by a simple inflation target (which is missed for the duration of the
      shocks, due to the ZLB). This experiment is referred to as ZLB experiment (ZLB-EX).
      This paper documents that the results derived in the literature under sticky prices
      in the ZLB-EX are even more extreme if sticky prices are replaced with sticky infor-
      mation, which is the opposite of Kiley’s result. The government spending multiplier
      becomes larger, and the paradox of toil and flexibility become more pronounced.
          While this may seem to contradict Kiley’s findings, it does not. Instead it clarifies
      that Kiley’s PEG-EX is a fundamentally different experiment than done in the existing
      literature. What is particularly subtle – and interesting – about the comparison, and
      likely to trigger confusion, is that under sticky prices the ZLB-EX and PEG-EX lead
      to exactly the same result. It is only when assuming sticky information that the
      results of the ZLB-EX and the PEG-EX are different. This does not have anything to
      do with the nature of the nominal frictions. Instead, it is a consequence of the fact
      that the sticky-information model has infinite number of endogenous state variables.
      Meanwhile the Calvo model is purely forward looking. The presence of endogenous
      state variables in the sticky-information model implies that comparing the reaction
      of an economy assuming an exogenous interest rate peg, versus the reaction of the
      economy if the central bank’s policy is bounded by zero due to fundamental shocks,
      leads to very different results. The same does not apply for perfectly forward looking
      systems like the Calvo model of price stickiness.
          This paper first shows analytical examples that clarify the intuition behind these
      findings. It then moves to numerical examples that replicate Kiley’s results. These
      examples confirm that Kiley’s results are driven by the difference in experiments
      being conducted rather than anything fundamental about the assumption of price
      stickiness.
          Arguably, the ZLB-EX is more economically relevant than PEG-EX. It seems of
      more limited economic interest – at least in the context of the crisis that started in
      2008 – to explore the behavior of New Keynesian models if the short-term interest
      rate is temporarily pegged for no apparent reasons. Instead, the most economically
      interesting experiment appears to be when the interest rate is pegged due to the fact
      that the ZLB is binding on account of a fundamental recessionary shock that prevents
      the central bank from achieving its objective of stabilizing inflation and output. 1

   1 We  contemplate another experiment (Coordinated PEG-EX) in which the duration of the peg is co-
ordinated with the duration of fiscal policy (details in Appendix D). The results of this experiment are
qualitatively similar to that of the ZLB-EX. These coordinated pegs have been used by other papers ana-
lyzing the effects of fiscal policy as well (see Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2014)). Exogenous interest
rate pegs have been used in McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016), Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2012)
to analyze the forward guidance puzzle, but only in the context of forward-looking models. As we note,
in perfectly forward-looking sticky-price models, it does not matter whether one assumes a passive mon-
etary policy due to an exogenous peg or binding ZLB resulting from a fundamental shock. However, it
is important to distinguish between Kiley’s proposed PEG-EX and Coordinated PEG-EX in the context of

                                                    2
          The following table summarizes the numerical results for the two models, cali-
      brated to produce a 10% drop in output and 2% annual deflation on impact. It is
      clear that in the ZLB-EX, government spending is more expansionary at zero interest
      rate than at positive interest rate and that tax cuts are contractionary at the ZLB, in
      both the models of nominal stickiness. Moreover, these paradoxes are starker under
      sticky information.

                      Table 1: Fiscal multipliers in the sticky-price model

                                           Government spending          Tax cut
                    Positive interest rate 0.42                         0.36
                    Zero interest rate     1.63                         -0.4


                  Table 2: Fiscal multipliers in the sticky-information model

                                           Government spending          Tax cut
                    Positive interest rate 0.42                         0.36
                    Zero interest rate     4.77                         -2.41



      2    Alternative models of nominal rigidities
      The most commonly used model of nominal rigidities is based on stickiness of prices
      (see for example,Woodford (2003)). An alternative model of nominal rigidities is
      based on stickiness of information (Mankiw and Reis (2001)). In the former model,
      only a fraction of the firms get to reset their prices every period, while in the latter
      model, all firms get to reset their prices every period but only a fraction of them get
      to update their information sets in any given period. Both models can be described
      by a system of 3 equations common in the monetary economics literature - IS curve,
      AS curve and a policy rule.
          In the Calvo model, firms account for the possibility of not being able to reset
      prices in future periods. Hence, their optimal price decision depends on their current
      marginal cost as well as current expectation of future marginal costs. On the other
      hand, in the Mankiw and Reis model, each firm gets to reset its price in every period,
      but firms that do not get the information update base their price decision on past
      expectations of current marginal cost. This introduces infinite lags into the model as
      firms set prices based on different vintages of information.
          All of the results in this paper depend on the presence of these lagged variables
      in the sticky-information framework. But there is nothing special about sticky "in-
      formation" versus sticky "prices". In fact, the SI model could be interpreted as an
      overlapping Taylor contract model. Similarly, Calvo originally interpreted the Calvo

sticky-information models as we will see.

                                                 3
      probability as an information friction rather than referring to sticky prices. The mod-
      els are entirely standard, accordingly, we only report them in their log-linear form,
      but define all composite parameters, in terms of the underlying deep parameters in
      Appendix C. Let us denote every variable x in deviation from its steady state as x̂,
      then we get the following equilibria in the two models:


      2.1     Sticky-price approximate equilibrium
      A sticky-price approximate equilibrium, which is accurate up to a first order, is a
      collection of stochastic process for output, inflation and the short-term interest rate,
      {ŷt , π̂t , ît }, that solve equations (1) and (2) given (i) a path for taxes and government
      spending, {τ̂t , ĝt }, determined by fiscal policy, (ii) exogenous shocks corresponding
      to the efficient rate of interest {r̂te }, and (iii) a specification of monetary policy.2
                                                  (                     )
                             ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )                      (1)

                                         π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κy ŷt − κ g ĝt + κτ τ̂t                               (2)

            Here, σ̃, κy , κ g , κτ > 0, 0 < β ≤ 1 and κy ≥ κ g .


      2.2     Sticky-information approximate equilibrium
      A sticky-information approximate equilibrium, which is accurate up to a first order,
      is a collection of stochastic process for {ŷt , π̂t , ît } that solve equations (3) and (4) given
      (i) a path for {τ̂t , ĝt } determined by fiscal policy, (ii) exogenous shocks {r̂te }, and (iii)
      specification of monetary policy.

                                                  (                     )
                             ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )                      (3)
                   λ (                                    )
          π̂t =              κ̃y ŷt − κ̃ g ĝt + κ̃τ τ̂t
                1−λ
                                                  (         [                                                     ])
             + λΣ∞                     j
                    j=0 (1 − λ ) Et−1− j π̂t + κ̃ y ( ŷt − ŷt−1 ) − κ̃ g ( ĝt − ĝt−1 ) + κ̃ τ ( τ̂t − τ̂t−1 )
                                                                                                                    (4)
            Here, σ̃, κ̃y , κ̃ g , κ̃τ > 0, 0 < β ≤ 1 and κ̃y ≥ κ̃ g .


      3      Analytical example
      This section compares the predictions of sticky-price and sticky-information models
      under the two different experiments described in the introduction - ZLB-EX versus
      PEG-EX. The results are first summarized and then explained further using simple
      graphs.


   2 Implicitly it is assumed here that there are lump-sum taxes that adjust to clear the government budget
constraint, so that fiscal policy is "Ricardian", see Eggertsson (2011) for further discussion.

                                                              4
      3.1    ZLB Experiment (ZLB-EX)
      The ZLB experiment makes the following assumptions:
         A1.(Shock): r̂1e < 0, î1 = 1−+īī , r̂te = 0 for t > 1
         A2.(Fiscal policy): ( ĝ1 , τ̂1 ) = ( ĝs , τ̂s ), ( ĝ2 , τ̂2 ) = (0, 0)
         A3.(Monetary policy): π̂t = 0 for t > 1
         A4.(Perfect foresight3 ): Et ŷt+1 = ŷt+1 , Et π̂t+1 = π̂t+1                           ∀t


      Proposition 1. (ZLB-EX) Under the assumptions of ZLB-EX, the sticky price and sticky
      information models have the following solutions:

      Sticky-price model:
                                               [            ]
                                          −1     ī
                                 ŷ1 = σ̃                 e
                                                      + r̂1 + ĝ1
                                               1 + ī
                                                                 [              ]
                                        (           )         −1     ī
                                π̂1 = κy − κ g ĝ1 + κy σ̃                + r̂1 + κτ τ̂1
                                                                              e
                                                                   1 + ī
                                                                                                      (5)
                                          −ī
                                  î1 =
                                        1 + ī
                                 ŷ2 = π̂2 = î2 = 0
                                 ŷt = π̂t = ît = 0       ∀t > 2

      Sticky-information model:
                                                                         [     ]
                                                                     ī
                                                                    −1
                             ŷ1 = γ1 ĝ1 + γ2 τ̂1 + (2 − λ)σ̃               e
                                                                         + r̂1
                                                                  1 + ī
                                                     (                  )[              ]
                                                       λ(2 − λ)κ̃y σ̃−1        ī
                            π̂1 = γ3 ĝ1 + γ4 τ̂1 +                                   e
                                                                                  + r̂1
                                                           1−λ             1 + ī
                                      −ī
                             î1 =
                                     1 + ī
                                                                         [                   ]
                                                                    −1         ī
                            ŷ2 = γ5 ĝ1 + γ2 τ̂1 + (1 − λ)σ̃                       + r̂1e
                                                                             1 + ī                   (6)
                            π̂2 = 0
                             î2 = σ̃ (ŷ3 − ŷ2 )
                                                                           
                                                    −2              j
                                                λΣtj=   ( 1 −   λ )
                             ŷt = ŷt−1                                   
                                                      0
                                             λ          t −2              j
                                                                                   ∀t > 2
                                            1− λ  + λΣ  j =0 ( 1 −    λ )
                            π̂t = 0      ∀t > 2
                             ît = σ̃ (ŷt+1 − ŷt )     ∀t > 2
   3 In  the sticky information model, perfect foresight is assumed only for those agents who update their
information set in any given period. Also, this assumption is only for illustration purposes, and is relaxed
later in the numerical results section.

                                                               5
   where, γ1 , γ2 , γ3 , γ4 , γ5 > 0 are defined as follows:
       [                   ]                [               ]            [               ]                         [               ]
        (2−λ)κ̃y −(1−λ)κ̃ g                     (1−λ)κ̃τ                     λ (2− λ )                                 λ (2− λ )
γ1 =            κ̃y            , γ2 =              κ̃y          , γ3 =         1− λ          (κ̃y − κ̃ g ), γ4 =         1− λ          κ̃τ ,
                 (         )
                    κ̃ −κ̃
γ5 =   (1 − λ) yκ̃y g .

Proof. The full details of the proof are provided in Appendix A, which essentially
just involves solving the models backwards using A1-A4 and keeping track of all
terms.
   These equations can be used to solve for the fiscal multipliers. As is well known in
the New Keynesian literature, policy paradoxes in the Calvo model with a one-period
deterministic fundamental shock take a weaker form. Tax cuts have no effect on out-
put and government spending increases output one-for-one. However, as shown in
the following results, even in this one-period shock setting, the sticky-information
model exhibits the policy paradoxes. This emphasizes that there is nothing funda-
mental in the Calvo price stickiness assumption that drives the policy paradoxes.
   The following two results follow directly from solving the equations in Proposition
1.

Result 1 (Government spending multipliers). In the ZLB-EX, government spending mul-
tiplier at the ZLB is larger in the sticky-information model than in the sticky-price model.

                                (           )SI
                                    dŷ1                   (2 − λ)κ̃y − (1 − λ)κ̃ g
                                                      =                             ≥1
                                    d ĝ1                             κ̃y
                                (           )SP
                                    dŷ1
                                                      =1
                                    d ĝ1
Result 2 (Paradox of toil). In the ZLB-EX, tax cuts at the ZLB are contractionary in the
sticky-information model but have no effect in the sticky-price model.

                                                (          )SI
                                                    dŷ1             (1 − λ)κ̃τ
                                                                 =              ≥0
                                                    dτ̂1                 κ̃y
                                            (              )SP
                                                 dŷ1
                                                                 =0
                                                 dτ̂1
    The reason that the paradoxes are more extreme in the sticky information model is
the persistence in the effects of the shock. Equation (5) shows that under sticky prices,
output, inflation and interest rate return to their steady state values immediately after
the fundamental shock is over in period 2. However, under sticky information the
recession continues even after the shock is over in period 2 (see equation (6)). This
persistence is due to the presence of lagged endogenous variables in the model. The
fact that the paradoxes are starker under sticky information can be understood further
by contemplating ŷ1 and π̂1 graphically, which is done in the next section, before we
turn to clarifying Kiley’s result, which leads to the opposite conclusion.
                                                                     6
3.1.1   Discussion
                                                                             κ
To simplify the analysis, consider the special case where λ =               1+κ .   The system of
equations becomes:
                 {
           AS: π̂1 = κy ŷ1 − κ g ĝ1 + κ̂τ τ̂1 , SP, SI
                                                    [             ]
               
                ŷ   = ŷ   + σ̃ −1 π̂ + ĝ + σ̃ −1    ī
                                                            + r̂ e              , SP, SI
               
                   1      2           2    1          1+ī      1
               
               
               π̂ = 0                                                          , SP, SI      (7)
           AD:
                    2   
               
                       0                                               , SP
               
                                                           [        ]
               
                ŷ 2 =
                       γ5 ĝ1 + γ2 τ̂1 + (1 − λ)σ̃−1 ī + r̂ e         , SI
                                                           1+ī    1


    The AS curves across the two models are the same. The AD curves, conditional on
expectation of future output, are also the same. This means that the only difference
between the multipliers in the two models stems from differences in the expectation
of future output. While this expectation is zero in the sticky price (SP) model, it
depends on lagged variables in the sticky information (SI) model.
    In the (ŷ1 , π̂1 ) space, the initial equilibrium for both the models is given by the
intersection of the aggregate demand (AD) and aggregate supply (AS) curves at point
E as shown in figure 1. The AD curves are vertical because demand does not depend
on current inflation, only expectation of future inflation, i.e. inflation in period 2.
Output is completely demand determined and pinned down by the shocks r̂1e and ĝ1 ,
and expectation of future output ŷ2 . To the extent that a tax shock does not affect ŷ2 ,
it does not matter for current output. For a given level of output, then, inflation is
determined where the AD curve intersects the AS curve. Now, consider the effects
of two different policy interventions in this framework: an increase in government
spending and a tax cut. The final effect of policy on output depends on: a) the direct
effect of the policy on aggregate demand (ŷ1 ), b) the direct effect of the policy on
aggregate supply (π̂1 ), c) the indirect effect of the policy on aggregate demand via its
effect on the expectation of future output (ŷ2 ).
    The effect of government spending increase is illustrated in figure (1a). There is a
direct effect on the AS curves in both the models. Government spending takes away
resources from private consumption, so people want to work more to make up for the
lost consumption, shifting out labor supply and reducing real wages. The lower real
wages mean that the firms can produce more at any given rate of inflation, shifting
the AS curve out to the right. There is also a direct effect on AD in both the models
as government spending increases "autonomous" spending in the economy. In the SP
model, an increase in government spending does not interact with inflation expecta-
tions, and hence , the real interest rate remains unchanged. This causes consumption
to remain unchanged, and all of the increase in government spending shows up one-
for-one in output expansion. In the SI model, there is an additional indirect effect
of government spending on output, because current government spending becomes

                                                7
     an endogenous state variable in the model, that produces expectations of a higher
     future output. The net effect is that there is a rightward shift in AD curves in both
     the models, but the shift is larger for the SI model. The new equilibria are given by
     points A’ and B’ for the SP and SI models, respectively. At these points, output is
     higher than the initial equilibrium for both SI and SP, but the increase is larger under
     SI.
         The effect of tax cut is illustrated in figure (1b). There is a direct effect on the AS
     curves in both the models. People want to work more, as they get more money in
     their pocket for every hour worked. This reduces real wages, the benefits of which get
     passed onto the consumers, producing deflation in the economy. There is no direct
     effect on the AD curves in either model. In the purely forward-looking Calvo model,
     expectation of future output is independent of current fiscal policy. In the SI model,
     however, there is an indirect effect of tax cut on current output, as current tax cut
     becomes an endogenous state variable, that produces expectations of a lower future
     output. This in turn lowers output today. The net effect is that there is no change in
     AD in the Calvo model, but a leftward shift in AD in the SI model. The new equilibria
     are given by points A” and B” for the SP and SI models, respectively. At these points,
     output is lower in the SI model but remains unchanged in the SP model.
         Hence we have just seen analytically and graphically why in the ZLB-EX the policy
     paradoxes are actually stronger under sticky information than sticky prices. We now
     turn to how one can obtain the opposite result by considering an alternative thought
     experiment.




(a) Effect of increasing government spending                      (b) Effect of cutting taxes

                           Figure 1: Policy predictions of ZLB-EX




                                                 8
3.2     Exogenous Interest Rate Peg Experiment (PEG-EX)
The Exogenous-PEG experiment makes the following assumptions:
   B1.(Shock): r̂te = 0 ∀t, î1 = î2 = 0
   B2.(Fiscal policy): ( ĝ1 , τ̂1 ) = ( ĝs , τ̂s ), ( ĝ2 , τ̂2 ) = (0, 0)
   B3.(Monetary policy): π̂t = 0 for t > 2
   B4.(Perfect foresight): Et ŷt+1 = ŷt+1 , Et π̂t+1 = π̂t+1 ∀t

   This alternative experiment is different from the ZLB-EX in two main regards.
One, there is no fundamental shock to the economy. Two, the peg lasts for two
periods while the fiscal policy is active for only one period, which means that in the
second period, inflation is not at its target level assuming sticky information while it
remains at zero under sticky prices. This difference generates the difference between
the two experiments.

Proposition 2. (PEG-EX) Under the assumptions of exogenous PEG-EX, the sticky price
and sticky information models have the following solutions:

Sticky-price model:
                                                        ŷ1 = ĝ1
                                                      π̂1 = (κy − κ g ) ĝ1 + κτ τ1
                                                        î1 = 0                                                                               (8)
                                                        ŷ2 = π̂2 = î2 = 0
                                                        ŷt = π̂t = ît = 0            ∀t > 2
Sticky-information model:
                                                        ŷ1 = ζ 1 ĝs + ζ 2 τ̂s
                                                      π̂1 = ζ 3 ĝs + ζ 4 τ̂s
                                                        î1 = 0
                                                        ŷ2 = 0                                                                               (9)
                                                      π̂2 = ζ 5 ĝs + ζ 6 τ̂s
                                                        î2 = 0
                                                        ŷt = π̂t = ît = 0            ∀t > 2
      where, ζ 1 , ζ 3 , ζ 4 > 0 and ζ 2 , ζ 5 , ζ 6 < 0 are defined as follows:
        (                          )            (                         )                           [   (                          )]
            1+σ̃−1 ( 1−λ λ )κ̃ g                    −σ̃−1 ( 1−λ λ )κ̃τ                 (    −λ
                                                                                                  )           1+σ̃−1 ( 1−λ λ )κ̃ g
ζ1 =                                   , ζ2 =                 κ̃ g − κ̃y      , ζ3 =       1− λ                                           ,
            1+σ̃−1 ( 1−λ λ )κ̃y                     1+σ̃−1 ( 1−λ λ )κ̃y       1+σ̃−1 ( 1−λ λ )κ̃y
                   [      (                         )          ]  (                    [)]
     ( −λ )        −    λ
                 σ̃ ( 1−λ )κ̃τ
                     1                           ( λ )              1+σ̃ ( 1−λ λ )κ̃ g
                                                                         − 1
ζ 4 = 1−λ κ̃y
                1+σ̃−1 λ κ̃
                                    − κ̃τ , ζ 5 = 1−λ κ̃ g − κ̃y 1+σ̃−1 λ κ̃                 ,
             [ ( −1 (λ1−λ ) y )           ]                                  ( 1− λ ) y
     (     )     σ̃ ( 1−λ )κ̃τ
ζ 6 = 1−λ λ κ̃y                     − κ̃τ
                1+σ̃−1 ( 1−λ λ )κ̃y

Proof. The details of the proof are shown in Appendix B. Again, it simply involves

                                                                          9
solving the model backwards, using B1-B4. The key point in the derivation is that
we show that under sticky information in PEG-EX, ŷ2 = 0 while π̂2 may be different
from zero, which is in contrast with our previous example.
     The following two results follow directly from solving the equations in Proposition
2.

Result 3 (Standard government spending multipliers). In the PEG-EX, the government
spending multiplier in the sticky-information model is smaller than that in the sticky-price
model and is bounded above by 1.

                              (           )SI                   λ
                                                                 (       )
                                  dŷ1              1 + σ̃−1          κ̃ g
                                                =           ( 1−λ λ )        <1
                                  d ĝ1             1 + σ̃−1 1−λ κ̃y
                            (             )SP
                                dŷ1
                                                =1
                                d ĝ1
Result 4 (No paradox of toil). In the PEG-EX, tax cuts are expansionary in the sticky-
information model but have no effect in the sticky-price model.

                              (           )SI                (λ
                                                                     )
                                  dŷ1               −σ̃−1        κ̃τ
                                                =           (1−λλ )          <0
                                  dτ̂1              1 + σ̃−1 1−λ κ̃y
                            (             )SP
                                dŷ1
                                                =0
                                dτ̂1

3.2.1    Discussion
                                                                                   κ
To simplify the analysis, consider again the special case where λ =               1+κ .   The system
of equations becomes:
                              {
                        AS: π̂1 = κy ŷ1 − κ g ĝ1 + κ̂τ τ̂1 , SP, SI
                            
                            
                             ŷ = ŷ2 + σ̃−1 π̂2 + ĝ1         , SP, SI
                             1
                            
                            
                            ŷ2 = 0                                                            (10)
                                                                , SP, SI
                        AD:          
                            
                                    0                 , SP
                            
                             π̂
                            
                                2 =
                                     ζ 5 ĝs + ζ 6 τ̂s , SI

    The AS curves across the two models are the same. The AD curves, conditional on
expectation of future inflation, are also the same. This means that the only difference
between the multipliers in the two models stems from differences in the expectation of
future inflation. Contrast this to our previous experiment, where the only difference
in AD was difference in expectation about output in deviation from steady state in
period 2 which is in this experiment zero. Meanwhile, the inflation expectation is zero
in the sticky-price model, but depends on lagged variables in the sticky-information

                                                       10
model. The final effect of policy on output depends on: a) the direct effect of the
policy on aggregate demand (ŷ1 ), b) the direct effect of the policy on aggregate supply
(π̂1 ), c) the indirect effect of the policy on aggregate demand via its effect on the
expectation of future inflation (π̂2 ).
     As shown in figure (2a), an increase in government spending has a direct on the
AS curves in that it produces inflation in both the models, as under ZLB-EX. It also
has a direct positive effect on AD in both the models as it increases "autonomous"
spending in the economy. There is an additional indirect effect of government spend-
ing on output in the SI model: government spending today becomes an endogenous
state variable in the model - it acts like a cost push shock that produces deflationary
expectation in the economy. This tends to reduces output today. The net effect is that
there is a rightward shift in AD curves in both the models, but the shift is smaller for
the SI model. The new equilibria are given by points A’ and B’ for the sticky-price
and sticky-information models, respectively. At these points, output is higher than
the initial equilibrium for both SI and SP, but the increase is larger under SP.
     As shown in figure (2b), a tax cut has a direct effect on AS in that it acts like a
negative cost push shock and produces deflation in both the models, as under ZLB-
EX. It has no direct effect on AD in either models. There is an indirect effect on AD
in the SI model, which is absent in the Calvo model. This effect in the SI model
occurs because a tax cut today becomes an endogenous state variable in the model -
it acts like a cost push shock that produces inflationary expectations, which inreases
output today. The net effect is that there is no change in AD in the Calvo model,
but a rightward shift in AD in the SI model. The new equilibria are given by points
A” and B” for the sticky-price and sticky-information models, respectively. At these
points, output is higher in the sticky-information model but remains unchanged in
the sticky-price model.




                                           11
  (a) Effect of increasing government spending                     (b) Effect of cutting taxes

                            Figure 2: Policy predictions of PEG-EX

  In summary, in ZLB-EX, the policy paradoxes are present in both sticky-price and
  sticky-information models, whereas in PEG-EX, the policy paradoxes are absent in
  the sticky-information model. This difference is a consequence of the fact that the SI
  model has an infinite number of endogenous state variables while the SP model is
  purely forward looking. The endogenous state variables become important once one
  artificially pegs the nominal interest rate independently of the fundamental shocks.
  This insight will now be carried over to a more dynamic setting, that replicates Kiley’s
  quantitative experiment.


  4 Numerical results: Sticky-price vs sticky-information under
  ZLB-EX
  This section provides the results of ZLB-EX under a parameter calibration that is
  common in the literature (details in Appendix C). The aim is to provide a relevant
  magnitude of the fiscal multipliers and discuss the paradox of flexibility. An AR(1)
  process is chosen for the natural real interest rate shock and a deterministic transition
  path is contemplated. The duration of the binding ZLB is endogenously determined.
  The persistence and magnitude of the real interest rate shock are chosen to produce a
  10% recession and 2% annual deflation on impact in the sticky-price model. The same
  shock process is then fed into the the sticky-information model and the information
  rigidity parameter is chosen to match the 10% recession and 2% annual deflation.4
  This is reminiscent of the exercise in Eggertsson (2011) but the value of the multipliers
  is different due to a different assumption about the stochastic process – he assumes a
4 Codes   for this exercise are available online on our webpage.

                                                  12
two state markov process rather than an AR(1).


Overexpansionary government spending

                   Table 3: Government spending multipliers

                                   Sticky-price Sticky-information
            Positive interest rate 0.42         0.42
            Zero interest rate     1.63         4.77

At positive interest rates, government spending crowds out private consumption, and
hence its effect on output is small (multiplier less than one) in both sticky price and
sticky information models. At zero interest rates, however, government spending is
over-expansionary in both the models, with the expansionary effect being higher in
the sticky-information model.


Paradox of toil

                            Table 4: Tax cut multipliers

                                   Sticky-price Sticky-information
            Positive interest rate 0.36         0.36
            Zero interest rate     -0.4         -2.41

At positive interest rates, tax cuts promote consumption spending and create an out-
put expansion in both sticky-price and sticky-information models. At zero interest
rates, however, tax cuts are contractionary. This contractionary effect is more sharply
evident in the sticky-information model.


Paradox of flexibility
In the numerical solution, as prices become more flexible, the output contraction in
response to a negative real interest rate shock becomes worse in both sticky-price
and sticky-information models. Infact, the paradox of flexibility is starker under
sticky-information than under sticky-prices. This is because increasing information
flexibility makes inflation more responsive to the output gap. Therefore, in response
to the shock, not only current deflation but also expected deflation is bigger. This
expected deflation feeds into the current output and contracts it further.




                                          13
                 0.9                                                                         3.5

                 0.8
                                                                                              3
                 0.7




                                                                            Drop in output
Drop in output

                                                                                             2.5
                 0.6

                 0.5                                                                          2


                 0.4                                                                         1.5

                 0.3
                                                                                              1
                 0.2

                                                                                             0.5
                 0.1

                  0                                                                           0
                       0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7                               0.2     0.25    0.3    0.35    0.4     0.45   0.5
                             Probability of price adjustment                                               Probability of updating information

                             (a) Sticky-price model                                                      (b) Sticky-information model

                            Figure 3: Effect of increasing flexibility at zero interest rates

      It is well-known what is happening in the sticky-price model, but a brief com-
   ment upon this paradox in the sticky-information model is in order, given that it is
   more subtle due its dependence on the combination of information flexibility (λ) and
   shock persistence (ρrn ). In a model where the shock persists for the first two periods
   and goes back to the steady state in the third period, there is a range of λ for which
   the paradox of flexibility holds. This can be shown analytically, but it is rather cum-
   bersome. Similar results can be derived for variations where the shock persists for
   more than two periods, but it gets progressively harder to get closed form solutions.
   Accordingly, the finding is presented as a computational result.

   Result 5 (Information threshold). Let λ∗ be the threshold level of information-flexibility,
   beyond which the paradox of flexibility holds. That is, for λ ≥ λ∗ , dλ < 0. And, let ρrn
                                                                              dy

   be the persistence of the natural interest rate shock. Then, the threshold level of information-
                                                                                  dλ∗
   flexibility is a decreasing function of the persistence of the shock. That is, dρ rn
                                                                                        ≤ 0.


                                  Table 5: Paradox of flexibility and shock persistence

                                                                 ρrn     λ∗
                                                                 0.1      1
                                                                 0.2      1
                                                                 0.3    0.76
                                                                 0.4    0.66
                                                                 0.5    0.62
                                                                 0.6    0.48
                                                                 0.7    0.38
                                                                 0.8    0.26
                                                                 0.9    0.18

   For any given probability of information updating λ, paradox of flexibility becomes
                                                                       14
more likely as persistence of the shock increases. This is because, for a given λ, a
negative shock to the natural real interest has a direct effect on current output and
inflation – output and inflation fall. There is an additional indirect effect on current
output through changes in the expectations of future output. The expectation of
future output for every period in which the shock is present will be negative. It
is only once the ZLB is no longer binding, that the inflation-targeting central bank
will pursue expansionary monetary policy which would increase output. Hence, the
final effect on current output depends on the relative magnitude of the cumulative
negative output gap in the shock-on periods versus the positive output gap in the
shock-off period. The higher the persistence of the shock, the higher is the magnitude
of the cumulative negative output gap. This means that as the shock persistence
increases, the expansionary effect once the shock is over, is less able to outweigh the
contractionary effect while the shock is on. This is true also for the original threshold
λ. Hence, the new threshold λ is lower if the persistence of the shock is higher. In the
baseline calibration, ρrn = 0.88 and the corresponding threshold λ∗ = 0.16.


5   Replicating Kiley’s results

               Table 6: Calibration parameters (from Kiley (2016))

                                 Parameters Value
                                      λ       0.25
                                      β        1
                                      σ̃       1
                                     κy      0.033
                                     κg     0.0165
                                     κ̃y      0.1
                                     κ̃ g     0.05
                                     ϕπ       1.5
                                     ϕy      0.125

    The PEG-EX is different from the ZLB-EX in two respects. The first is absence of a
fundamental shock that drives the economy into the ZLB environment. The second is
lack of policy coordination, that is, the duration of the peg is different from the dura-
tion of fiscal policy. It is important to understand which of these differences explains
the difference in the policy results. Accordingly, we contemplate yet another exper-
iment, which lies somewhere in between the ZLB-EX and the PEG-EX. We call this
the Coordinated PEG-EX (CPEG-EX). Under this experiment, there is no fundamental
shock to the economy but the duration of policy is coordinated with the duration of
the peg.
    This section compares the numerical results for multipliers under PEG-EX versus
CPEG-EX. Both models are calibrated as per table 6 to replicate the policy results of

                                           15
                              5                                                                                                30
                                        Sticky-price                                                                                      Sticky-price
                             4.5        Sticky-information                                                                                Sticky-information




                                                                                                  Percent increase in output
Percent increase in output                                                                                                     25
                              4

                             3.5                                                                                               20

                              3
                                                                                                                               15
                             2.5

                              2                                                                                                10

                             1.5
                                                                                                                               5
                              1

                             0.5                                                                                               0
                                    2   4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24                                            2   4     6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24
                                   Duration of government expenditure increase (T)                                                  Duration of government expenditure increase (T)

                                            (a) Exogenous PEG-EX                                                                              (b) Coordinated PEG-EX

                                                          Figure 4: Government spending multiplier


  Kiley (2016). The only difference is in the specification of fiscal policy. In particular,
  under PEG-EX, duration of the fiscal policy intervention is varied period 1 to period
  25, while the interest rate is pegged to its steady state value for 100 periods. Under
  CPEG-EX, the interest rate peg lasts for as long as the fiscal policy shock is on.
      As we will see, the paradox results for the CPEG-EX are qualitatively similar to
  that of the ZLB-EX. This underlines the importance of policy coordination in this
  class of models. Quantitatively, the paradoxes are even starker under CPEG-EX than
  ZLB-EX.
  The key result under PEG-EX is that the policy paradoxes depend on the assumptions
  regarding the nature of price adjustment – sticky prices versus sticky information.
  Kiley interprets this to mean that changes in assumptions regarding price dynamics
  can overturn the key policy paradoxes at the ZLB. Figure 4 (a) is a replication of Figure
  2 of Kiley’s paper. The graph shows that in the sticky-price model, the government
  expenditure multiplier – that is, the average increase in output over the period of
  higher government expenditure – is strictly greater than one and increasing in the
  duration (T) of the fiscal expansion. In the sticky-information model, the government
  expenditure multiplier is strictly less than one and decreasing in the duration (T) of
  the fiscal expansion. However, as illustrated in the preceding section, the absence
  of the over-expansionary effect of government spending under sticky-information
  here is an artifact of the exogenous interest rate peg. Under CPEG-EX, government
  spending is over-expansionary even under the assumption of sticky-information, as
  depicted in Figure 4 (b). Infact, the multiplier is higher under sticky-information than
  under stick-prices.
  Similarly, Figure 5 shows the effect a tax increase under the assumption of sticky-price
  and sticky-information under PEG-EX versus CPEG-EX. In the sticky-price model,
  tax increase creates output expansion under both experiments. However, the effect of
  tax increase on output in the sticky-information model depends on the experiment

                                                                                             16
  being performed. Under PEG-EX in Figure 5 (a), tax increase has no effect on output,
  whereas under CPEG-EX in Figure 5 (b), tax increase is expansionary. Infact, the
  expansionary effect under CPEG-EX is higher in the sticky-information model than
  in the sticky-price model.

                              4                                                                                               30
                                       Sticky-price                                                                                    Sticky-price
                             3.5       Sticky-information                                                                              Sticky-information
Percent increase in output




                                                                                                 Percent increase in output
                                                                                                                              25
                              3

                             2.5                                                                                              20

                              2
                                                                                                                              15
                             1.5

                              1                                                                                               10

                             0.5
                                                                                                                              5
                              0

                  -0.5                                                                                                        0
                                   2   4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24                                          2   4     6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20   22   24
                                            Duration of tax increase (T)                                                                     Duration of tax increase (T)

                                           (a) Exogenous PEG-EX                                                                            (b) Coordinated PEG-EX

                                                                         Figure 5: Tax multiplier

  These graphs illustrate that keeping the interest rate pegged after the policy interven-
  tion is over (PEG-EX) reduces the expansionary power of government spending and
  makes the paradox of toil disappear in the sticky-information model. This is because,
  in the absence of the peg, the Central Bank would want to lower the interest rate from
  second period onwards, in order to stimulate the economy. Constraining the Cen-
  tral Bank’s ability to do so through a peg, mechanically engineers a contractionary
  monetary policy in the model and prevents output from expanding. The subtlety
  lies in the fact that the interest rate peg produces no such contradiction, relative to
  ZLB-EX/CPEG-EX, in the sticky-price framework. The sticky-price model is purely
  forward looking, and as soon as the shock is over, output, inflation and interest rate
  go back to their respective steady states. Hence, holding the interest rate constant is
  inconsequential in that model.


  6                                Conclusion
  This paper demonstrates that the key policy predictions of the New Keynesian model
  at the ZLB are independent of the assumption about the nature of price dynamics –
  sticky prices or sticky information. This contradicts the recent findings of Kiley (2016)
  that the policy paradoxes of the sticky-price model are fragile and disappear under
  the alternative sticky-information assumption of Mankiw and Reis (2001). Kiley’s
  findings are driven by the nature of the experiment he performs, rather than anything
  fundamental about sticky information. He assumes an arbitrary interest rate peg
  independent of any fundamental shock or policy intervention (PEG-EX in the paper).
                                                                                            17
This is very different from the policy experiment common in the ZLB literature, where
the ZLB is binding due to a fundamental shock and policy is explicitly in response to
it (ZLB-EX in the paper). It is even different from much of the literature on interest
rate pegs, where it is typically assumed that fiscal intervention lasts as long as the
interest rate peg (CPEG-EX).
     Analytical examples and numerical simulations are used to illustrate and explain
this result. In the ZLB-EX, government spending multiplier is larger and paradox of
toil is starker under sticky-information than under sticky-prices. This is because in
the purely forward looking sticky-price model, current policy leaves expectations of
future variables unchanged. Hence, there is only a "direct" effect of current policy on
current output. In the backward looking sticky-information model, however, current
policy has an additional "indirect" effect on current output, which comes from its
effect on the expectations of future variables.
     In the alternative experiment, PEG-EX, government spending multiplier is smaller
than one and paradox of toil disappears under sticky-information. This is because an
arbitrary interest rate peg is equivalent to engineering a contractionary monetary
policy in that framework. In the absence of the peg, an inflation-targeting central
bank would lower interest rate in order to stimulate output and inflation. The peg
puts a constraint on the central bank’s ability to do so. The subtle feature of this
experiment is that it doesn’t affect the predictions of the sticky-price model. This is
because the sticky-price model is purely forward looking, and all variables revert to
their steady state once the temporary fiscal policy shocks are over. Hence, pegging the
interest rate to its steady state value (even after the shock is over) is inconsequential
in that model.
     We further contemplate an experiment, which is a hybrid of the ZLB-EX and PEG-
EX, called CPEG-EX. Under CPEG-EX, while the interest rate peg is arbitrary to the
extent that there is no fundamental shock causing it, policy duration is coordinated
with the peg duration. The results for the multipliers under CPEG-EX are qualita-
tively similar to that of the ZLB-EX. This underscores the importance of coordinating
fiscal policy with the duration of monetary policy passiveness in this class of experi-
ments.
     Finally, this paper illustrates numerically that the paradox of flexibility is also
starker under sticky-information. This result is harder to intuit from an analyti-
cal example, because the response of output to increased flexibility in the sticky-
information model depends on the persistence of the underlying fundamental rate
shock.
     Overall, the paradoxical results for fiscal policy multiplier at the ZLB could be
interpreted as reflecting a weakness of the Calvo model. This paper, however, clarifies
that these paradoxes are not a product of the Calvo assumption, but rather are a
fundamental feature of models with nominal rigidities, irrespective of its source, be
it sticky prices or sticky information.


                                           18
References
Bhattarai, Saroj, Gauti Eggertsson, and Raphael Schoenle. 2014. “Is increased price
  flexibility stabilizing? redux.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework.”
  Journal of monetary Economics, 12(3): 383–398.

Carlstrom, Charles T, Timothy S Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian. 2012. “Inflation and
  output in New Keynesian models with a transient interest rate peg.”

Carlstrom, Charles T, Timothy S Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian. 2014. “Fiscal multi-
  pliers under an interest rate peg of deterministic versus stochastic duration.” Jour-
  nal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46(6): 1293–1312.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2009. “When is the
  government spending multiplier large?” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2010. “The paradox of toil.” FRB of New York Staff Report, , (433).

Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2011. “What fiscal policy is effective at zero interest rates?” In
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, Volume 25. 59–112. University of Chicago Press.

Kiley, Michael T. 2016. “Policy paradoxes in the New Keynesian model.” Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 21: 1–15.

Mankiw, N Gregory, and Ricardo Reis. 2001. “Sticky information versus sticky
 prices: a proposal to replace the New Keynesian Phillips curve.” National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2016. “The power of forward
 guidance revisited.” The American Economic Review, 106(10): 3133–3158.

Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Interest rate and prices.”

Woodford, Michael. 2011. “Simple analytics of the government expenditure multi-
 plier.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(1): 1–35.




                                          19
     Appendix
     A    Proof of Proposition 1
     Sticky-price model
                                                   (                     )
                              ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )
                                                                                                                   (11)
                              π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κy ŷt − κ g ĝt + κτ τ̂t
         Assumptions (A1)-(A4) imply that:
     For t=1:

                                                          σ̃−1 ī
                                             ŷ1 = ŷ2 +          + σ̃−1 r̂1e + ĝ1
                                                          1 + ī                                                   (12)
                                             π̂1 = κy ŷ1 − κ g ĝ1 + κτ τ̂1
         For t=2:
                                                      ŷ2 = ŷ3 − σ̃−1 î2
                                                                                                                   (13)
                                                     π̂2 = κy ŷ2
         For t=3:
                                                      ŷ3 = ŷ4 − σ̃−1 î3
                                                                                                                   (14)
                                                     π̂3 = κy ŷ3
..
 .
         For any t>2:
                                                     ŷt = ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît
                                                                                                                   (15)
                                                    π̂t = κy ŷt
         Applying (A3) to period 2 Phillips curve (eqn 13) allows us to solve for ŷ2 as follows:

                                                             π̂2 = κy ŷ2
                                                               0 = κy ŷ2                                          (16)
                                                        =⇒ ŷ2 = 0

         Substituting ŷ2 into period 1 IS curve (eqn 12) gives:

                                                        σ̃−1 ī
                                                ŷ1 =           + σ̃−1 r̂te + ĝ1                                  (17)
                                                        1 + ī
         Substituting ŷ1 in period 1 Phillips curve (eqn 12) gives:

                                       (        )      κy σ̃−1 ī
                                  π̂1 = κy − κ g ĝ1 +            + κy σ̃−1 r̂1e + κτ τ̂1                          (18)
                                                        1 + ī
         Output for every period t > 2 can be solved from that period’s Phillips curve using
     assumption (A3). We get that for t>2, ŷt = π̂t = 0.
     Sticky-information model
                                   (                      )
          ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )
                  λ (                                 )
         π̂t =           κ̃y ŷt − κ̃ g ĝt + κ̃τ τ̂t                                                               (19)
                1−λ
                                               (        [                                                        ])
              + λΣ∞               j
                   j=0 (1 − λ ) Et−1− j π̂t + κ̃ y ( ŷt − ŷt−1 ) − κ̃ g ( ĝt − ĝt−1 ) + κ̃ τ ( τ̂t − τ̂t−1 )

         Assumptions (A1)-(A4) imply that:


                                                             A.1
        For t=1
                                                               σ̃−1 ī
                                                      ŷ1 = ŷ2 +      + σ̃−1 r̂1e + ĝ1
                                                               1 + ī                                                                (20)
                                                             λ (                              )
                                                      π̂1 =      κ̃y ŷ1 − κ̃ g ĝ1 + κ̃τ τ̂1
                                                            1−λ
             For t=2:
                                   ŷ2 = ŷ3 − σ̃−1 î2
                                            λ              (     [                                      ])                           (21)
                                  π̂2 =         κ̃y ŷ2 + λ π̂2 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ1 ) + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1
                                         1−λ
             For t = 3:
                                     ŷ3 = ŷ4 − σ̃−1 î3
                                              λ                           (                       )                                  (22)
                                    π̂3 =         κ̃y ŷ3 + [λ + λ(1 − λ)] π̂3 + κ̃y (ŷ3 − ŷ2 )
                                           1−λ
             For t = 4:

                             ŷ4 = ŷ5 − σ̃−1 î4
                                      λ            [                        ](                      )                                (23)
                            π̂4 =         κ̃y ŷ4 + λ + λ(1 − λ) + λ(1 − λ)2 π̂4 + κ̃y (ŷ4 − ŷ3 )
                                   1−λ
..
 .
             For t>2:
                                              ŷt = ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît
                                                       λ
                                             π̂t =         κ̃y ŷt                                                                   (24)
                                                    1−λ
                                                       −2                 j(                              )
                                                 + λΣtj= 0 (1 − λ ) π̂t + κ̃ y ( ŷ t − ŷt−1 )

            Period 2 Phillips curve (eqn 21) along with assumption (A3) can be used to solve for ŷ2 as
        follows:
                                     λ              (        [                                 ])
                            π̂2 =      κ̃y ŷ2 + λ π̂2 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ1 ) + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1
                                   1−λ
                                     λ              (      [                                 ])
                               0=      κ̃y ŷ2 + λ 0 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ1 ) + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1       (25)
                                   1−λ
                                   (      )[                       ]
                                     1−λ              κ̃ g     κ̃τ
                             ŷ2 =             ŷ1 − ĝ1 + τ̂1
                                     2−λ              κ̃y      κ̃y
             Substituting ŷ2 into period 1 IS curve (eqn 20) gives ŷ1 :
                    [                            ]       [            ]
                        (2 − λ)κ̃y − (1 − λ)κ̃ g           (1 − λ)κ̃τ                 σ̃−1 ī
            ŷ1 =                                  ĝ1 +                τ̂1 + (2 − λ)         + σ̃−1 (2 − λ)r̂1e (26)
                                   κ̃y                         κ̃y                    1 + ī

     Substituting ŷ1 into period 1 Phillips curve (eqn 20) gives π̂1 :
                                (            )[                                                        ]
                                  λ (2 − λ )                                        −1 e   κ̃y σ̃−1 ī
                          π̂1 =                 (κ̃y − κ̃ g ) ĝ1 + κ̃τ τ̂1 + κ̃y σ̃ r̂1 +                                                  (27)
                                    1−λ                                                      1 + ī

     To write ŷ2 in terms of exogenous parameters, substitute the solution for ŷ1 (eqn 26) into ŷ2 (eqn 25):
                                     (                )                   (         )
                                         κ̃y − κ̃ g                           κ̃τ                       σ̃−1 ī
                    ŷ2 = (1 − λ)                         ĝ1 + (1 − λ)                 τ̂1 + (1 − λ)           + (1 − λ)σ̃−1 r̂1e          (28)
                                             κ̃y                              κ̃y                       1 + ī

     Further, we can solve for the transition dynamics of output in each period using the Phillips curve for



                                                                       A.2
that period along with assumption (A3). For t>2, we get:

                                 λ (          )            −2
                                                                           (                    )
                          0=           κ˜y ŷt + λΣtj=         (1 − λ) j 0 + κ˜y (ŷt − ŷt−1 )
                               1−λ                           0
                               [                                     ]       [                 ]
                                  λ              t −2              j             −2
                          0=           + λΣ j=0 (1 − λ) κ˜y ŷt − λΣtj=              (1 − λ) j κ˜y ŷt−1
                                 1−λ                                               0                       (29)
                                                                  
                                         −2                j
                                     λΣtj=    ( 1  −   λ )
                         ŷt =                                     ŷt−1
                                            0
                                  λ           t −2               j
                                 1− λ +  λΣ   j =0  ( 1 −    λ )

B Proof of Proposition 4
Sticky-price model

                                                    (                     )
                               ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )
                                                                                                           (30)
                              π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κy ŷt − κ g ĝt + κτ τ̂t
    Assumptions (B1)-(B4) imply that:
For t=1
                                             ŷ1 = ŷ2 + σ̃−1 π̂2 + ĝ1
                                                                                                           (31)
                                            π̂1 = βπ̂2 + κy ŷ1 − κ g ĝ1 + κτ τ̂1
     For t=2:
                                                           ŷ2 = ŷ3
                                                                                                           (32)
                                                          π̂2 = κy ŷ2
     For t=3:
                                                       ŷ3 = ŷ4 − σ̃−1 î3
                                                                                                           (33)
                                                      π̂3 = κy ŷ3
..
 .
     For t>2:
                                                      ŷt = ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît
                                                                                                           (34)
                                                     π̂t = κy ŷt
     Period 3 Phillips curve along with assumption (B3) allows us to solve for ŷ3 as follows:

                                                             π̂3 = κy ŷ3
                                                               0 = κy ŷ3                                  (35)
                                                       =⇒ ŷ3 = 0

     Substituting ŷ3 into period 2 IS curve (eqn 32) implies:

                                                        ŷ2 = ŷ3 = 0                                      (36)

     Substituting ŷ2 into period 1 IS curve (eqn 31) gives ŷ1 :

                                                           ŷ1 = ĝ1                                       (37)

     Finally, substituting ŷ1 into period 1 Phillips curve (eqn 31) gives:

                                                π̂1 = (κy − κ g ) ĝ1 + κτ τ1                              (38)

   Further, we can solve for output in each period t > 2 using the Phillips curve for that period along
with assumption (B3). For t>2, we get ŷt = 0 as π̂t = 0.

                                                             A.3
Sticky-information model
                                          (                      )
                 ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )
                         λ (                                 )
                π̂t =           κ̃y ŷt − κ̃ g ĝt + κ̃τ τ̂t                                                                 (39)
                       1−λ
                                                      (        [                                                        ])
                     + λΣ∞               j
                          j=0 (1 − λ ) Et−1− j π̂t + κ̃ y ( ŷt − ŷt−1 ) − κ̃ g ( ĝt − ĝt−1 ) + κ̃ τ ( τ̂t − τ̂t−1 )

    Assumptions (B1)-(B4) imply that:
For t=1
                                           ŷ1 = ŷ2 + σ̃−1 π̂2 + ĝ1
                                                      λ (                               )                                    (40)
                                          π̂1 =            κ̃y ŷ1 − κ̃ g ĝ1 + κ̃τ τ̂1
                                                    1−λ
    For t=2:
                          ŷ2 = ŷ3
                                    λ                  (       [                                  ])                         (41)
                         π̂2 =            κ̃y ŷ2 + λ π̂2 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ1 ) + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1
                                  1−λ
    For t=3:
                             ŷ3 = ŷ4 − σ̃−1 î3
                                       λ                                    (                   )                            (42)
                            π̂3 =            κ̃y ŷ3 + [λ + λ(1 − λ)] π̂2 + κ̃y (ŷ3 − ŷ2 )
                                    1−λ
    For t=4:
                    ŷ4 = ŷ5 − σ̃−1 î4
                               λ              [                                   ](                 )                       (43)
                   π̂4 =          κ̃y ŷ4 + λ + λ(1 − λ) + λ(1 − λ)2 π̂4 + κ̃y (ŷ4 − ŷ3 )
                           1−λ
..
 .
     For t>2:
                                           ŷt = ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît
                                                    λ
                                          π̂t =         κ̃y ŷt                                                              (44)
                                                 1−λ
                                                    −2              j(                         )
                                              + λΣtj= 0 (1 − λ ) π̂t + κ̃ y ( ŷ t − ŷt−1 )

     Period 3 Phillips curve (eqn 42) along with assumption (B3) allows us to solve for ŷ3 as follows:

                                λ             (                      )          (                       )
                      π̂3 =        κ̃y ŷ3 + λ π̂3 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ2 ) + λ(1 − λ) π̂3 + κ̃y (ŷ3 − ŷ2 )
                            1−λ
                                λ                  (                   )            (                     )
                        0=         κ̃y ŷ3 + λEt−1 0 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ2 ) + λ(1 − λ) 0 + κ̃y (ŷ3 − ŷ2 )                      (45)
                            1−λ
                                [                        ]
                                      λ + λ (1 − λ )
                      ŷ3 = ŷ2    λ
                                  1− λ + λ + λ (1 − λ )

     Substituting ŷ3 into period 2 IS curve (eqn 41) gives the following equation for ŷ2 :
                                                   [                       ]
                                                         λ + λ (1 − λ )
                                         ŷ2 = ŷ2    λ
                                                                                                                             (46)
                                                     1− λ + λ + λ (1 − λ )

Since λ > 0, the only solution to this equation is ŷ2 = 0.




                                                                    A.4
    Substituting ŷ2 = 0 into period 1 IS curve and period 2 Phillips curve gives:

                                        ŷ1 = σ̃−1 π̂2 + ĝ1
                                                (       [                          ])                             (47)
                                       π̂2 = λ π̂2 + −κ̃y ŷ1 + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1

Solving these simultaneously gives ŷ1 and π̂2 :
                   (      )                      (     )     
            1 + σ̃−1 1−λ λ κ̃ g                σ̃−1 1−λ λ κ̃τ
    ŷ1 =          (      )  ĝs −                   (   )  τ̂s
            1 + σ̃−1 1−λ λ κ̃y               1 + σ̃−1 1−λ λ κ̃y
                                           (     )                                 (    )                 (48)
          (       )               1 + σ̃−1 1−λ λ κ̃ g           (       )          σ̃−1 1−λ λ κ̃τ
              λ     κ̃ g − κ̃y                                    λ
   π̂2 =                                     (     )  ĝs +             κ̃y             (   )  − κ̃τ  τ̂s
            1−λ                   1 + σ̃ − 1    λ
                                                     κ̃           1 − λ          1 + σ̃ − 1   λ
                                                                                                 κ̃
                                             1− λ    y                                         1− λ      y


    Substituting ŷ1 into period 1 Phillips curve (eqn 40) gives π̂1 :
                                          (      )                              (    )          
         (      )                     σ̃ −1    λ
                                                    κ̃        (      )          σ̃ −1    λ
            −λ                   1 +         1− λ     g         − λ                    1−λ κ̃ τ
   π̂1 =             κ̃ g − κ̃y            (      )  ĝs +          κ̃y            (    )  − κ̃τ  τ̂s      (49)
           1−λ                    1 + σ̃−1 λ κ̃                 1−λ           1 + σ̃−1 λ κ̃
                                            1− λ    y                                          1− λ      y


    Further, from period 4 Phillips curve along with assumption (B3), and solution ŷ3 = 0 we get:

                               λ (          ) [                           ](                 )
                           0=        κ˜y ŷ4 + λ + λ(1 − λ) + λ(1 − λ)2 0 + κ˜y (ŷ4 − ŷ3 )
                             1−λ
                             [                                      ]
                                   λ + λ (1 − λ ) + λ (1 − λ )2                                                   (50)
                    =⇒ ŷ4 =    λ
                                                                      ŷ3
                               1− λ + λ + λ (1 − λ ) + λ (1 − λ )
                                                                  2

                             =0

   Similarly, we can solve for the transition dynamics of output in each period t > 2 using the Phillips
curve for that period along with the assumption (B3). For t>2, we get:

                                  λ (          )         −2
                                                                      (                       )
                              0=        κ˜y ŷt + λΣtj=      (1 − λ) j 0 + κ˜y (ŷt − ŷt−1 )
                                1−λ                        0
                                [                                ]       [                   ]
                                   λ              ∞            j               −2
                           0=           + λΣ j=0 (1 − λ) κ˜y ŷt − λΣtj=           (1 − λ) j κ˜y ŷt−1
                                  1−λ                                           0
                                                                                                                (51)
                                          −2             j
                                      λΣtj=    ( 1 − λ )
                       =⇒ ŷt =  λ                            ŷt−1
                                             0
                                       +  λΣ   ∞ (1 − λ ) j
                                  1− λ         j =0

                                =0




                                                           A.5
C Calibration parameters

                                            Table 7: Calibration parameters

      Common parameters                                               Description                                     Value
                 β                                                  Discount factor                                   0.9970
                 σ                                              Risk aversion parameter                                1.032
                 η                                          Frisch elasticity of labor supply                         1.7415
                ω                                         Probability of price non-adjustment                           0.66
                 λ                                       Probability of updating information                            0.15
                 θ                                                   CES parameter                                   13.6012
               ϕπ                                                 Reaction to inflation                              100000
                ϕy                                               Reaction to output gap                                   0
                 ψ                                 Steady state government spending to output ratio                     0.2
                 τ̄                                               Steady state tax rate                                  0.1
                r̂se                                  Generates 10% drop in output, 2% deflation                     -0.0225
               ρrn                                      Makes ZLB bind for around 16 quarters                           0.88
     Sticky-price parameter                                                                                           Value
                 κ                                                                                                    0.0841
                κy                                                                                                    0.0103
                κg                                                                                                    0.0044
                κτ                                                                                                    0.0038
                 σ̃                                                                                                     1.29
 Sticky-information parameter                                                                                         Value
                κ̃y                                                                                                   0.1228
                κ̃ g                                                                                                  0.0523
                κ̃τ                                                                                                   0.0450
                 σ̃                                                                                                     1.29

Parameter details:
                                 (1−ω )(1− βω )
σ̃ = 1−σ ψ , ψ = G
                 Y,        κ=          ω        , κy = κ (σ̃ + η ),          κ g = κ σ̃,          κτ =     κ
                                                                                                         (1−τ̄ )
                                                                                                                 ,
        σ̃+η
κ̃y =   1+ηθ ,   κ̃ g = 1+ηθ , κ̃τ = (1+ηθ )(1−τ̄ ) , ŷt = YtȲ−Ȳ ,
                         σ̃                   1
                                                                              ĝt =        Gt − Ḡ
                                                                                             Ȳ
                                                                                                   ,
                                                −ī                              rte −ī
τ̂t = τt − τ̄,    π̂t = p̂t − p̂t−1 , ît = i1t+ ī
                                                    , r̂te = ξ̂ t − ξ̂ t+1   =   1+r̄ e


D Coordinated Interest Rate Peg Experiment (CPEG-EX)
The Coordinated-PEG experiment makes the following assumptions:
   C1.(Shock): r̂te = 0 ∀t, î1 = 0
   C2.(Fiscal policy): ( ĝ1 , τ̂1 ) = ( ĝs , τ̂s ), ( ĝ2 , τ̂2 ) = (0, 0)
   C3.(Monetary policy): π̂t = 0 for t > 1
   C4.(Perfect foresight): Et ŷt+1 = ŷt+1 , Et π̂t+1 = π̂t+1 ∀t

Sticky-price model

                                                         (                     )
                                    ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )
                                                                                                                     (52)
                                   π̂t = βEt π̂t+1 + κy ŷt − κ g ĝt + κτ τ̂t
                                                                  A.6
    Assumptions (C1)-(C4) imply that:
For t=1
                                                      ŷ1 = ŷ2 + ĝ1
                                                                                                                             (53)
                                                     π̂1 = κy ŷ1 − κ g ĝ1 + κτ τ̂1
     For t=2:
                                                           ŷ2 = ŷ3 − σ̃−1 î2
                                                                                                                             (54)
                                                          π̂2 = κy ŷ2
     For t=3:
                                                           ŷ3 = ŷ4 − σ̃−1 î3
                                                                                                                             (55)
                                                          π̂3 = κy ŷ3
..
 .
     For t>2:
                                                          ŷt = ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît
                                                                                                                             (56)
                                                         π̂t = κy ŷt
     Applying (C3) to period 2 Phillips curve (eqn 54) allows us to solve for ŷ2 as follows:

                                                                  π̂2 = κy ŷ2
                                                                   0 = κy ŷ2                                                (57)
                                                           =⇒ ŷ2 = 0

     Substituting ŷ2 into period 1 IS curve (eqn 53) gives:

                                                               ŷ1 = ĝ1                                                     (58)

     Substituting ŷ1 in period 1 Phillips curve (eqn 53) gives:
                                                  (        )
                                             π̂1 = κy − κ g ĝ1 + κτ τ̂1                                                     (59)

   Output for every period t > 2 can be solved from that period’s Phillips curve using assumption (C3).
We get that for t>2, ŷt = π̂t = 0.

Sticky-information model
                                          (                      )
                 ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂te + ( ĝt − Et ĝt+1 )
                         λ (                                 )
                π̂t =           κ̃y ŷt − κ̃ g ĝt + κ̃τ τ̂t                                                                 (60)
                       1−λ
                                                      (        [                                                        ])
                     + λΣ∞               j
                          j=0 (1 − λ ) Et−1− j π̂t + κ̃ y ( ŷt − ŷt−1 ) − κ̃ g ( ĝt − ĝt−1 ) + κ̃ τ ( τ̂t − τ̂t−1 )

    Assumptions (C1)-(C4) imply that:
For t=1
                                       ŷ1 = ŷ2 + ĝ1
                                                 λ (                                )                                        (61)
                                      π̂1 =            κ̃y ŷ1 − κ̃ g ĝ1 + κ̃τ τ̂1
                                               1−λ
    For t=2:
                         ŷ2 = ŷ3 − σ̃−1 î2
                                  λ               (        [                                  ])                             (62)
                        π̂2 =         κ̃y ŷ2 + λ π̂2 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ1 ) + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1
                               1−λ




                                                                  A.7
     For t=3:
                               ŷ3 = ŷ4 − σ̃−1 î3
                                        λ                           (                       )               (63)
                              π̂3 =         κ̃y ŷ3 + [λ + λ(1 − λ)] π̂2 + κ̃y (ŷ3 − ŷ2 )
                                     1−λ
     For t=4:
                        ŷ4 = ŷ5 − σ̃−1 î4
                                 λ            [                        ](                      )            (64)
                       π̂4 =         κ̃y ŷ4 + λ + λ(1 − λ) + λ(1 − λ)2 π̂4 + κ̃y (ŷ4 − ŷ3 )
                              1−λ
..
 .
     For t>2:
                                      ŷt = ŷt+1 − σ̃−1 ît
                                               λ
                                     π̂t =         κ̃y ŷt                                                  (65)
                                            1−λ
                                                 −2                     j(                  )
                                           + λΣtj= 0 (1 − λ ) π̂t + κ̃ y ( ŷ t − ŷt−1 )

     Period 2 Phillips curve (eqn 62) along with assumption (C3) can be used to solve for ŷ2 as follows:

                                     λ              (        [                                 ])
                            π̂2 =      κ̃y ŷ2 + λ π̂2 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ1 ) + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1
                                   1−λ
                                     λ              (      [                                 ])
                               0=      κ̃y ŷ2 + λ 0 + κ̃y (ŷ2 − ŷ1 ) + κ̃ g ĝ1 − κ̃τ τ̂1                (66)
                                   1−λ
                                   (      )[                       ]
                                     1−λ              κ̃ g     κ̃τ
                             ŷ2 =             ŷ1 − ĝ1 + τ̂1
                                     2−λ              κ̃y      κ̃y

     Substituting ŷ2 into period 1 IS curve (eqn 61) gives ŷ1 :
                                      [                       ]       [            ]
                                     (2 − λ)κ̃y − (1 − λ)κ̃ g           (1 − λ)κ̃τ
                               ŷ1 =                            ĝ1 +                τ̂1                    (67)
                                                κ̃y                         κ̃y

Proposition 3 (Government spending multipliers). In the CPEG-EX, the government spending multiplier in the
sticky-information model is bounded below by 1 while it is equal to 1 in the sticky-price model.

                                       (           )SI
                                           dŷ1                (2 − λ)κ̃y − (1 − λ)κ̃ g
                                                         =                              ≥1
                                           d ĝ1                          κ̃y
                                      (            )SP
                                          dŷ1
                                                         =1
                                          d ĝ1

Proposition 4 (Paradox of toil). In the CPEG-EX, tax cuts are contractionary in the sticky-information model but
have no effect in the sticky-price model.

                                                   (          )SI
                                                       dŷ1             (1 − λ)κ̃τ
                                                                    =              ≥0
                                                       dτ̂1                 κ̃y
                                                   (          )SP
                                                       dŷ1
                                                                    =0
                                                       dτ̂1




                                                                    A.8
Numerical results: ZLB-EX vs CPEG-EX

                      Table 8: Fiscal multipliers under sticky-prices

                                   Government spending      Tax cut
                       ZLB-EX      1.63                     -0.4
                       CPEG-EX     1.04                     -0.03


                   Table 9: Fiscal multipliers under sticky-information

                                   Government spending      Tax cut
                       ZLB-EX      4.77                     -2.41
                       CPEG-EX     5.14                     -2.64




                                           A.9
