NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMICS OF PIPES
Jongha Lim
Michael W. Schwert
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 23967
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23967

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

The authors are Fellows of the National Center for the Middle Market at the Fisher College of
Business, Ohio State University, and acknowledge the Center’s support for this research. We
would like to thank Rocky Bryant, Shan Ge, Clemens Sialm, participants in seminars at Ohio
State and the 2017 Southern California Private Equity Conference for helpful suggestions. Hyeik
Kim, Dongxu Li, and John Lynch provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jongha Lim, Michael W. Schwert, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economics of PIPEs
Jongha Lim, Michael W. Schwert, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 23967
October 2017
JEL No. G12,G23,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper considers a sample of 3,001 private investments in public equities (PIPEs). Issuing
firms tend to be small and poorly performing, so have limited access to traditional sources of
finance. To attract capital, they offer shares in a PIPE at a substantial discount to the market
price, along with warrants and a collection of other rights. Because of the discount at issuance,
PIPE returns decline with the holding period, which itself is a function of registration status and
liquidity of the shares issued in the PIPE. Assuming that the PIPE investor sells 10% of volume
each day following the issuance, the average PIPE investor holds the stock for 384 days and earns
an abnormal return of 21.2%. More risky firms tend to raise capital from relatively risk tolerant
investors such as hedge funds and private equity funds. PIPEs issued to more constrained firms
have higher holding period adjusted returns but these returns are more volatile. The abnormal
holding period adjusted returns earned by PIPE investors appear to be compensation for
providing capital to otherwise constrained firms.
Jongha Lim
Mihaylo College of Business and Economics
California State University - Fullerton
5170 SGMH
800 N. State College Blvd.
Fullerton, CA 92831
jolim@fullerton.edu
Michael W. Schwert
Fisher College of Business,
Ohio State University
812 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
schwert.6@osu.edu

Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
An important source of financing for many public corporations are private placements of equity,
commonly referred to as “PIPEs”. According to PrivateRaise, a leading database on PIPE transactions,
between 2001 and 2015, there were 11,296 private placements of common stock by U.S. listed firms that
raised $243.9 billion. Firms raising funds through PIPEs tend to be small, with 93% of common stock
PIPE issuers having market capitalization below $1 billion. As a point of comparison, U.S. firms with
market capitalization below $1 billion raised $240.3 billion in SEOs over the same period (see Figure 1).
PIPE investments appear to be an important source of corporate finance, especially for small public firms.
Why do so many firms turn to PIPEs for financing? Conventional wisdom is that it is relatively
expensive source, or as Brophy et al. (2009) put it, a “last resort” form of financing. But how expensive is
it? To calculate the cost to issuers, it is important to consider a number of attributes of the package
purchased by PIPE investors. In addition to common stock, issuers often offer investors warrants and
other securities. In most transactions, the common stock is unregistered and cannot be immediately sold
by investors. The cost of capital for the issuing firms is a function of the expected return and risk of these
securities. Since the equity in PIPEs tends to be discounted, the expected return to holding them varies
inversely with the expected holding period, which depends on the time it takes to register the securities as
well as the thinness of the secondary market for trading these securities after they are registered.
Therefore, to calculate the cost of financing through PIPEs, one must control for the time it takes to
register the securities and to sell them.
This paper evaluates the cost to issuers and the benefits to investors from PIPE financing. We rely
on a comprehensive sample of 3,001 common stock PIPE transactions by U.S. firms listed on NYSE or
NASDAQ between 2001 and 2015. In this sample, the median investment is $10 million, which equals
9.1% of the market value of the median issuing firm’s equity. In 80.9% of the transactions, the firm issues
unregistered equity, meaning that investors cannot sell their positions until the issuing firm registers the
equity, on average 100 days following the closing date of the offering. PIPE investors purchase shares at
an average discount of 6.3% to the market price. In addition, investors receive warrants in 39% of the
1

transactions in our sample. If one values the warrants using standard techniques, these warrants are worth
an average of 17.5% of the value of the equity purchased. Including the value of the warrants, PIPE
investors receive an effective average discount of 11.2% relative to the value of the package of securities
they acquire.
Because of these discounts and warrants, PIPE investors earn substantially higher returns than
investors who buy and sell stocks of issuing firms’ or comparable firms at market prices. Over the year
following the issuance, PIPE investors average a 12.1% buy-and-hold abnormal return, compared to 5.2% for investors who buy and sell the issuers’ stocks at market prices. These returns are highly skewed,
with the median PIPE investor earning an abnormal return of only 1.7% over the year after issuance. The
large difference between mean and median returns occur because the returns of the issuing firms’ stocks
are skewed and in addition the warrants amplify the right tail of the return distribution while having no
effect on the losing deals. This highly skewed return distribution suggests that PIPE investing is like
venture capital investing in that the key drivers of returns are the “home run” investments.
It is, however, not clear if PIPE investors in practice could achieve the above mentioned buy-andhold returns. An important factor affecting investors’ returns is the time they hold the investments. The
returns PIPE investors receive decline with the time they hold the investment. This pattern occurs because
the offering discount accrues to investors immediately when the transaction closes. After that point, the
long-run performance of issuing firms tends to be poor, consistent with results in the prior literature (e.g.
Hertzel et al. (2002); Brophy, Ouimet, and Sialm (2009)). Therefore, PIPE investors have an incentive to
exit their stock positions as quickly as possible to capture the discount and mitigate exposure to the
issuer’s downside risk. 1
There are two factors that limit the ability of PIPE investors to exit their positions quickly. First,
most PIPE shares are unregistered at issuance and cannot be sold to the public until they are registered
with the SEC. Second, the shares of PIPE issuers tend to be illiquid, so they cannot be sold immediately

1

Although sometimes short-selling is possible, conversations with practitioners indicate that it is often prohibitively
expensive to short sell the stock of PIPE issuers to lock in the discount and hedge against downside risk.
2

after registration without putting substantial downward pressure on the stock price. At the time of
registration, the typical deal exhibits an increase in trading volume and a decrease in the stock price,
suggesting that PIPE investors begin to exit their positions as soon as the securities can be sold.
However, considering both the size of the investments (18% of the pre-offering shares outstanding, on
average) and the limited trading volume in the issuers’ shares, we estimate that investors in unregistered
PIPEs retain stock exposure for at least one year after registration. In contrast, investors in registered
PIPEs are exposed to the issuer’s stock for at least six months.
We estimate the returns to PIPE investors controlling both for registration status and the limited
ability of investors to exit their positions given the thinness of trading in the underlying stocks. To
calculate these “holding period adjusted” returns, we assume that investors sell a constant fraction of the
daily volume each trading day from the day the stock is registered until they liquidate their portfolio. The
returns from this strategy, which presumably could be executed with a minimal effect of the PIPE
investors’ trading on price pressure, leads to returns that are nonetheless still noticeably higher than
investments in comparable firms at market prices. Assuming that investors sell 10% of the daily trading
volume after registration, PIPE investors average a 21.2% return, compared to 4.9% for market investors,
over an average holding period of 384 days.
Why do public firms raise capital under such costly terms? Examining the characteristics of PIPE
issuers, it appears that their options are limited. Even though these firms are publicly traded, they are
relatively small, with median book assets of $51 million. Their operating performance in the year prior to
the PIPE issuance tends to be very poor, with a median ratio of EBITDA to Book Assets of -22%. They
likely do not have access to public debt markets and appear to have limited access to bank loans, as the
median firm has a leverage ratio of only 7.2%. Finally, as has been argued previously (e.g. Hertzel and
Smith (1993)), these are firms for which information asymmetry is likely severe, suggesting that the
issuance cost of an SEO would be substantial.
We examine the hypothesis that the abnormal returns earned by PIPE investors represents
compensation for the risk associated with providing capital to such poorly performing firms. Consistent
3

with this view, when issuing firms appear to be more risky, the capital in the PIPE is more likely to be
provided by relatively risk tolerant investors such as hedge funds and private equity funds, as opposed to
the insiders and strategic partners who tend to supply capital to the other PIPEs in our sample. In addition,
the returns from the PIPEs issued by riskier firms are higher and more volatile. The PIPE market appears
to be one in which PIPE investors provide financing to companies that cannot obtain financing from
alternative sources.
One other result is worth noting. A classic question in the capital raising literature is that stock
prices generally fall when firms issue additional equity (see for example Smith (1986)). The two potential
explanations are that that the issuance could signal the firm’s quality, or that there could be price pressure
coming from a lack of supply in the market. In our sample, stock prices actually rise when firms issue an
unregistered PIPE but fall when they issue a registered one. This pattern suggests that price pressure is an
important factor affecting the stock price reaction, since there is no selling pressure for unregistered
PIPEs immediately after closing but there is for registered ones. In addition, at the time when the
unregistered PIPES are registered and can be traded publicly, these stocks decline in value, which is also
consistent with the price pressure hypothesis.
The paper most closely related to ours is Brophy, Ouimet, and Sialm (2009), who analyze a large
sample of PIPEs between 1995 and 2002. These authors study the underperformance of firms issuing
PIPEs to hedge funds, showing that issuers of “structured” PIPEs, with variable conversion rates to
protect investors from downside risk, have particularly poor post-issuance performance. They argue that
hedge funds are investors of last resort who provide capital to poor quality firms. We build on Brophy,
Ouimet, and Sialm’s (2009) analysis in a number of ways. First, we calculate deal level returns for PIPE
investments, measuring the returns to PIPE investors and the issuer’s cost of capital, whereas they restrict
attention to the performance of the underlying stock. Second, we show that the distribution of returns to
PIPE issuers is highly skewed and that warrants amplify this skewness, leading to a returns distribution
for PIPE investors that relies on “home run” deals to provide acceptable returns. Third, we examine the
extent to which the time to registration and the illiquidity of the issuer’s stock limits the ability of
4

investors to exit their positions, which is important in light of the underperformance in the issuer’s stock
and the investors’ desire to capture the offering discount.
In addition, the paper is related to Chaplinsky and Haushalter (2010), who also compute returns
to individual PIPEs in an earlier, non-overlapping sample from ours. However, these authors do not
control for registration status or trading volume considerations that can substantially affect holding
periods and hence returns. In addition, they do not discuss the risk or skewness of these returns, nor relate
them to the operating condition of the issuing firms, nor the identity of the investors.
Our work is also related to the literature on private placements. 2 This literature began with Wruck
(1989), who argues that the resulting increase in shareholder concentration creates value by aligning the
interests of managers and shareholders. Subsequent research on private placements has focused on the
finding that issuers’ post-issuance long-run returns are extremely poor (Hertzel et al. (2002)), which
stands in puzzling contrast to the positive returns around private placement announcements. Our paper
adds to the private placement literature in several ways. We are the first to estimate the returns to the
package of securities offered to investors, which provides an estimate of private placement issuers’ cost of
capital. We show that the returns to PIPE investors depend heavily on their holding periods and that
abnormal returns become statistically insignificant as the holding period extends beyond one year. We
also document significantly negative abnormal returns to unregistered PIPE issuers when the registration
statement becomes effective, offsetting the positive announcement return an average of three months after
the transaction closes. These findings indicate that PIPE investors are short-term shareholders who are
unlikely to play a role in improving corporate governance.

2. Privately-Negotiated Investments in Public Firms
2.1. Motivation/Magnitude of Investment

2

See Hertzel and Smith (1993), Hertzel et al. (2002), Wu (2004), Cronqvist and Nilsson (2005), Krishnamurthy et
al. (2005), Wu, Wang, and Yao (2005), Barclay, Holderness, and Sheehan (2007), Wruck and Wu (2009),
Chaplinsky and Haushalter (2010), Gomes and Phillips (2012),and Chakraborty and Gantchev (2013) for
contributions to the literature on private placements.
5

Public firms often raise capital through privately negotiated transactions rather than through the
public market. Table 1 characterizes such investments during the period from 2001 to 2015. Common
stock investments are most common, with 11,296 issues totaling $243.9 billion. In addition, syndicates of
investors purchased 5,077 convertible or preferred debt issues ($183.0 billion), provided 1,132 equity
lines ($19.2 billion), and 1,747 other types of securities ($176.9 billion). 3 In total, PIPE investments
provided $623 billion in capital to public firms from 2001 to 2015. Since we are interested in analyzing
the returns earned by investors, we focus on the common stock investments, because returns for these
investments are straightforward to calculate. However, we emphasize there are also a substantial number
of private investments in public companies that include securities other than common stock.

2.2. A Typical Investment
Even “common stock” PIPE investments involve more than just common stock. To illustrate the
way these investments are structured, in Table 2 we provide details about a typical investment, the
December 2006 investment of $6.5 million in the equity of a medical device company called United
American Health Corporation (UAHC). We choose this particular investment because it is close to the
median investment size in our sample and has a number of features common to other PIPE deals.
In this investment, a syndicate of investors led by a private equity firm called Heights Capital
Management purchased exactly one million shares of UAHC for $6.50 per share. Heights Capital put in
20% of the capital ($1.3 million) and the remaining 80% was split between a group of investors made up
of five hedge funds, one private equity fund, and a collection of other individuals and institutional
investors. This purchase occurred at a 21% discount to the market price of $8.20, which is larger than
average discount for this period (see Table 4 below). In addition to the equity, investors also received
100,000 warrants on UAHC’s equity, equal to one warrant for every 10 shares of common equity they

3

Note that in the run-up to the 2008 Financial Crisis, there were large convertible preferred offerings totaling over
$69 billion by financial institutions including Barclays, Citigroup, Merrill Lynch, and Washington Mutual.
6

purchased. The warrants had a strike price of $8.50 per share and a term of 5 years, so applying the
Black-Scholes model adjusted for dilution, each warrant is worth $3.92.
Another way of viewing the warrants is that they effectively increase the discount investors
receive. For every share with a market value of $8.20, investors receive one tenth of a warrant, increasing
the total value to $8.59. Relative to this value, the price of $6.50 per share represents a discount of 24.4%.
One reason for the discount is that the shares were unregistered, so they could not be sold to the
public until the firm registered them with the SEC. Unregistered PIPEs generally contain a provision
requiring the firm to register the securities within a specified period of time. In this case, the provision
stated that UAHC had to file a registration statement within 30 days and that the registration would
become effective by the 90th day, or the 120th day if there was an SEC review. In the UAHC PIPE, the
registration statement was filed on January 11, 2007 and was declared effective on January 26, 2007, 44
days after the transaction closed.
Figure 2 shows that after this day when the shares were registered, there was a large increase in
trading volume in UAHC: during the 5 trading days prior to the registration becoming effective, a total of
297,422 shares were traded, while in the 5 trading days subsequent to the effective registration date, more
than three times as many shares, 983,504, were traded. If the additional trading volume represents selling
by PIPE investors, then the difference of 686,082 shares represents more than two thirds of the 1 million
shares issued in the PIPE. Consistent with PIPE investors putting downward pressure on the stock price
by selling their shares immediately after they became registered, the return on UAHC stock over the 5
trading days after registration was -16.3%.
In addition to the equity and warrants, investors in the PIPE received a number of other rights.
The warrants had anti-dilution protection, which means that if there was another equity issue at a lower
price, the strike price of the warrants would be adjusted downwards. The issuing firm was prohibited from
issuing other securities for 60 days, and the investors had the right of first refusal for 40% of any other
equity or equity-linked securities that UAHC issued during the subsequent year. It is difficult to put a

7

monetary value on these rights, but they clearly offer some value, suggesting that the 24% discount is
understated relative to the true value that investors received.
While the investors in the PIPE received a number of rights that ordinary investors do not have, it
is notable that they do not have any “control rights”. In venture capital deals, it is common for investors to
have rights that allow them to influence the firm’s operations, such as board representation, the right to
approve compensation arrangements, etc. 4 In contrast, in PIPE deals, these features rarely occur. In our
sample, there are control related provisions in less than 10% of PIPEs. These are usually cases in which
the investors’ provision of capital is contingent on a management change, either the CEO or the board of
directors. However, even in these cases, the provisions do not give explicit control rights to the investors.
The fact that control rights are not typically negotiated suggests that unlike most private equity
investments, PIPEs appear to be passive investments in which the investors do not play an active role in
the management of the issuing company. 5

3. Sample
3.1. Selection Process
The starting point for our sample is the universe of 21,227 distinct PIPE transactions covered in
PrivateRaise, a leading provider of data on PIPE transactions. PrivateRaise began collecting data in 2001,
so our sample covers the period 2001 to 2015. We exclude 1,352 Rule 144A issuances and 623
confidentially marketed public offerings (CMPOs), which are included in the PrivateRaise database but
are not truly PIPE transactions. Most of the Rule 144A offerings in the PrivateRaise database are
convertible bonds issued by large firms (e.g. Verizon Communications) to hedge funds. A CMPO is a

4
See Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) for a detailed description of the provisions in contracts between venture
capitalists and their portfolio firms.
5
In contrast, some of the prior literature on equity private placements, beginning with Wruck (1989), have focused
on the corporate governance benefits of increasing ownership concentration. See Edmans and Holderness (2017) for
a survey of the literature on blockholders and corporate governance.

8

hybrid between a PIPE and an SEO, in which registered stock is first marketed to institutional investors,
then a prospectus is filed and the offering is opened to the public. 6
PIPE transactions involve a variety of security types, many of which are difficult to value. To
ease the calculation of returns, we restrict our focus to common equity investments without price reset
features. We do include PIPEs with attached warrants so long as there is only one warrant with a fixed
strike price. These restrictions exclude 7,956 investments for which the primary security is not common
stock, 127 transactions with contingent adjustments to the purchase price, 443 transactions with multiple
warrants, and 251 transactions for which the attached warrant did not have a fixed strike price. We
exclude eight large transactions that are strategic partnerships, asset purchases with stock as currency, or
transactions contingent on the completion of an IPO or a merger. Finally, we require information on
investor types, which excludes 3,611 transactions. After applying these exclusion criteria, the sample
includes 6,856 PIPE transactions.
To evaluate the subsequent performance of PIPE issuers, we merge the PrivateRaise sample with
stock price data from CRSP. Doing so restricts our sample to firms on NYSE or NASDAQ for analyses
that use stock return data. To ensure quality of the stock return data, we exclude transactions for which
the pre-closing price in CRSP is different than the pre-closing price in PrivateRaise, reducing our sample
to 3,001 observations.

3.2. Sample Description
There are two types of transactions in our sample, Unregistered PIPEs and Registered Direct
Offerings (RDOs). These two transaction types are alike in that they are privately negotiated with a small
set of accredited investors, but they differ in the ability of investors to sell their shares in a timely manner.
6

Specifically, a typical CMPO involves an underwriter confidentially marketing a takedown of an effective S-3
shelf registration statement to a small number of investors. Before the underwriter discloses the name of the issuer,
the investor must indicate interest in receiving confidential information and agree not to trade the issuer’s stock until
the offer is either completed or canceled. After the investors confirm interest, the issuer, underwriter, and investors
negotiate terms including the offering amount, discount, and warrant coverage. Then the offering is made public and
a prospectus is filed with the SEC, allowing outside investors to participate in the transaction. Typically, these
documents are filed after the market close and the offering closes before the subsequent market open.
9

Unregistered PIPEs involve the issuance of unregistered shares under Regulation D of the
Securities Act of 1933. In these transactions, the firm promises to file a registration statement with the
SEC in a contractually specified timeframe (32 days for the median deal). Investors in unregistered PIPEs
can sell their shares after the registration becomes effective, but they cannot trade their shares on public
markets before that time.
RDOs involve the issuance of shares previously registered under a shelf registration statement, so
investors can sell the shares immediately after purchasing them in the offering, if they wish. The warrants
attached to RDOs are sometimes unregistered, with terms of registration specified as in an unregistered
PIPE. Over our sample period, the proportion of registered PIPEs in our sample jumped up from 10.9% in
2001 to 28.4% in 2015 (see Table 4 below). This change in the composition of PIPE offerings followed
an SEC amendment to Form S-3, referred to by practitioners as the “baby shelf” rule, which allowed
listed companies below $75 million in public float to file shelf registration statements.
Table 3 provides summary statistics on the sample of issuing firms and the PIPE transactions. 7 A
large number of PIPEs involve hedge funds and private equity funds as investors; we refer to these PIPEs
as HF/PE PIPEs. Since the HF/PE PIPEs are potentially different from other PIPEs (non-HF/PE PIPEs),
we present statistics for them separately from other PIPEs.
The firms raising capital through PIPEs are much smaller than typical Compustat firms, with
median book assets of $51.2 million and market capitalization of $109.3 million. At the time of the PIPE,
issuing firms are not performing well, with both mean and median EBITDA-to-Assets ratios being
negative (mean = -38.5, median = -22.0). Consequently, it seems unlikely that most of our sample firms
could access the public debt market, or even borrow much from banks. Perhaps for this reason, the sample
firms are not highly leveraged, with the mean (median) market leverage ratio equal to 18.3% (7.2%).
Firms issuing a HF/PE PIPE are even smaller and perform poorer than those issuing non-HF/PE PIPEs,

7

These statistics are for the issuing firms who have data available in CRSP and Compustat and are thus traded on
NYSE or NASDAQ. The firms with stocks trading over-the-counter are likely to be even smaller and less leveraged
than the ones described in Table 3.
10

which is consistent with the notion that the firms raising capital from hedge funds and private equity
funds are riskier than firms who are able to attract other investors to their PIPEs.
The PIPE offerings have a mean size of $35.3 million and a median size of $10.0 million. The
most notable difference between unregistered and registered PIPEs is the liquidity of the issuing firms.
The shares issued in the average unregistered PIPE equal 79 times the average daily volume for the
issuer’s stock over the three months prior to issuance, whereas the typical registered PIPE issues shares
equivalent to 24 days of average volume. For unregistered offerings, there are pre-specified dates by
which the firm must file a registration statement and by which the registration must become effective. In
general, HF/PE PIPEs have shorter registration periods than other PIPEs; the mean (median) effective
time to registration was 90 (60) days for unregistered HF/PE PIPEs and 150 (80) days for other PIPEs.
HF/PE PIPEs are more likely to have warrants than other deals as well, with about 48% of HF/PE deals
having warrants compared to about 22% of other deals.
PIPEs are usually syndicated, with a number of different investors contributing capital in each
transaction. In Panel B of Table 3, we present statistics on the investor composition of each PIPE. Hedge
funds and private equity funds play a prominent role, participating in roughly two thirds of the PIPEs in
our sample (1,991 out of 3,001 PIPEs). In these PIPEs, hedge funds and private equity funds provide an
average of 72% of the capital. There appears to be a dichotomy in which hedge funds and private equity
funds either provide the bulk of the capital or none at all. Therefore, we present separate results for HF/PE
and non-HF/PE PIPEs throughout the paper to explore how differences in investor composition are
associated with other transaction characteristics and outcomes.

4. Returns to PIPE Investors
As illustrated by the example of United American Health Corporation, PIPEs are generally sold at
a price that differs from the current market price. In this section, we describe how we value the package
of securities offered in a PIPE transaction, summarize the discounts for our sample of PIPEs, and compute
buy-and-hold abnormal returns to PIPE investors over various horizons.
11

4.1. Measuring PIPE Discounts
The discount on a PIPE investment reflects the price paid relative to the true value of the package
of securities the investor receives. Since 39% of the PIPEs in our sample have attached warrants, it is
important to include the value of the warrants in the calculation of PIPE discounts. For this reason, we
add the value of any warrants associated with a PIPE to the market price of the equity when estimating
the value of the securities the investor receives. Then, we measure the discount as one minus the price
paid per share, divided by the sum of the market price of the stock and the estimated value of any attached
warrants.
We value each warrant using the Black-Scholes warrant pricing formula that adjusts for the
dilution that occurs when the firm issues new shares upon exercise of the warrants:
𝑁𝑁
𝐶𝐶(𝑆𝑆𝑡𝑡 , 𝐾𝐾, 𝑇𝑇, 𝜎𝜎𝑡𝑡 , 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡 )
𝑁𝑁 + 𝑀𝑀

where 𝑁𝑁 is the number of shares outstanding, 𝑀𝑀 is the number of warrants outstanding, the function 𝐶𝐶 is

the Black-Scholes call option pricing model, 𝑆𝑆𝑡𝑡 is the stock price, 𝐾𝐾 is the strike price, 𝑇𝑇 is the time to

expiration, 𝜎𝜎𝑡𝑡 is the stock volatility, and 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡 is the risk-free rate for maturity 𝑇𝑇. We estimate the conditional

volatility 𝜎𝜎𝑡𝑡 using the annualized standard deviation of daily returns for the three months prior to the
valuation date. The risk-free rate 𝑟𝑟𝑡𝑡 is measured with the interpolated maturity-matched swap rate.

One potential concern is that if one measures the volatility at the time of the PIPE issuance, it

could be higher than expected future volatility, since PIPEs tend to be issued at times when there is
unusually high uncertainty. Overstating volatility for this reason would lead the Black-Scholes formula to
overstate the value of the warrants and hence the discounts and returns to the PIPE investors. For this
reason, we set a ceiling of 50% for the volatility input, which reduces the estimated value of the warrants
and the PIPE discounts.

4.2. Estimates of PIPE Discounts
12

Panel A of Table 4 summarizes the estimated discounts for the PIPEs in our sample. Table 4
presents mean discounts for our sample of PIPEs, with the sample broken down in a number of ways. We
present the discounts by year of issuance, as well as for all years pooled.
The mean discount for all PIPEs is 11.2% and the median is 11.1%. 8 Discounts vary over time,
and tend to be higher in the earlier portion of the sample. The discount is much higher for PIPEs with
warrants than without, with an average 20.1% discount for PIPEs with warrants and 5.7% for PIPEs
without warrants. 9 , 10 HF/PE PIPEs have noticeably higher discounts than other PIPEs, with a mean
discount of 14.5% for HF/PE PIPEs compared to a discount of 4.6% for other PIPEs. Some of this larger
discount comes from the fact that HF/PE PIPEs are more likely to have attached warrants than other
PIPEs.
Panel B of Table 4 examines the extent to which discounts vary across PIPEs with different
issuing firm and transaction characteristics. The first panel suggests that percentage discounts are larger
for smaller PIPE offerings. The average discount is 13.9% for investments of under $5 million and 7.2%
for investments over $50 million. Discounts also decline with issuer size. The average PIPE issued by a
firm with market capitalization under $50 million has a discount of 14.1%, while the average PIPE issued
by a firm with market capitalization over $500 million has a discount of 7.3%. These patterns are
consistent with the view that the discounts represent compensation for information gathering costs, some
of which are fixed. Smaller investments have a higher per share fixed cost of information gathering and
hence a larger discount. Likewise, obtaining information on smaller firms are usually more difficult,
increasing the information gathering cost and the size of discounts.
Although discounts decline with the absolute size of offerings, they increase with the relative size
of offerings, measured by the ratio of issued shares to outstanding shares. The average discount is 5.5%

8
Median discounts are close to the mean discounts for all subsamples reported in Table 4. To avoid making the table
unnecessarily cluttered, we do not report medians in this table but they are available from the authors on request.
9
This difference mainly comes from the warrant value. The average price discount on stock is not statistically
different between the transactions without warrants (5.7%) and those with warrants (7.2%).
10
Recall that the warrant valuation sets a conservative ceiling on volatility at 50%, otherwise the discounts for
PIPEs with warrants would be even larger.

13

for offerings accounting for less than 5% of outstanding shares and 16.1% for offerings over 25% of
existing shares. This pattern suggests that PIPE investors can negotiate a larger discount when their
investments matter more to the issuing firm and therefore give bigger bargaining power to the PIPE
investors.
Discounts are positively related to the issuer’s recent stock performance. Firms that have
performed poorly have slightly smaller discounts than the average firm. PIPEs by firms whose equity
returned less than -50% in the prior year have an average discount of 8.4%. In contrast, firms that have
performed very well have relatively large discounts. PIPEs by firms whose equity returned more than
100% in the prior year offer an average discount of 16.7%. This pattern potentially comes from the timing
of the discounts. Usually the price is set at the time the investors and the firm reach an agreement, but the
discount is measured at the time the transaction closes. If the price has gone up during this period, the
discount increases, and if it has gone down, the discount decreases.
Illiquidity is an important feature of PIPE transactions that is likely to affect the offering price.
Consistent with this notion, the average discount of 11.6% for unregistered PIPEs is 22% larger than the
average discount of 9.5% for registered PIPEs. This difference is statistically significant at the 1% level
and likely reflects compensation for the inability of unregistered PIPE investors to sell their shares until
the issuer’s registration statement becomes effective, which can take months. Interestingly, the effect of
liquidity is less obvious when measured with pre-deal trading activity in the issuer’s stock. While there
are slightly smaller discounts for the most liquid deals, there is no correlation between discounts and the
amount of shares issued as a fraction of daily trading volume.
Not all PIPEs are sold at a discount. In 17.3% of the transactions in the sample, shares are sold at
a premium to the prevailing market price. Investors could in principle be willing to pay a premium to be
able to gather a large stake in a company they expect to do well over time. One such case occurred when a
group of investors led by Apollo and Blackstone made an equity investment in Sirius XM. When these
parties reached an agreement on October 17, 2002, the investors agreed to pay a 23% premium to the
market price. Presumably, Apollo and Blackstone had private information about Sirius’ prospects, since
14

they were secured debtholders and Sirius had recently defaulted on its debt, and the PIPE was part of the
workout by which Sirius avoided going into Chapter 11. By the time the deal closed on March 7, 2003,
Sirius XM’s stock price had declined sufficiently that the premium had increased to 112%. However,
Apollo and Blackstone were rewarded for their investment; over the subsequent two years, Sirius’ stock
price went up by more than a factor of 10, providing Apollo and Blackstone with a sizable profit despite
the premium they paid for the PIPE investment. Non-HF/PE transactions are even more likely to be
priced at a premium than HF/PE PIPEs (30% vs. 10%), seemingly because these transactions often times
involve corporate insiders and strategic buyers who likely receive private information. [See Table 3, Panel
B]

4.3. Buy-and-Hold Returns Earned by Ordinary Investors and PIPE Investors
The return a PIPE investor receives over a particular holding period is equal to the change in the
value of the equity investment plus the change in the value of any attached warrants over that period. The
equity portion of this investment is affected by the discount negotiated by the investor and the return on
the stock over the holding period. If the PIPE contains warrants, the change in warrant valuation will be
affected by the change in the stock price and underlying parameters of the Black-Scholes valuation,
including the strike price, time to expiration, and the stock volatility. 11 In this section, we compute buyand-hold abnormal returns to PIPE investors over various horizons.
We summarize the buy-and-hold returns to ordinary and PIPE investors in Table 5. Panel A
contains the returns for full sample and Panel B by registration status. To measure abnormal returns, we
compare the returns of an issuing firm to those from a matched firm. These matched firms are assigned by
considering all firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry that did not previously issue a PIPE during the
sample period, then selecting the firm with the minimum sum of the absolute differences between the
standardized equity book-to-market ratio, the standardized log market capitalization, and the standardized
11

It is possible that investors cannot realize the Black-Scholes value of the warrants if they wish to exit and there is
not a liquid market for the warrants. For this reason, we report PIPE investor returns both with and without warrants
throughout the paper.
15

Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure. We follow Lyon, Barber, and Tsai (1999) and use bootstrapped
skewness-adjusted t-statistic to draw statistical inferences.
In each panel, we first present the returns to an ordinary investor who buys shares at the market
price on the PIPE closing date and holds them for a fixed horizon. These returns tend to be low relative to
those of the matched firms. In the full sample, the average abnormal return for the PIPE issuer over the
three months after closing is -0.5%, for six months is -4.2%, for one year is -5.2%, and for two years is 8.0%. The returns for the six months, one year and two years are all statistically significantly different
from zero. These negative returns are driven by the unregistered PIPEs for which the average return for
the PIPE issuer minus the matched firm over the three months after closing is -1.1%, for six months is 5.4%, for one year is -6.5%, and for two years is -12.2%. As with the full sample, the differences for the
six months, one year and two years are all statistically significantly different from zero. For registered
PIPEs, the average abnormal returns are neither statistically nor economically different from zero for any
horizon.
This pattern of underperformance subsequent to PIPE issuance suggests that the Sirius XM
example discussed above is atypical and that most firms issuing PIPEs tend to perform poorly
afterwards. 12 If the issuing firms in our sample did not offer discounts and warrants, they would likely
have trouble finding investors willing to hold long positions in a large quantity of newly issued equity. 13
The effect of the discounts and warrants on the return to PIPE investors is illustrated in the
second and third portion of each panel, in which we report the PIPE investor’s return relative to that of a
matched firm’s equity, both excluding and including the effect of the warrants. In contrast to ordinary
investors, PIPE investors’ returns are substantially higher than the returns earned on matched firms,
12

Abnormal returns in our sample are somewhat higher than reported in prior literature. Hertzel et al. (2002) find
average abnormal returns of -30% over the three years after private placements in a sample covering 1980 to 1996.
Brophy et al. (2009) find average abnormal returns of -11% in the year after traditional PIPE offerings to hedge fund
investors in a sample covering 1995 to 2002. These differences could arise from differences in the sample period,
the holding period used in return calculations, or the type of transactions considered.
13
Conversations with practitioners indicate that because PIPE issuers tend to be small and not actively traded, it is
difficult to short sell their shares to hedge the discount and the warrants. However, in some circumstances, PIPE
investors can hedge their investments and still profit from the discounts and warrants included with the PIPE (see
Brophy et al. (2009)).
16

although the magnitude and statistical significance of their returns decrease with the holding period. If we
only consider the stock portion of the PIPE (setting the value of warrants to zero), PIPE investors receive
an average abnormal return of 10.2% (t = 7.8) over the three months following the PIPE’s closing, 6.3%
(t = 4.3) over six months, 4.6% (t = 2.2) over the first year, and 1.9% (t = 0.5) over the first two years.
Adding the value of the warrants increase the returns to 17.4% over 3 months, 13.2% over 6 months, 12.1
over 1 year and 10.1 over two years.
The pattern of returns comes from the discounts PIPE investors receive, combined with the
subsequent underperformance of issuing firms’ equities. Since a large portion of the return they receive
occurs immediately from the discount, PIPE investors have an incentive to exit their positions as soon as
possible, especially given the poor subsequent performance of the issuing firms’ equities. However, it is
not clear whether investors would be able to exit their positions soon enough to realize these gains, given
the unregistered status of the equity they receive and the illiquidity of the positions. Therefore, some of
these returns, especially for the three-month horizon, are likely to be unattainable by investors who have
to sell their positions on public markets to realize the gains.

4.4. Warrants and Skewness in the Return Distribution
An important characteristic of the returns is their skewness, since mean returns are always
substantially higher than median returns. This pattern occurs because of both the skewness of the
underlying stock returns and also because of the attached warrants. When the issuer performs poorly, the
warrants have little value and expire worthless. However, when the issuer performs well, the firm’s stock
price will exceed the exercise price and the warrants will be valuable. Warrants will therefore magnify the
stock’s upside but not affect its downside, which increases the skewness of the PIPE return distribution.
This skewness of returns is illustrated in Figure 3, which reports distribution of the one year buyand-hold abnormal returns to market investors (slanted line pattern bar), the equity portion of PIPE
investors’ return (dotted bar), and PIPE investors’ return using the Black-Scholes valuation of the
attached warrants (solid blue bar). The peak of the distribution is negative for all distributions of returns,
17

which occurs because of the negative median returns earned by both market and PIPE investors.
However, PIPE returns are more likely to be positive than ordinary investor returns because of effects of
the discount and warrants. The gap between the PIPE investor return and the PIPE investor return
excluding warrants is largest for the highest return levels, which reflects the amplification of positive
returns by the warrants. This figure is similar to Figure 1 of Chaplinsky and Haushalter (2010), who
illustrate return skewness in an earlier sample of PIPEs. Skewness in PIPE returns is not unique to our
sample.
The high skewness of PIPE returns suggests that investing in PIPEs is somewhat like venture
capital investing, in that positive average returns are driven by a small number of “home runs” in the
portfolio. Investing in PIPEs can be profitable because shares are purchased at a discount and the attached
warrants amplify the returns of good investments. As a result, winning investments become sufficiently
profitable to drive average abnormal returns to 12.1% for a one year holding period in our sample of
PIPEs.

5. Registration and Holding Period Adjusted Returns
5.1. Announcement Returns
Much of the literature on private placements has focused on the initial stock price reactions to
their announcement. The consensus finding of this literature is that the market reaction is positive.
Potential explanations for this finding are that uncertainty about the firm’s ability to obtain financing is
resolved, that investors provide certification of the firm’s quality (Hertzel and Smith (1993);
Krishnamurthy et al. (2005)), and that the subsequent increase in ownership concentration potentially
leads to improved monitoring (Wruck (1989)).

18

Table 6 summarizes the abnormal returns from four trading days before to five trading days after
the announcement date of the PIPEs in our sample. 14 Similar to other studies, we find a positive and
statistically significant average abnormal return of 4.0% (t = 8.2). However, the median abnormal
announcement return is 0.5%, suggesting that the large average return is driven by some observations for
which returns are particularly high.
There is, however, a substantial difference in the abnormal announcement returns between
registered and unregistered PIPEs. The abnormal announcement return for unregistered PIPEs is 5.3% (t
= 10.0), in contrast to an average abnormal announcement return for RDOs of -1.3% (t = -1.3). To
understand the reason for this difference, it is important to consider two offsetting factors that could lead
the announcement of a PIPE to affect stock prices. First, there is likely to be resolution of uncertainty
about the firms’ capital raising and investment decisions. Since issuing firms are generally small and
poorly performing, the market will often not be sure about whether the issuing firms can raise capital and
continue their investment policies. The announcement of a PIPE can provide positive news that the firm is
able to raise capital, presumably from informed investors in the PIPE syndicate. Second, there is likely to
be price pressure following an equity offering, since some investors will attempt to sell their shares
immediately. This price pressure would lead to a decline in stock prices at the time of a PIPE
announcement.
The difference in abnormal announcement returns between registered and unregistered PIPEs can
be understood in the context of these two effects. Shares offered in a registered PIPE are similar to those
sold in an SEO in that they can be sold immediately. Therefore, the announcement return for registered
PIPEs reflects both effects, with the second effect appearing to dominate in this sample since the average
stock price reaction is negative. This negative announcement effect for registered PIPEs is similar to that
observed in seasoned equity offerings, which tend to have negative announcement day returns (see for
example Asquith and Mullins (1986)).
14

Some of the PIPEs have missing data on the announcement date, in which case we use the closing date. The
median difference between announcement and closing is two days, so stock price changes around closing dates are
likely to capture the announcement day stock price reaction.
19

In contrast, an unregistered PIPE has only the first effect, the resolution of uncertainty about the
firm’s financing and investment opportunities. It does not have the price pressure effect since the issued
shares cannot be sold immediately. Therefore, the announcement of unregistered PIPEs provides a way to
isolate the impact of information about financing without leading to an immediate increase in selling
pressure on the stock. The fact that, in contrast to registered PIPEs or SEOs, the announcement of
unregistered PIPEs is strongly positive suggests that the resolution of uncertainty about the ability to raise
financing is good news for these firms. 15

5.2. Abnormal Volume and Return Around Closing and Registration Dates
The difference in the announcement day returns between registered and unregistered PIPEs
suggest that at least some PIPE investors appear to have strong incentives to sell their shares as soon as
possible, placing downward pressure on the issuer’s stock price. We evaluate the extent to which the
phenomenon of selling as soon as possible is a general pattern in our sample of PIPE investments. To do
so, we examine abnormal trading volume and price movements in issuing firms’ stocks immediately
following the closing date and the effective registration date for various subsamples split by the investor
type and the registration status. For registered PIPEs, shares are tradable as soon as the transaction’s
closing and therefore, the two dates are the same, while for unregistered PIPEs, the registration date
averages 100 days subsequent to the closing date (see Table 3).
We present statistics on trading volume in Table 7, with the full sample of PIPEs presented in
Panel A, HF/PE PIPEs in Panel B and non-HF/PE PIPEs in Panel C. In each panel, registered PIPEs
average substantially higher trading volume after closing (and registration) relative to the quarter prior to
this date. The equities of firms issuing registered PIPEs have an average daily trading volume that is 49.1%
higher (t = 7.2) in the week following closing, 41.2% (t = 6.8) in the two weeks following closing, and
15
Consistent with the results in Krishnamurthy et al. (2005), we find that the announcement return to HF/PE PIPEs
is significantly smaller than the announcement return to non-HF/PE PIPEs. Krishnamurthy et al. (2005) attribute this
difference to a certification effect from insiders investing in the firm. Our results in Table 7 suggest that this
difference can be also explained by a HF/PE investors’ stronger incentive to exit quickly, which leads to greater
price pressure.

20

38.0% (t = 5.9) higher in the month following closing. However, these large average jumps in trading
volume appear to be driven by large increases for a minority of firms, since the median abnormal volume
around the time of the PIPE is close to zero for all windows around the closing date.
The trading volume in a registered PIPE issuer’s stock is likely to contain both selling by PIPE
investors who are trying to liquidate some of their positions and buying by outside investors who react to
the positive news of successful securing of capital. These two factors should have offsetting effects on the
issuing firm’s price. It is impossible to know what fraction of the abnormal volume following PIPE
offerings represents selling by PIPE investors, or how long these investors actually hold the shares they
acquire. However, the returns around the closing of registered PIPEs provide some insight. The abnormal
return to registered PIPEs around the closing is -2.5% (t = -2.3) suggesting that the price pressure effect
seems to dominate.
Unregistered PIPEs provide a setting that makes it possible to identify the price pressure effect
separately from the information effect, since the provision of capital to issuing firms and the selling by
PIPE investors happen at different times. Following the closing of unregistered PIPEs, trading volumes
significantly increase for the full sample as well as the two subsamples. This increase in trading volume,
unlike in registered PIPEs, does not include selling by PIPE investors since their shares are not registered
at this time. The statistically significantly positive 4.1% abnormal return around closing indicates that a
successful offering of PIPE provides positive news regarding the resolution of uncertainty about the
firm’s capital raising and investment.
The information effect of capital raising is reflected in the trading volume and return at the time
the transaction was closed. Therefore, subsequent increase of trading volume and price movements
around the registration of unregistered PIPE securities should reflect selling by PIPE investors rather than
information about the issuing firm’s prospects. Table 7 indicates that on the registration of originally
unregistered PIPEs, we find a spike in trading volume, with about a 30% abnormal volume. This increase
in volume is accompanied by significantly negative abnormal returns, with a mean of -3.2% (t = -6.6).

21

This pattern is consistent with selling by PIPE investors driving down the price of issuers’ stocks at the
time when they can begin selling their positions.
Splitting the sample by investor types in Panels B and C reveals that the price pressure effect is
mainly driven by HF/PE investors. For the firms issuing a PIPE to non-HF/PE investors, the average
abnormal return around the effective registration date is not statistically different from zero for both
unregistered and registered PIPEs. This pattern suggests that HF/PE investors particularly have stronger
incentives than other types of investors to sell their shares as soon as they can.

5.3. Trading Volume and the Time Required to Exit a PIPE Investment
An important issue facing PIPE investors is that the stocks they purchase are relatively illiquid,
since they were issued by small companies with poor operating performance. Therefore, if a PIPE
investor wishes to exit his position by selling shares in the secondary market, his ability to do so without
depressing the price is limited unless he spreads the sales over a long period of time. The bottom portions
of each Panel of Table 7 present calculations of the ratio of the number of shares issued in the PIPE to the
post-registration volume over specified periods following the PIPE issuance. Given that an investor who
wishes to sell an equity position without depressing the stock too much can only sell a relatively small
fraction of the daily volume, this calculation provides insights into the ability of PIPE investors to exit
their positions during this time period.
For unregistered PIPEs, there are on average 4.14 times as many shares issued in the PIPEs as
total transact in the first month following registration. The ratio is lower for registered PIPEs, with 1.16
times as many shares issued transact in the first month. Clearly, it would be impossible for PIPE investors
to sell all of their shares during the first month following registration. While we do not know what
fraction of the volume of any particular stock is made up of selling by PIPE investors, these calculations
indicate that if PIPE investors limit their trades to a maximum of 10 percent of the daily volume as would
probably be necessary to avoid depressing the stock price substantially, it will take at least two years for
them to exit their unregistered position and 6 to 12 months to exit their registered positions.
22

Consequently, it appears that the ability of investors to sell their shares is restricted since PIPEs
tend to be issued in relatively illiquid stocks. In addition, our sample contains relatively liquid PIPEs
because the issuers are traded on NYSE or NASDAQ. The common stock PIPEs that were excluded from
our sample trade over-the-counter and therefore are even more difficult to sell than the PIPEs in our
sample.

5.4. Holding Period Adjusted Returns
PIPEs are a type of investment for which the returns depend on the holding period, since a large
portion of the return investors receive come from the discount received at the time of the investment.
Investors have an incentive to sell the stocks they receive in the PIPE as soon as possible, but are limited
by registration requirements and low trading volume. It is impossible to know the actual holding periods
of investors without frequent, detailed data on their holdings. However, the facts that they have strong
incentives to sell quickly and that volume increases following the PIPE suggests that at least some of
them try to unload their positions as soon as they can. There is an unobservable limit on the number of
shares an investor can sell on a particular day, since selling too aggressively will drive down transaction
prices. To approximate the returns an investor would receive with a strategy that he could potentially
adopt, we assume that the PIPE investors follow a strategy of selling a constant fraction of the daily
volume until their position is unloaded and calculate the returns from this strategy. We perform these
calculations assuming that the PIPE investors sell 10% of the daily volume each trading day until their
position is liquidated.
Table 8 contains estimates of the returns received by regular and PIPE investors assuming the
investors follow this strategy, which adjusts for the holding periods that investors plausibly could have
achieved. 16 Panel A contains the results for full sample, Panel B for unregistered PIPEs, and Panel C for
registered ones. The second row of Panel A shows that if one sells 10% of the daily volume every day

16

A comparable calculation assuming the investor sells 20% of the daily volume is presented in Internet Appendix
Table IA.1.
23

subsequent to registration, it would take over a year (384 days) to sell the position. Market investors
perform somewhat (4.9%) better than peer firms on average, but the median PIPE issuer does slightly
worse (-0.6%), suggesting that the issuing firms have a somewhat more skewed distribution than their
matched firms. PIPE investors, however, do much better than investors in peer firms. HF/PE investors
receive a 22.4% higher return than investments in the matched firms and non-HF/PE investors have a
15.8% higher return over the period in which they hold the PIPE. In terms of annualized return, both
HF/PE investors and non-HF/PE investors earn over 100% abnormal return per year. 17
Panel B presents the results for unregistered PIPEs. HF/PE investors receive a 26.9% average
abnormal return with selling 10% of volume per day over an average of a 511 day holding period, while
non-HF/PE investors average a 11.4% abnormal return over an average of a 397 day holding period.
These returns correspond to an average annualized return of 64.6% and 24.6%, respectively.
Panel C presents similar results for RDOs and shows that PIPE investors average a 16.8%
abnormal return. Since the average holding period of RDO is much shorter (237 days), the annualization
effect becomes stronger for the return on RDOs so that PIPE investors average an annualized abnormal
return of 168%.
The fact that the annualized returns are much higher if the investor can sell the stock faster
highlights the importance of the holding period. If the investor can sell the PIPE sooner and reinvest the
money at an equivalent rate (which might not be possible in practice), then they would earn a
substantially higher annual return. Of course, these calculations assume that the HF/PE investors could
sell their stocks without affecting the price using either strategy. The extent to which selling does affect
prices would lower the abnormal returns that PIPE investors receive, and presumably would lower them
more the more quickly the investor sold the shares.

17

One important caveat about the annualized returns is that the average value is heavily affected by a small number
of observations taking an extremely large value due to compounding.
24

6. Issuers’ Costs of Finance and PIPE Investor Returns
These calculations suggest that, despite the fact that returns decline with holding periods and
there are impediments to selling the stock acquired in a PIPE as quickly as an investor would like, PIPE
investors do earn substantially higher returns than investors who purchase equity in a similar company
that does not issue a PIPE. A natural question to ask is whether these higher returns occur because of
market imperfections, or if they reflect the return investors receive for bearing the risk associated with the
PIPE. If the returns represent compensation for providing capital to a financially constrained firm that
could not raise capital from other sources, then there are several predictions that we should observe in the
data. First, we expect that when PIPE issuers are in worse financial shape, we should be more likely to
observe more risk tolerant investors such as hedge funds or private equity funds providing capital to them.
Second, we expect that the size of discount as well as the holding period adjusted expected returns should
increase with the risk of the PIPE issuers. Third, we expect that the volatility of returns to PIPE investors
should be higher when the issuer is in worse financial condition.
We test these hypotheses and present the results in Table 9. In Columns 1-2, we present
regressions predicting whether or not there is a hedge fund or private equity fund participating in the PIPE
syndicate (Column 1) or the share of capital that hedge funds and private equity funds provide (Column
2). As independent variables, we include firm size, profitability, a measure of intangibility and firm age.
Presumably, size, profitability and firm age are likely to be positively correlated with financial resources,
while intangibility is likely to be negatively correlated with it. The estimates in these equations suggest
that the coefficients on size and profitability are negatively related to hedge fund or private equity fund
participation while intangibility is positively related to it. These results are consistent with the view that
hedge funds and private equity funds are more likely to invest in PIPEs of more risky companies.
In terms of economic significance, when the size of firm increases from the 25th percentile ($41
million) to the 75th percentile ($228 million), holding other variables at their mean values, the likelihood
of HF/PE participation decreases by 23%. Likewise, an increase of intangibility from the 25th percentile to
the 75th percentile is associated with a 7% higher probability of HF/PE participation.
25

In Column 3, we present equations predicting discounts on PIPEs using the same specification as
in the prior columns. Consistent with the univariate results in Table 4, smaller firms tend to have larger
discounts. Profitability is also negatively associated with the size of discounts
In Column 4, we estimate the extent to which holding period adjusted (annualized) returns are a
function of financial constraints, using the returns calculated assuming that investors sell 10% of the daily
volume each day. The coefficients on size and profitability are negative and large in magnitude; for
example, a one standard deviation increase in firm size (1.26) is associated with a 23.4% decrease in
annualized holding period adjusted return. All these findings are consistent with the notion that when
firms are more financially constrained, they have to offer potential investors larger expected returns
through the use of discounts and warrants.
In Column 5, we estimate the extent to which the volatility of returns facing PIPE investors is a
function of issuers’ financial constraints. We measure the volatility of PIPE investor returns as the
annualized standard deviation of issuers’ daily stock returns over the holding period, where holding
period is computed assuming that investors sell 10% of the daily trading volume. Similar to the results for
expected returns, we find that size, profitability, and age are negatively associated with the volatility of
returns. These results are consistent with the view that PIPEs issued by more financially constrained firms
are more risky than PIPEs issued by less financially constrained firms.
Overall, the results in Table 9 are consistent with the view that the returns earned by PIPE
investors are a function of the risk involved with them. Capital is provided to the most financially
constrained firms by the most risk tolerant investors, hedge funds and private equity funds. PIPEs from
more financially constrained firms have both higher holding period adjusted returns and higher risk.
These results are all consistent with the view that the excess returns earned by PIPE investors are
compensation for the risks they face by providing capital to financially constrained firms.

26

7. Summary
In a PIPE transaction, a syndicate of investors provides capital to an issuing firm in exchange for
a public security, often equity, which is sometimes accompanied by warrants and other rights. PIPEs are
an important source of finance for small public firms, providing approximately the same amount of
capital as seasoned equity offerings for small firms in recent years. This paper examines a sample of
3,001 common stock PIPEs and evaluates their role in corporate finance. We estimate the cost of finance
of issuing firms through the returns received by PIPE investors and evaluate the extent to which the
financial condition of the issuing firms affects both the identity of the PIPE investors and the returns they
receive.
Issuing firms make PIPEs attractive to investors by offering them at a discount to the prevailing
secondary market price and by including warrants in the package offered to investors. In our sample, the
capital provided to the issuing firm is worth an average of 11.2% less than the market value of the equity
plus the Black-Scholes valuation of attached warrants. Therefore, PIPE investors are tempted to exit their
positions quickly, capture this discount and then reinvest their capital. In addition, as has been reported in
prior literature, the stocks of firms that issue PIPEs underperform their peers subsequent to the issue.
These effects combine to make PIPE returns decline with holding periods, especially if one adjusts for the
time holding the position by annualizing the returns. Therefore, to estimate the returns PIPE investors
receive, one also has to estimate the time in which they hold the position simultaneously.
There are two factors that limit the ability of investors to exit their positions quickly. First in 80%
of the PIPEs in our sample, investors receive unregistered stock that cannot be sold on the secondary
market until it is registered, which occurs an average of 100 days following the issuance. Second, the
stocks of issuing firms tend to be relatively thinly traded. So, if an investor wishes to sell his shares
without depressing the stock price too much through price pressure, he will have to spread his sales out
over time. Since the returns to investing in PIPEs decline with holding period, the more an investor
spreads out his sales, the lower his return will be.

27

It is impossible to know exactly how long PIPE investors hold their positions, since holding
period data are not publicly available. However, a reasonable strategy for an investor would be to sell a
constant fraction of the daily volume each day following registration until the investor has sold his entire
position. If an investor were to follow this strategy and sell 10% of the daily volume, it would take an
average of 384 days to exit the position, and the total return (including the change in the value of any
attached warrants) would be 19.0%. This holding period adjusted return is substantially (and statistically
significantly) higher than the -2.1% return that an investment in a matched firm would earn over the same
period.
The source of these above market returns could be a market imperfection of some sort, or it could
be that investing in PIPEs is risky and the that the “abnormal” returns reflect the reward to bearing the
risk of providing equity to an otherwise financially constrained firm. To evaluate the extent to which the
risk of the issuing firms explains the returns to PIPE investors, we perform three tests. First, we consider
the identities of the investors in the PIPEs. About two-thirds of the PIPEs in our sample include hedge
funds and private equity funds in the syndicate. Conditional on participation, these risk-tolerant
institutional investors provide an average of 72% of the capital raised. These PIPEs tend to be from
smaller and less profitable firms, who are more likely to be financially constrained. In addition, the PIPEs
in which hedge funds and private equity funds invest earn much higher returns; the holding period
adjusted return to these investments, assuming that investors sell 10% of the daily volume, is 22.4%,
compared to the 15.8% earned by the investors in PIPEs that do not contain hedge funds or private equity
investors. Presumably these HF/PE PIPEs were issued by financially constrained firms, so the returns
they earn are compensation for providing capital when other sources of finance were unwilling to do so.
Second, over the whole sample of PIPEs, the risk of the issuing firm is strongly related to the
returns investors earn. Holding period adjusted returns decrease significantly with the size and
profitability of the issuing firms. Third, the risk of PIPE investments, measured by the volatility of
subsequent stock returns, is positively related to the risk of the issuing firms. It appears that that the

28

returns earned by PIPE investors come from the risks they face in providing capital to poorly performing
firms.
Overall, our results confirm the view of other studies such as Brophy et al. (2009), that PIPEs are
issued by firms that are not likely to have alternative sources of capital. They offer discounts and warrants
to investors, who consequently earn returns higher than they would receive from investing in comparable
firms in the public markets. The worse financial shape the issuing firm is in, the more attractive is the
return distribution they have to offer investors, and the most constrained PIPE issuers are sufficiently
risky that hedge funds and private equity funds end up being the primary providers of capital.

29

References
Amihud, Y., 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Time Series and Cross-Section Effects, Journal of
Financial Markets, 5, 31-56.
Asquith, P., and D. Mullins, 1986, Equity issues and offering dilution, Journal of Financial Economics
15, 61-89.
Barclay, M.J., C.G. Holderness, and D.P. Sheehan, 2007, Private placements and managerial
entrenchment, Journal of Corporate Finance 13, 461-484.
Brophy, D.J., P.P. Ouimet, and C. Sialm, 2009, Hedge funds as investors of last resort? Review of
Financial Studies 22, 541-574.
Chakraborty, I. and N. Gantchev, 2013, Does shareholder coordination matter? Evidence from private
placements, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 213-230.
Chaplinsky, S. and D. Haushalter, 2010, Financing under extreme risk: Contract terms and returns to
private investments in public equity, Review of Financial Studies 23, 2789-2820.
Cronqvist, H. and M. Nilsson, 2005, The choice between rights offerings and private equity
placements, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 375-407.
Edmans, A. and C.G. Holderness, 2017, Blockholders: A survey of theory and evidence, in B.E. Hermalin
and M.S. Weisbach, ed.: The Handbook of The Economics of Corporate Governance (NorthHolland).
Gomes, A. and G. Phillips, 2012, Why do public firms issue private and public securities? Journal of
Financial Intermediation 21, 619-658.
Hadlock, C. J., and J.R. Pierce, 2010, New Evidence on Measuring Financial Constraints, Going Beyond
the KZ Index, Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1909-1940.
Hertzel, M., M. Lemmon, J.S. Linck, and L. Rees, 2002, Long run performance following private
placements of equity, The Journal of Finance 57, 2595-2617.
Hertzel, M. and R.L. Smith, 1993, Market discounts and shareholder gains for placing equity privately,
Journal of Finance 48, 459-485.
Kaplan, S.N. and P. Strömberg, 2003, Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An empirical
analysis of venture capital contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70, 281-315.
Krishnamurthy, S., P. Spindt, V. Subramaniam, and T. Woidtke, 2005, Does equity placement type
matter? Evidence from long-term stock performance following private placements, Journal of
Financial Intermediation 14, 210-238.
Lyon, J.D., B.M. Barber, and C. Tsai, 1999, Improved methods for tests of long-run abnormal stock
returns, Journal of Finance 54, 165-201.
Smith, C,W., 1986, Investment Banking and the Capital Acquisition Process, Journal of Financial
30

Economics, 15, 3-29.
Wruck, K.H., 1989, Equity ownership concentration and firm value: Evidence from private equity
financings, Journal of Financial Economics 23, 3-28.
Wruck, K.H. and Y. Wu, 2009, Relationships, corporate governance, and performance: Evidence from
private placements of common stock, Journal of Corporate Finance 15, 30-47.
Wu, Y., 2004, The choice of equity-selling mechanisms, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 93-119.
Wu, Y., Z. Wang and J. Yao, 2005, Understanding the positive announcement effects of private equity
placements: New insights from Hong Kong data, Review of Finance 9, 385-414.

31

Table 1
Time Series of PIPE Investments
This table reports time series statistics on the number and dollar volume of PIPEs split by the type of securities
issued. The sample includes all PIPE transactions in PrivateRaise from 2001 to 2015 with non-missing CUSIPs,
excluding Rule 144A offerings and confidentially marketed public offerings. Common Stock includes issuance of
registered or unregistered shares of common stock. Conv. Debt or Pref. includes issuance of convertible debentures
or preferred stock. Equity Line is a commitment by the investor to purchase equity securities from the issuer over a
set timeframe. Other Types include other types of convertible securities, non-convertible debt, non-convertible
preferred stock, and prepaid warrants. All categories may include warrants in the package of securities.
Common Stock

Conv. Debt or Pref.

Equity Line

Other Types

Obs.

$ Bil.

Obs.

$ Bil.

Obs.

$ Bil.

Obs.

$ Bil.

2001

597

8.5

377

8.5

122

2.2

77

1.4

2002

511

5.7

350

7.7

54

0.7

58

0.7

2003

781

9.7

325

4.9

44

0.5

77

2.3

2004

909

10.6

454

4.4

82

1.0

51

1.2

2005

824

10.9

500

7.9

83

1.9

58

1.4

2006

1,030

21.1

520

6.1

79

2.1

102

4.3

2007

1,139

35.6

471

13.5

49

1.1

143

18.9

2008

714

28.6

378

68.9

41

1.0

104

18.6

2009

733

17.7

267

12.4

64

1.9

84

3.7

2010

924

22.2

253

8.4

117

1.6

66

2.3

2011

752

11.9

208

4.3

100

1.4

130

16.8

2012

601

12.3

225

7.9

81

1.1

158

17.3

2013

592

9.7

234

7.1

76

1.3

190

23.9

2014

649

14.7

256

11.0

68

0.7

201

30.0

2015

540

24.5

259

10.0

72

0.9

248

34.0

Total

11,296

243.9

5,077

183.0

1,132

19.2

1,747

176.9

32

Table 2
A Typical PIPE: The December 2006 Private Placement of
United American Healthcare Corporation
This table reports the terms of a representative PIPE transaction from our sample. United American Healthcare
Corporation is a provider of contract manufacturing services to the medical device industry. On December 13,
2006, UAHC issued $6.5 million of common stock to raise capital to pay start-up costs associated with its subsidiary
in Tennessee. This private placement was completed by a syndicate of 10 investors led by Heights Capital
Management. At the time of issuance, UAHC was listed on NASDAQ.

Announcement date
Placement type
Market cap. ($MM)
Number of shares
Warrant type
Maturity
Other covenants

12/14/2006
Unregistered PIPE
61.9
1,000,000

ii)

iii)

6.5
Common Stock
$8.20
$6.50

Warrant Terms
Fixed
Number of warrants
100,000
5 years
Strike price
$8.50
i)
Anti-dilution protection (weighted-average adjustment)
ii)
Cashless exercise

Investor Name
Heights Capital Management, Inc.
Miscellaneous Trusts & Pension Funds
Iroquois Capital Management, LLC
Braeburn Financial Group
Hudson Bay Capital Management LP
Stafford Capital Management, LLC
Individual Investors
Kensington Partners LP
Joslynda Capital, LLC
Nite Capital, LP
i)

Basic Information
Issuance amount ($MM)
Security type
Market stock price
PIPE issuance price

Investor Allocations
Investor Type
Private Equity
Miscellaneous
Hedge Fund
Asset Manager
Hedge Fund
Hedge Fund
Individual
Private Equity
Hedge Fund
Hedge Fund

Investment Amount
$1,300,000
$1,027,000
$877,500
$868,850
$715,000
$500,500
$455,000
$431,145
$162,500
$162,500

Rights and Restrictions
Mandatory registration: Issuer has to file a Registration Statement no later than the 30th day after the
Closing Date. Issuer has further agreed to use its best efforts to cause such Registration Statement to be
declared effective no later than the 90th day (or 120th day if the Registration Statement is subject to review
by the SEC) following the Closing Date.
Limitation on future issuance of securities: During the period beginning on the Purchase Agreement date
and ending on the Trigger Date (normally the 60th trading day following the Registration Statement is
declared effective), the issuer will not be permitted to offer, sell, grant any option to purchase or otherwise
dispose of any of its or its subsidiaries’ equity or equity equivalent securities;
Right of participation: If, from the Trigger Date until the 1-year anniversary of the Closing Date, the issuer
proposes to issue securities convertible into common stock, the issuer is required to first give the investors
a chance to purchase up to 40% of such securities on the same terms.

33

Table 3
Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics on PIPE issuers and transaction terms in Panel A, and investor compositions in Panel B. Each observation represents a
distinct PIPE transaction. The sample consists of transactions involving common stock (registered or unregistered at issuance), with or without fixed strike price
warrants. The sample is restricted to transactions with stock price data in CRSP and excludes transactions for which the pre-closing price in CRSP is different
than the pre-closing price in PrivateRaise. Accounting figures from the year prior to issuance are collected from Compustat. Market leverage is the ratio of total
debt to total debt plus market capitalization. Asset Market-to-Book is market capitalization plus total debt divided by book assets. Daily Trading Volume is the
average of daily share volume times closing price over the quarter prior to the closing date of the PIPE transaction. Days to Mandatory File and Effect
Registration are the contract terms requiring filing and effectiveness of a registration statement for PIPEs that are unregistered at issuance. The rows labeled Ex
Post report the actual time to filing and effectiveness of the registration statement. Negative values of these variables are truncated at zero, affecting 6
observations. R&D expense is assumed to be zero when it is unreported in Compustat. All ratios are winsorized at the 1% level to mitigate the impact of outliers.
Panel A: Issuer and Transaction Terms
All PIPEs
Variables

HF/PE PIPEs
Unregistered
Registered
Mean p50
Obs.
Mean p50
Obs.

Non-HF/PE PIPEs
Unregistered
Registered
Mean p50
Obs.
Mean p50
Obs.

Mean

p50

Obs.

353

20.2

2,448

172 20.3

1,255

146

8.1

372

791 31.7

714

269 15.5

107

1,245

51.2

2,453

799 42.7

1,259

367

41.3

372

2,549 96.5

715

829 67.9

107

Market Cap. ($MM)

445 109.3

3,001

245 95.1

1,544

278

111

447

861

136

884

576

152

126

Market Leverage (%)

18.3

7.2

2,441

18.2

7.6

1,255

13.8

2.9

370

21.2

9.1

710

17.3

5.6

106

35.0

23.9

2,453

33.1 20.7

1,259

47.4

51.6

372

30.4 17.3

715

45.0 48.0

107

-38.5 -22.0

2,371

-37.7 -19.8

1,241

-59.7 -46.2

350

-28.0 -13.1

686

-47.6 -31.5

94

26.6 13.7

698

16.8

7.7

95

4.0

1.4

106

35.4 21.4

107

Issuer Characteristics
Revenue ($MM)
Book Assets ($MM)

Cash/Assets (%)
EBITDA/Assets (%)
PP&E/Assets (%)

22.4

10.5

2,395

21.3

9.5

1,254

19.5

8.7

348

CapEx/Assets (%)

5.8

2.2

2,422

5.9

2.3

1,239

4.5

1.2

372

6.7

2.8

705

R&D/Assets (%)

25.5

10.8

2,448

24.6 10.2

1,255

40.0

29.5

372

17.9

2.4

714

Asset Market-to-Book

3.1

1.8

2,441

3.2

1.8

1,255

3.6

2.4

370

2.7

1.6

710

3.8

2.1

106

Years since IPO

8.7

6.5

2,455

8.3

6.1

1,259

10.0

8.4

372

8.4

6.2

716

11.6

8.3

108

Daily Trading Vol. ($MM)

5.8

0.6

2,455

2.5

1.0

372

11.6

0.5

716

16.2

1.3

108

0.5
1,259
3.1
Continue on the next page

34

All PIPEs
Mean
Variables
PIPE Terms and Conditions
HF/PE share (%)
47.0
Issue amount ($MM)
35.3
Issued/Outstanding Shr. (%)
17.6
Issued Shares/Daily Volume 68.0
Days to Mand. Reg. File
36.0
Ex Post Days to Filing
33.5
Days to Mand. Effect. Reg.
77.5
Ex Post Days to Effect.Reg. 60.2
Warrants Included
0.39
Warrant Expiration (Years)
4.6
Warrant Moneyness
0.91

p50

Obs.

49.7
10.0
11.4
19.2
26.0
15.0
90.0
33.0
0.00
5.0
0.87

2,529
3,001
3,001
2,455
2,053
1,448
1,886
1,442
3,001
1,145
1,150

Table 3, Panel A – Continued
HF/PE PIPEs
Unregistered
Registered
Mean p50
Obs.
Mean p50
Obs.
69.4
28.7
21.7
85.5
42.6
50.0
106
90.4
0.48
4.7
0.93

76.0
11.0
14.0
26.1
30.0
29.0
90.0
60.0
0.00
5.0
0.89

1,429
1,544
1,544
1,259
1,260
739
1,164
732
1,544
732
726

88.3 100.0
24.5 11.7
15.0 11.3
24.6 13.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.46 0.00
4.8
5.0
0.83 0.82

224
447
447
372
447
447
447
447
447
206
206

Non-HF/PE PIPEs
Unregistered
Registered
Mean p50
Obs.
Mean p50
Obs.
0.0
53.2
12.8
66.5
91.8
85.1
151
150
0.23
3.9
0.93

0.0
7.5
7.7
16.9
45.0
38.0
99.0
80.0
0.00
4.0
0.88

787
884
884
716
220
136
149
137
884
187
198

0.0 0.0
30.2 10.0
9.2 6.7
23.6 8.7
0.0 0.0
0.0 0.0
0.0 0.0
0.0 0.0
0.16 0.00
4.7 5.0
0.87 0.82

89
126
126
108
126
126
126
126
126
20
20

Panel B: Investor Composition

Investor Type
Hedge Funds/Private Equity Funds
Mutual Fund
Financial Institution
Trust/Endowment/Pension/Foundation
Individual Investor
Corporation/Strategic
Insurance Company
Insider/Affiliate
Broker-Dealer
Foreign Investment house
Sovereign Wealth Fund
Miscellaneous
Unknown

HF/PE PIPEs
Participation by (%)
Shares bought by (%)
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
100
1,991
72
1,653
14.7
1,991
3.7
1,653
26.9
1,991
5.5
1,653
20.7
1,991
1.8
1,653
29.7
1,991
4.6
1,653
4.7
1,991
0.7
1,653
4.9
1,991
0.5
1,653
8.1
1,991
0.7
1,653
4.8
1,991
0.4
1,653
2.6
1,991
0.3
1,653
1.0
1,991
0.2
1,653
11.5
1,991
1.4
1,653
34.0
1,991
8.2
1,653

35

Non-HF/PE PIPEs
Participation by (%)
Shares bought by (%)
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
0
1,010
0
876
5.2
1,010
3.9
876
14.7
1,010
11.9
876
7.0
1,010
4.0
876
12.4
1,010
7.0
876
32.4
1,010
33.5
876
2.3
1,010
1.4
876
14.7
1,010
7.8
876
1.0
1,010
0.4
876
1.7
1,010
1.0
876
1.9
1,010
1.9
876
4.1
1,010
1.8
876
27.8
1,010
25.3
876

Table 4
Summary of PIPE Discounts
This table reports summary statistics by issuance year of discounts on PIPE transactions. We lose 53 observations from the full sample (3,001 observations) due
to the lack of contractual data (e.g., warrant term and strike price) required for the calculation of warrant value. The discount is the difference between the market
value of securities purchased in the transaction and the price paid by the investor, as a percentage of the market value of securities purchased. The sample is split
into PIPEs without and with warrants, unregistered and registered, and HF/PE PIPEs and non-HF/PE PIPEs. Obs. is the total number of transactions in each year,
% with Warrants is the percentage of transactions including warrants, % Reg. is the percentage of registered transactions, and % HF/PE is the percentage of
transactions involving hedge funds or private equity funds. Negative discounts mean the investor paid a premium to the market price. Market values are
computed using the last closing price prior to the transaction closing. Warrants are valued using the Black-Scholes call option model adjusted for dilution, with
annualized volatility estimated over the trailing three months and capped at 50% and the risk-free rate interpolated from the swap curve.
Panel A: Annual Summary Statistics
All PIPEs

without
Warrant

with
Warrant

% with
Warrant

Unregistered

Registered

% Reg.

HF/PE

Non-HF/PE

% HF/PE

Obs.

2001

10.1

5.2

24.0

26.0

10.1

10.4

10.9

18.6

2.7

46.7

304

2002

10.4

4.7

19.8

38.0

11.4

6.1

17.5

14.9

3.2

62.0

234

2003

17.3

11.2

25.3

43.4

18.0

12.1

12.1

19.7

10.7

73.2

272

2004

13.5

7.8

20.2

46.4

14.4

8.5

14.9

15.7

6.4

76.6

248

2005

14.3

7.4

21.2

50.0

15.6

9.2

19.8

16.8

5.8

77.5

222

2006

13.8

6.6

21.4

48.2

14.8

9.2

18.6

14.9

10.1

76.5

226

2007

10.9

4.9

20.3

39.1

11.4

7.6

14.5

13.2

1.7

80.2

248

2008

8.1

4.1

14.7

38.0

7.6

9.9

22.3

11.2

1.6

68.1

166

2009

10.0

4.5

17.8

41.6

8.8

12.4

33.1

12.7

5.8

60.2

166

2010

11.8

6.6

21.5

34.7

12.2

10.6

25.9

16.1

4.4

63.3

147

2011

9.7

7.3

13.7

37.7

10.7

6.3

23.2

11.9

6.7

57.2

138

2012

4.6

0.0

20.3

22.9

3.6

8.6

19.5

8.7

-2.1

61.9

118

2013

9.0

5.4

18.1

28.4

8.8

9.9

23.1

13.3

2.8

59.0

134

2014

9.6

6.6

16.6

30.1

9.7

9.5

27.0

10.5

8.2

60.1

163

2015

6.1

1.9

16.7

28.4

4.4

10.4

28.4

8.9

1.6

61.7

162

11.2

5.7

20.1

37.8

11.6

9.5

19.4

14.5

4.6

66.3

2,948

All Years

36

Panel B: Cross-Sectional Splits
Mean

StDev

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

0 to 4.9 million

13.9

26.4

1.6

13.9

27.2

803

5 to 9.9 million

11.5

23.3

2.3

13.2

23.7

575

10 to 19.9 million

11.7

18.4

3.9

11.8

20.8

630

20 to 49.9 million

8.9

17.9

2.4

9.1

16.7

577

50 million and above

7.2

21.7

1.9

7.6

15.4

363

0 to 49.9 million

14.1

30.0

3.8

14.8

27.2

753

50 to 99.9 million

14.0

18.3

5.3

14.3

24.2

634

100 to 199.9 million

10.7

18.6

2.2

10.9

19.7

632

200 to 499.9 million

7.1

18.5

0.0

7.7

16.5

522

500 million and above

7.3

18.5

1.4

7.0

14.2

407

Split by Issue Amount ($)

Split by Market Capitalization ($)

Split by Ratio of Issued Shares to Old Shares Outstanding
0% to 4.9%

5.5

27.4

-0.8

5.4

15.8

641

5.0% to 9.9%

10.6

18.2

2.4

11.0

20.3

681

10.0% to 14.9%

13.1

16.7

5.6

13.3

23.0

512

15.0% to 24.9%

12.8

23.2

5.2

13.1

22.5

761

25.0% and above

16.1

21.4

3.8

13.3

27.1

353

-50.0% and below

8.4

34.0

0.0

11.3

22.0

558

-49.9% to -10.0%

9.9

20.3

0.1

10.4

20.5

738

-9.9% to 9.9%

9.0

17.4

0.0

7.9

18.8

400

10.0% to 49.9%

11.4

14.4

3.5

10.4

18.6

520

50.0% to 99.9%

14.2

21.2

6.1

13.0

24.7

302

100% and above

16.7

16.5

7.8

14.6

25.8

429

0 to 10 days

8.4

25.7

0.0

9.4

19.2

796

10 to 20 days

12.4

18.0

2.9

11.9

21.4

429

20 to 60 days

12.5

17.6

4.1

11.4

22.5

611

60 days and above

11.4

26.1

2.3

10.9

22.6

581

11.6

24.0

2.4

12.0

23.2

2,376

9.5

11.7

2.3

8.8

15.5

572

Split by Trailing One-Year Stock Return

Split by Issued Shares/Daily Volume

Split by Registration Status
Unregistered
Registered

37

Table 5
Buy-and-Hold Returns to Market and PIPE Investors
This table reports summary statistics of buy-and-hold returns after PIPE transactions. Panel A presents the statistics
for the full sample, and Panel B for the subsamples split by registration status. Market Investor Return is the return
earned by purchasing the PIPE issuer’s stock on the market on the transaction closing date and holding it for a fixed
period. PIPE Investor Return is the return earned by purchasing securities in the PIPE transaction and holding them
for a fixed period. Abnormal returns are relative to the return on a matched firm, which is obtained by considering
all firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry that did not previously issue a PIPE in the sample period and selecting the
firm with the minimum sum of the absolute differences between the standardized equity book-to-market ratio, the
standardized log market capitalization, and the standardized Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure. Warrants are valued
using the Black-Scholes call option model adjusted for dilution, with annualized volatility estimated over the trailing
three months and capped at 50% and the risk-free rate interpolated from the swap curve. Observations where this
sum exceeds two are excluded due to poor match quality, which removes 423 observations from the full sample. tstat is the bootstrapped skewness-adjusted t-statistic from 1,000 draws with replacement.
Panel A: Full Sample

Mean
StDev
Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)
3 months
-0.5
47.9
6 months
-4.2
63.6
1 year
-5.2
97.6
2 years
-8.0
157.1

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

-0.6
-3.2
-2.7
-2.4

-23.3
-34.2
-47.9
-63.0

-0.9
-5.0
-6.7
-7.6

20.6
25.5
32.0
47.3

2,513
2,485
2,422
2,123

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return (excluding Warrants) (%)
3 months
10.2
53.6
7.8
6 months
6.3
70.1
4.3
1 year
4.6
103.2
2.2
2 years
1.9
160.9
0.5

-16.8
-29.2
-42.9
-56.0

6.2
1.3
-0.9
-1.2

33.5
37.6
44.3
57.8

2,513
2,485
2,422
2,123

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return (with Warrants) (%)
3 months
17.4
59.6
11.0
6 months
13.2
76.9
8.6
1 year
12.1
114.1
4.8
2 years
10.1
175.7
2.4

-13.1
-25.9
-39.8
-55.0

10.9
4.4
1.7
0.7

40.0
43.8
50.1
62.9

2,513
2,485
2,422
2,123

38

Panel B: Subsamples Split by Registration Status

Unregistered
Mean
p50
Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)
3 months
-1.1
-1.1
6 months
-5.4
-5.3
1 year
-6.5
-7.2
2 years
-12.2
-9.3

Obs.

Registered
Mean
p50

Obs.

1,988
1,966
1,918
1,674

1.6
0.2
-0.3
7.5

-0.2
-3.6
-5.4
-1.2

525
519
504
449

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return (excluding Warrants) (%)
3 months
11.2
7.5
1,988
6 months
6.6
1.6
1,966
1 year
4.5
-0.9
1,918
2 years
-1.1
-2.2
1,674

6.7
5.5
4.7
12.9

2.9
-0.1
-0.3
1.3

525
519
504
449

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return (with Warrants) (%)
3 months
18.6
12.0
6 months
13.8
5.1
1 year
12.3
1.5
2 years
7.7
0.3

13.0
11.2
11.4
19.0

5.5
2.1
4.1
4.4

525
519
504
449

39

1,988
1,966
1,918
1,674

Table 6
Summary of PIPE Announcement Returns
This table reports summary statistics of announcement returns for the PIPE transactions in our sample. The raw
announcement return is the stock return from 4 trading days before to 5 trading days after the announcement date of
the PIPE transaction. The abnormal return is the raw return minus the CAPM benchmark return from the realized
market return over that window, with beta estimated using daily returns over the year prior to the announcement
date. Betas are bound between -1 and 3, which impacts less than 1% of observations. 17 observations with new
issuance more than 5 times the number of previously outstanding shares are excluded from the sample. t-stat is from
a regression of the abnormal announcement return on a constant, with standard errors clustered two ways by firm
and month of announcement. % Warr. is the percentage of transactions with attached warrants.
Mean

StDev

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

% Warr.

Obs.

Raw Return (%)

4.2

25.1

8.1

-7.9

0.4

11.3

39.3

2,963

Abnormal Return (%)

4.0

24.7

8.2

-7.8

0.5

10.9

39.3

2,963

5.3

24.9

10.0

-6.7

1.3

12.0

39.2

2,392

-1.3

23.3

-1.3

-13.6

-3.5

6.1

39.6

571

Abnormal Return Split by Offering Type (%)
Unregistered
Registered

Abnormal Return Split by Investor Composition (%)
HF/PE

2.1

23.7

3.7

-9.8

-0.8

8.8

47.9

1,971

Non-HF/PE

7.9

26.2

8.5

-4.9

3.1

14.5

22.1

992

Abnormal Return Split by Warrant Status (%)
without Warrant

5.7

23.1

9.7

-5.0

1.9

11.3

0

1,800

with Warrant

1.5

26.9

1.8

-12.4

-3.1

10.1

100

1,163

40

Table 7
Summary of Trading Volume and Returns around Closing and Registration
This table reports summary statistics on trading volume in PIPE stocks. Panel A presents the statistics for the full
sample, and in Panels B and C the sample is split into PIPEs with and without hedge funds and private equity funds
participation. Each observation represents a distinct PIPE transaction. The registration date is defined as the
effective date of the registration statement for unregistered PIPEs and the closing date of the transaction for
registered PIPEs. Daily Abnormal Volume is defined as the difference between the average daily volume in a
window after closing (registration) and the average daily volume over the three months prior to closing
(registration). Raw Return around closing (registration) date is the stock return from 4 trading days before to 5
trading days after the registration date. Abnormal Return is the raw return minus the CAPM benchmark return over
that window. Fraction of Post-Registration Volume Required to Sell Issued Shares is the ratio of issued shares to
realized volume over various windows after registration and describes the amount of daily volume the PIPE
investors would need to trade to exit their positions. t-stat is from a regression of the variable of interest on a
constant, with standard errors clustered by month of closing. All ratios (except returns) are winsorized at the 1%
level to mitigate the impact of outliers.
Panel A: Full Sample
Unregistered
At Closing
Variables

Mean p50 t-stat

Registered
At Registration

Obs.

Mean

At Closing & Registration

p50 t-stat Obs.

Mean

p50

t-stat

Obs.

2.9

7.2

573

Daily Abnormal Volume (%)
1 week

55.7

3.4

13.7 2,425

30.5 -10.3

4.6

865

49.1

2 weeks

46.2

1.2

12.7 2,425

26.9

-5.0

5.0

853

41.2

0.0

6.8

573

1 month

41.1 -0.4

11.2 2,424

34.8

-5.2

5.6

853

38.0

-0.5

5.9

573

Returns (%)
Raw Return

4.2

0.8

7.5 2,427

-2.9

-1.7

-5.4

865

-2.1

-4.0

-1.9

573

Abnormal Ret.

4.1

0.6

7.6 2,427

-3.2

-2.2

-6.6

865

-2.5

-3.7

-2.3

573

Percentage of Post-Registration Volume Required to Sell Issued Shares (%)
1 month

n.a.

414

124

15.7

859

116

58.8

14.6

571

3 months

n.a.

124

43.3

14.9

850

36.4

18.9

14.6

571

6 months

n.a.

52.8

19.9

15.5

850

17.6

8.9

14.5

570

12 months

n.a.

23.5

8.5

14.9

846

7.8

4.0

13.6

567

24 months

n.a.

10.6

3.8

13.0

824

3.4

1.7

11.5

555

Panel B: HF/PE PIPEs
Unregistered

Registered

At Closing
Variables

Mean p50 t-stat

At Registration
Obs.

Mean

At Closing & Registration

p50 t-stat Obs.

Mean

p50

t-stat

Obs.

Daily Abnormal Volume (%)
1 week

56.5 5.3

11.5

1,542

36.0

-9.9

4.7

731

49.2

5.3

6.6

447

2 weeks

48.4 3.4

10.7

1,542

31.1

-4.3

5.0

723

44.5

4.3

6.4

447

1 month

42.2 1.0

9.6

1,542

39.9

-3.9

5.6

723

40.8

1.5

5.5

447

Continue to the next page

41

Table 7, Panel B - Continued
Unregistered

Registered

At Closing
Variables

Mean p50 t-stat

At Registration
Obs.

Mean

At Closing & Registration

p50 t-stat Obs.

Mean

p50

t-stat

Obs.

Returns (%)
Raw Return

3.5 0.0

5.7

1,543

-3.3

-2.0

-6.0

731

-3.0

-4.7

-2.4

447

Abnormal Ret.

3.3 0.0

5.5

1,543

-3.6

-2.6

-6.9

731

-3.6

-4.8

-2.8

447

Percentage of Post-Registration Volume Required to Sell Issued Shares (%)
1 month

n.a.

442

142

14.9

727

111

62.2

14.7

446

2 months

n.a.

212 70.7

13.9

721

54.0

31.7

14.8

446

3 months

n.a.

134 48.3

14.3

721

36.0

20.6

14.4

446

6 months

n.a.

57.0 22.2

14.9

721

17.7

9.6

14.4

446

12 months

n.a.

25.2

9.8

14.3

718

8.2

4.4

12.4

443

24 months

n.a.

11.2

4.3

12.0

702

3.5

1.8

10.1

432

Panel C: Non-HF/PE PIPEs
Unregistered
At Closing
Variables

Registered
At Registration

Mean p50 t-stat Obs.

Mean

At Closing & Registration

p50 t-stat Obs.

Mean

p50

t-stat

Obs.

Daily Abnormal Volume (%)
1 week

54.3

0.1

9.0

883

0.2 -18.0

0.0

134

48.9

-7.8

3.3

126

2 weeks

42.5 -2.4

8.1

883

3.4 -12.5

0.4

130

29.6

-8.5

2.8

126

1 month

39.2 -5.1

7.4

882

6.3 -13.0

0.7

130

28.3

-7.0

2.7

126

Returns (%)
Raw Return

5.5

1.9

6.2

884

-0.8

-0.3

-0.6

134

1.1

0.2

0.6

126

Abnormal Ret.

5.4

1.4

6.4

884

-1.0

-0.4

-0.9

134

1.4

0.3

0.8

126

Percentage of Post-Registration Volume Required to Sell Issued Shares (%)
1 month

n.a.

259

57.6

5.2

132

132

38.6

5.7

125

3 months

n.a.

67.3

15.7

4.9

129

37.6

12.2

5.7

125

6 months

n.a.

29.2

8.5

5.2

129

17.2

6.3

5.7

124

12 months

n.a.

14.1

4.4

4.7

128

6.4

2.8

6.3

124

24 months

n.a.

7.0

1.7

4.1

122

2.8

1.0

6.8

123

42

Table 8
Holding Period Adjusted Returns to Market and PIPE Investors
This table reports summary statistics of effective holding period returns after PIPE transactions, assuming that PIPE
investors sell 10% of post-registration daily trading volume. Panel A presents the statistics for the full sample, and in
Panels B and C the sample is split into Unregistered PIPEs and RDOs. Market Investor Return is the return earned
by purchasing the PIPE issuer’s stock on the market on the transaction closing date and selling 10% of postregistration volume daily until exiting. PIPE Investor Return is the return earned by purchasing securities in the
PIPE transaction and selling 10% of post-registration volume daily until exiting. Abnormal returns are relative to the
return on a matched firm, which is obtained by considering all firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry that did not
previously issued a PIPE in the sample period and selecting the firm with the minimum sum of the absolute
differences between the standardized equity book-to-market ratio, the standardized log market capitalization, and the
standardized Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure. The return to matched firm is calculated assuming that investors
sell the matched stock at the same rate as the PIPE stock. Warrants are valued using the Black-Scholes call option
model adjusted for dilution, with annualized volatility estimated over the trailing three months and capped at 50%
and the risk-free rate interpolated from the swap curve. Annualized returns are capped at 3000% to mitigate the
impact of outliers, which affects about 3% of observations. t-stat is the bootstrapped skewness-adjusted t-statistic
from 1,000 draws with replacement.
Panel A: Full Sample
Mean

StDev

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

4.9

101

1.5

-20.7

-0.6

22.2

1,244

Holding Period (Days)

384

336

48.3

131

288

542

1,244

Excluding Warrants (%)

12.7

112

3.5

-16.8

4.1

29.7

1,244

With Warrants (%)

21.2

118

5.0

-13.8

7.8

38.4

1,244

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

105

461

13.9

-16.1

9.1

59.2

1,244

Holding Period (Days)

405

341

40.3

140

303

580

1,009

Excluding Warrants (%)

12.6

112

3.1

-16.2

4.3

31.3

1,009

With Warrants (%)

22.4

120

4.4

-12.8

8.8

41.8

1,009

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

104

457

12.8

-15.9

10.4

59.0

1,009

Holding Period (Days)

295

297

19.9

76.0

198

398

235

Excluding Warrants (%)

13.5

113

2.1

-18.8

3.5

24.7

235

With Warrants (%)

15.8

113

2.6

-17.8

3.8

26.7

235

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

109

481

5.6

-16.2

3.0

60.3

235

Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)
PIPE Investor Abnormal Return

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : HF/PE PIPEs

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : Non-HF/PE PIPEs

43

Panel B: Unregistered PIPEs
Mean

StDev

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

4.4

115

0.9

-27.0

-1.7

26.5

715

Holding Period (Days)

493

355

34.9

210

397

710

715

Excluding Warrants (%)

14.4

132

2.7

-24.3

3.9

36.4

715

With Warrants (%)

24.4

140

4.1

-20.6

6.8

44.2

715

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

58.1

316

6.1

-19.0

6.2

46.3

715

Holding Period (Days)

511

357

30.3

224

417

742

599

Excluding Warrants (%)

15.6

129

2.5

-21.9

5.0

37.5

599

With Warrants (%)

26.9

139

3.7

-18.4

8.9

48.4

599

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

64.6

328

6.3

-17.6

9.0

47.5

599

Holding Period (Days)

397

328

12.7

156

306

515

116

Excluding Warrants (%)

8.2

148

0.5

-34.0

-4.7

25.2

116

With Warrants (%)

11.4

148

0.8

-32.6

-2.9

26.2

116

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

24.6

242

1.0

-24.0

-3.2

38.8

116

Mean

StDev

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

5.6

78

1.3

-13.0

0.0

16.8

529

Holding Period (Days)

237

241

27.6

64.0

157

327

529

Excluding Warrants (%)

10.5

77.6

2.4

-11.0

4.3

21.7

529

With Warrants (%)

16.8

80.2

3.2

-8.5

8.3

33.0

529

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

168

600

13.7

-10.8

12.2

77.9

529

Holding Period (Days)

249

244

25.8

74.0

165

340

410

Excluding Warrants (%)

8.1

81.3

1.6

-12.5

3.1

21.7

410

With Warrants (%)

15.9

84.4

2.6

-8.7

8.8

34.1

410

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

161

593

10.6

-12.1

12.0

77.8

410

Holding Period (Days)

196

223

15.5

45.0

105

308

119

Excluding Warrants (%)

18.5

62.9

4.9

-6.9

7.2

23.1

119

With Warrants (%)

20.0

63.9

5.2

-6.9

7.4

27.4

119

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

191

623

7.9

-6.1

17.2

79.5

119

Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)
PIPE Investor Abnormal Return

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : HF/PE PIPEs

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : Non-HF/PE PIPEs

Panel C: Registered PIPEs
Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)
PIPE Investor Abnormal Return

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : HF/PE PIPEs

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : Non-HF/PE PIPEs

44

Table 9
Issuers’ Financial Condition and Their Cost of Finance
This table presents the relation between the issuers’ financial conditions and various measures that characterize their
cost of finance. Probit (Column 1) or OLS (Columns 2-5) coefficient estimates and corresponding t-stats (in
parentheses) are reported. The dependent variables are the indicator variable of HF/PE participation (Column 1), the
percentage of shares bought by HF/PE investors (Column 2), the size of discount including warrant value (Column
3), holding-period adjusted returns (Column 4), and the annualized standard deviation of issuers’ daily stock returns
over the holding period (Column 5), respectively. Holding periods are computed based on the scenario of selling
10% of post-registration daily volume. Size is the natural log of market capitalization. Profitability is the ratio of
EBITDA to book assets. Intangibility is one minus the ratio of PP&E to book assets. Age is the number of years
since IPO. All ratios and the volatility of returns are winsorized the 1% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. All
specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and account for double
clustering by firm and issue month. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.
Dep. Var.

Size
Profitability
Intangibility
Age
Constant
Year FE
Observations
2

Adjusted (Pseudo) R

HF/PE
Participation

HF/PE
Share

Discount

HP-Adj.
Return

Volatility
of Returns

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.134***

-0.032***

-0.022***

-0.186*

-0.122***

(-4.78)

(-3.36)

(-4.37)

(-1.95)

(-7.85)

-0.144**

-0.081***

-0.010

-0.439*

-0.210***

(-2.06)

(-2.80)

(-0.91)

(-1.71)

(-5.26)

0.224*

0.065

0.018

-0.530

-0.031

(1.81)

(1.39)

(0.76)

(-1.24)

(-0.45)

0.003

0.003*

-0.000

0.002

-0.004**

(0.71)

(1.78)

(-0.50)

(0.10)

(-2.41)

0.274

0.311***

0.186***

4.402***

1.597***

(1.31)

(4.36)

(3.09)

(3.77)

(9.29)

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

2,364

1,991

2,326

965

965

0.0643

0.0808

0.0340

0.0792

0.280

45

Figure 1
Time Series of PIPE and SEO Issuance by Small Firms
This figure reports annual issuance of PIPEs and SEOs for firms with market capitalization under $1 billion from
2001 to 2015. SEO data are obtained from SDC Platinum. The SEO sample includes primary offerings by U.S.
listed companies with non-missing data on CUSIP and market capitalization. All PIPEs includes common stock,
equity line, convertible preferred stock, convertible debt, and other types of PIPEs in PrivateRaise, excluding Rule
144A offerings and confidentially marketed public offerings, but placing no restrictions on investor type. Stock
PIPEs includes the common stock subset of the All PIPEs sample.

46

Figure 2
UAHC Prices and Volumes around the December 2006 PIPE
This figure reports the price and trading volume of United American Healthcare Corporation (UAHC) from one
month before the closing of its December 2006 PIPE transaction to one month after the effective registration date for
the shares sold in the offering. The vertical line on December 14, 2006 marks the announcement of the transaction
after the market close. The vertical line on January 26, 2007 marks the effective registration date.

47

Figure 3
Distribution of Returns to Market and PIPE Investors
This figure reports histograms of the distributions of returns to regular investors in PIPE stocks and participants in
PIPE transactions. Market Investor Return is the return earned by purchasing the PIPE issuer’s stock on the market
on the transaction closing date and holding it for a fixed period. PIPE Investor Return is the return earned by
purchasing securities in the PIPE transaction and holding them for a fixed period. Abnormal returns are relative to
the return on a matched firm, which is obtained by considering all firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry that did not
previously issue a PIPE in the sample period and selecting the firm with the minimum sum of the absolute
differences between the standardized equity book-to-market ratio, the standardized log market capitalization, and the
standardized Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure.
25%

Fraction of Sample

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

1-Year Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return
Market Investor

PIPE Investor (excl. Warrant)

48

PIPE Investor

Table IA.1
Holding Period Adjusted Returns to Market and PIPE Investors: Alternative Trading Strategy
This table reports summary statistics of effective holding period returns after PIPE transactions, assuming that PIPE
investors sell 20% of post-registration daily trading volume. Panel A presents the statistics for the full sample, and in
Panels B and C the sample is split into Unregistered PIPEs and RDOs. Market Investor Return is the return earned
by purchasing the PIPE issuer’s stock on the market on the transaction closing date and selling 20% of postregistration volume daily until exiting. PIPE Investor Return is the return earned by purchasing securities in the
PIPE transaction and selling 20% of post-registration volume daily until exiting. Abnormal returns are relative to the
return on a matched firm, which is obtained by considering all firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry that did not
previously issued a PIPE in the sample period and selecting the firm with the minimum sum of the absolute
differences between the standardized equity book-to-market ratio, the standardized log market capitalization, and the
standardized Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure. The return to matched firm is calculated assuming that investors
sell the matched stock at the same rate as the PIPE stock. Warrants are valued using the Black-Scholes call option
model adjusted for dilution, with annualized volatility estimated over the trailing three months and capped at 50%
and the risk-free rate interpolated from the swap curve. Annualized returns are capped at 3000% to mitigate the
impact of outliers, which affects about 3% of observations. t-stat is the bootstrapped skewness-adjusted t-statistic
from 1,000 draws with replacement.
Panel A: Full Sample
Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)

Mean

StDev

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

4.6

86

2.0

-17.3

-1.2

16.8

1261

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return
Holding Period (Days)

271

278

40.0

76

177

356

1,261

Excluding Warrants (%)

11.8

95.9

4.7

-14.4

3.6

23.4

1,261

With Warrants (%)

19.8

101

7.2

-10.5

7.8

34.6

1,261

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

113

526

7.4

-16.1

9.8

61.5

1,261

Holding Period (Days)

285

284

37.7

85

196

381

1,026

Excluding Warrants (%)

12.0

94.9

4.4

-14.5

3.0

24.7

1,026

With Warrants (%)

21.2

101

6.7

-10.1

9.3

37.5

1,026

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

104

500

5.9

-16.0

11.4

62.3

1,026

Holding Period (Days)

209

244

16.7

43.0

128

285

235

Excluding Warrants (%)

10.7

100

1.7

-13.9

4.2

16.8

235

With Warrants (%)

13.3

101

2.3

-13.0

4.3

20.1

235

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

154

626

4.5

-18.2

6.5

58.4

235

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : HF/PE PIPEs

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : Non-HF/PE PIPEs

49

Panel B: Unregistered PIPEs
Mean

StDev

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

6.7

105

1.7

-24.9

-2.7

23.8

722

Holding Period (Days)

366

300

31.0

146

276

484

722

Excluding Warrants (%)

15.7

118

3.9

-21.4

4.2

33.9

722

With Warrants (%)

25.0

124

6.1

-16.9

8.9

43.2

722

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

76.4

432

3.9

-20.9

8.8

56.7

722

Holding Period (Days)

378

303

29.8

149

283

503

606

Excluding Warrants (%)

17.6

116

4.1

-19.2

6.3

35.3

606

With Warrants (%)

27.9

123

5.9

-14.4

10.7

46.8

606

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

77.5

404

3.9

-19.5

11.5

59.0

606

Holding Period (Days)

303

276

11.3

115

230

383

116

Excluding Warrants (%)

5.9

128

0.4

-28.2

-3.7

21.8

116

Holding Period (Days)
Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)
PIPE Investor Abnormal Return

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : HF/PE PIPEs

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : Non-HF/PE PIPEs

With Warrants (%)

9.8

129

0.8

-27.0

-2.8

22.7

116

70.5

557

1.3

-30.2

-0.7

42.2

116

Mean

StDev

t-stat

p25

p50

p75

Obs.

1.9

50.9

0.8

-9.8

-0.4

9.4

539

Holding Period (Days)

143

181

18.5

34.0

83.0

184

539

Excluding Warrants (%)

6.6

53.2

2.6

-9.2

3.1

15.8

539

With Warrants (%)

12.8

55.5

4.3

-4.5

7.1

23.8

539

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

162

627

6.6

-8.6

11.5

71.8

539

Holding Period (Days)

151

185

17.6

38

90

198

420

Excluding Warrants (%)

4.1

50.1

1.5

-10.6

1.3

14.3

420

With Warrants (%)

11.6

53.0

3.2

-5.8

8.0

24.8

420

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

142

611

4.8

-10.5

11.0

67.3

420

Holding Period (Days)

117

164

12.2

25.0

54.0

147

119

Excluding Warrants (%)

15.3

62

4.1

-2.0

5.1

16.6

119

With Warrants (%)

16.8

63

4.6

-2.0

5.4

17.1

119

With Warrants - Annualized (%)

235

680

9.5

0.0

11.7

116

119

With Warrants - Annualized (%)
Panel C: Registered PIPEs
Holding Period (Days)
Market Investor Abnormal Return (%)
PIPE Investor Abnormal Return

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : HF/PE PIPEs

PIPE Investor Abnormal Return : Non-HF/PE PIPEs

50

