                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DIAGNOSING THE ITALIAN DISEASE

                                           Bruno Pellegrino
                                            Luigi Zingales

                                        Working Paper 23964
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23964


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2017




Bruno Pellegrino gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Price Center for Entrepreneurship
at the UCLA Anderson School of Management. Luigi Zingales gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. We thank
Carlo Altomonte and Tommaso Aquilante for providing us with additional data from the EFIGE dataset
and for useful discussions. We are grateful to Andrei Shleifer, Raffaella Sadun, Dale Jorgenson, Paola
Giuliano, Romain Wacziarg, Christian Dippel, Erik Brynjolfsson and seminar participants at Chicago
Booth, UCLA Anderson, Harvard Business School, Berkeley Haas, and Purdue for their helpful comments
and feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Bruno Pellegrino and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Diagnosing the Italian Disease
Bruno Pellegrino and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 23964
October 2017, Revised May 2019
JEL No. D24,E22,M14,M15

                                              ABSTRACT

Italy’s aggregate productivity abruptly stopped growing in the mid-1990s. This stop represents a puzzle,
as it occurred at a time of stable macroeconomic conditions. In this paper, we investigate the possible
causes of this “disease” by using sector and firm-level data. We find that Italy’s productivity disease
was most likely caused by the inability of Italian firms to take full advantage of the ICT revolution.
While many institutional features can account for this failure, a prominent one is the lack of meritocracy
in the selection and rewarding of managers. Unfortunately, we also find that the prevalence of loyalty-based
management in Italy is not simply the result of a failure to adjust, but an optimal response to the Italian
institutional environment. Italy’s case suggests that familism and cronyism can be serious impediments
to economic development even for a highly industrialized nation.


Bruno Pellegrino
University of California, Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Entrepreneurs Hall, Suite C.501
Los Angeles, CA 90095
bpellegrino@ucla.edu

Luigi Zingales
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
1    Introduction

In the mid-1990s, Italy’s total factor productivity (TFP) stopped growing, and in fact started to decline. While
in most Western countries TFP growth slowed down after the Great Financial Crisis (Fernandez-Villaverde
and Ohanian, 2018), Italy is unique in experiencing a decline in TFP and experiencing it before the Great
Financial Crisis.
    Italy’s productivity growth disease is not only key to Italy’s ability to sustain its debt and to remain
a member of the Euro Area, it is also an economic puzzle, at odd with standard growth theory. Lack of
investments could explain a decline in labor productivity, but not in TFP: it is hard for firms to unlearn what
they have learned. A major institutional turmoil could explain the decline, but during the period 1996-2006,
Italy benefited from the most stable economic and political environment since the early 1960s: low and stable
interest rates, low and stable inflation, it even enjoyed the most long-lasting governments since WWII.
    Another possible explanation is that it is the aggregate TFP that declined, not the firm-level TFP. As
Gopinath et al. (2017) have shown in a recent paper, capital misallocation can lead to declines in aggregate
TFP. This explanation is very convincing for Spain, where gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) went from
21% of GDP in 1994 to 31% in 2007. It is less plausible for Italy, where GFCF went from 18% of GDP
in 1994 to 21% in 2007. In fact, from Gopinath et al. (2017)’s Online Appendix we can deduce that capital
misallocation can explain at most a 6% decline in TFP vis-à-vis the first best (Figure A.3.b) of the 21% gap
of taly accumulated with respect to the average of the most advanced nations in 1996-2006.
    Italy lags behind other developed countries across many dimensions. While these deficiencies might be
able to explain why it is less productive overall, they cannot easily account for the drop in TFP that occurred
in the mid-90s, since these deficiencies were present in the 1950s and 1960s, when Italy was considered an
economic miracle, and persisted in the 1970s and 1980s, when Italy continued to have GDP and productivity
growth above the European average. In order to explain Italy’s drop in TFP it is necessary to identify a
significant deterioration of the institutional environment, or some institutional factor which did not matter
before 1995, and then became a major driver of competitiveness in later years.
    To find such a factor we resort to the existing literature. Italy’s TFP started decreasing at the same time
that US labor productivity started accelerating. In a seminal contribution, Bloom, Sadun and Reenen (2012a)
have attributed the US’s acceleration to the impact of the ICT revolution, which occurred in the same period.
American firms were able to take advantage of ICTs thanks to meritocratic management practices, which
have been shown to be strongly complementary with ICT capital (Bresnahan et al., 2002). We also know
that Italy stands out, among developed countries, for the scarce diffusion of these practices: Bandiera et al.



                                                       2
(2008) documented this fact extensively using a combination of survey and administrative data, and linked
it with certain cultural traits that are particularly prevalent in Italy. Can the interaction of the ICT revolution
and lack of meritocracy explain Italy’s productivity decline?1
       Under the standard growth accounting framework (Jorgenson et al., 1987, 2005), the effect of Manage-
ment and ICT should be factored in the contribution of ICT capital to output growth. Therefore, Jorgenson-
style TFP measures should not be affected by management-based differences in the productivity of ICT.
However, this conclusion does not hold if there are spillovers in ICT investments, as the literature sug-
gests there are (Stiroh, 2002). As we show in a simple model, in the presence of externalities, the effect of
management-ICT complementarities will show up in TFP growth, without invalidating the growth account-
ing framework.
       Having established the theoretical possibility, we test whether it holds in practice by relying on the only
dataset that includes estimates of both the impact of TFP growth and of ICT capital investments (computers,
communication equipment, etc.) at the sector level: the EU KLEMS data.
       Consistently with our hypothesis, we find that TFP grew faster in more ICT-intensive sectors in countries
where firms are more likely to select, promote, and reward people based on merit, as captured by a measure
we derived from answers to the World Economic Forum (WEF) expert survey. This effect explains between
66 and 73% of Italy’s TFP growth gap.
       We contrast this hypothesis with a set of alternative explanations, from the impact of China’s accession
to the WTO to the introduction of the Euro. We find the impact of China’s accession to the WTO (Autor et
al., 2013) explains none of this gap, nor do Italy’s rigid labor laws. The evidence in favor of any effect of
the introduction of the Euro is weak.
       Since a country’s propensity to meritocracy in the business sector is correlated with many other insti-
tutional characteristics (quality of government, ICT infrastructure, size of the shadow economy), aggregate
data alone cannot rule out other possible interpretations. For this reason, we probe deeper with a firm-level
dataset (the Bruegel-Unicredit EFIGE dataset). The main disadvantage of this data is that it does not contain
estimates of ICT capital investments.
       Using response data from a large survey of European manufacturing firms, we construct a firm-level
measure of meritocratic management which reflects the firm’s actual organizational practices. In construct-
ing this index, we follow previous work by Bloom et al. (2012b) and Bandiera et al. (2008). Using our data,
we confirm the stylized fact that Italian firms are particularly likely to select and reward their managers based
on loyalty and connections, rather than performance.
   1
       This hypothesis has been advanced by Hassan and Ottaviano (2013) as well.



                                                                3
    The firm-level data exhibits the same patterns as the KLEMS sectoral data: TFP grows faster in more
meritocratic firms in sectors where the contribution of ICT investments to GDP growth is larger. This result
holds after controlling for country and sector fixed effects.
    Using EFIGE survey data, we can investigate directly whether the effect of Meritocratic management on
TFP growth is mediated by a more intensive use of ICTs. Consistent with Garicano and Heaton (2010), we
find that more meritocratic firms indeed utilize ICTs more. As for TFP growth, this correlation is stronger
in sectors where ICTs have the largest impact on output growth.
    These findings raise a further question: Why does Italy lag behind in the adoption of meritocratic manage-
ment practices? A plausible explanation is that non-meritocratic (i.e., loyalty-based) management has greater
benefits in Italy than in other developed countries. The main advantage of a loyalty-based management is its
ability to perform even in environments with poorly-functioning credit markets or where legal enforcement
is inefficient or unavailable. Among developed countries, Italy stands out for its patronage-based banking
sector (Sapienza, 2004), its inefficient legal system, and the diffusion of tax evasion and bribes. Thus, a
reasonable explanation is that, at the onset of the ICT revolution, Italy found itself with a managerial class
that was perfectly suitable for its domestic environment, but incapable of taking full advantage of the newly
available technologies.
    To test this hypothesis, we exploit another feature of the EFIGE survey: firms are asked to indicate the
main impediments to their growth. We look at three major sources of external constraints: access to finance,
labor market regulation, and bureaucracy. We find that, while in our sample meritocratic firms are less likely
to experience any of these constraints, this effect disappears for Italian firms. Thus, in Italy, loyalty-based
management seems to provide a relative advantage in overcoming financial and bureaucratic constraints.
    We are certainly not the first to point out Italy’s productivity slowdown. In fact, it is so well known as
to have become an international problem in the aftermath of the Eurozone crisis (see, for example, the 2017
IMF Country Reports on Italy). Yet, there is a dearth of data-based explanations. We are also not the first
ones to point to Italy’s delay in the adoption of ICT: Bugamelli and Pagano (2004) use micro data from the
mid- to late 1990s to show that, in Italy, firms need to undergo major reorganization in order to adopt ICT.
Milana and Zeli (2004) were the first to correlate these delays with sluggish aggregate productivity growth
in the years 1996-99. Their channel is the lower level of ICT investment. Hassan and Ottaviano (2013) use
the same channel to explain the slowdown in Italian TFP growth. In our analysis, while we confirm that
lower investment is part of the problem, we show that the reduced productivity of such investments is indeed
even more important. Schivardi and Schmitz (2017) build on our findings to construct a model that explains
productivity differences between Germany and Italy.


                                                       4
      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data. In Section 3, we explore the
possible structural causes for the lack of productivity growth using sector-level data. In Section 4, we explore
the robustness of our econometric estimates. In Section 5, we discuss alternative explanations. In Section
6, we analyze firm-level data. Section 7 provides suggestive evidence of why, in Italy, loyalty prevails over
merit in the selection and rewarding of managers. In Section 8, we conclude.



2      Data and measurement

2.1     Growth accounting by country and sector

Our main source of sector-level data is the EU-KLEMS structural database (O’Mahony and Timmer, 2009). It
contains harmonized measures of value added, capital, labor, total factor productivity and input compensation
at the two-digit ISIC level for 25 European countries, as well as Australia, South Korea, Japan, and the
United States, accounting for approximately half of the world’s GDP. This level of disaggregation allows
us to control for country and sector level confounders using fixed effects. It also allows us to study the
interaction between country-specific factors and industry-specific factors. Data is available, depending on
the country, from as far back as 1970.
      Multiple releases of this dataset are available. Based on the degree of harmonization, and the need to
merge this dataset with external data, we have chosen to use the 2011 release, which is based on the ISIC
rev3.1 sector definition. Based on data availability, we use data from 1984 to 2006.
      The dataset provides industry-level growth accounting. One of its key advantages is the ability to quan-
tify separately the impact of ICT assets and non-ICT assets. In other terms, EU KLEMS breaks down value
added growth at constant prices into: 1) TFP growth, 2) the contribution of ICT capital (computers, com-
munication equipment, software...); 3) the contribution of non-ICT capital (land, buildings, machinery...); 4)
the contribution of hours worked; 5) the contribution of human capital.
      EU KLEMS measures the growth in “labor services” as the weighted average of the growth of hours
worked by different worker categories, where the weights are given by the compensation share of each
worker’s category (age, sex, and skill level). Concordantly, human capital growth is defined as the difference
in growth rates between labor services and unweighted hours worked.
      We now proceed to summarize the EU KLEMS growth accounting methodology. Assume that, for every
country c, sector s, time t, there exists a representative firm that produces output Y (measured as value added




                                                       5
at constant prices) by combining capital K and labor L using a generic production function F :


                                        Ycst = Acst · Fcst (Kcst , Lcst )                                   (1)


where A is the firm-level total factor productivity. Capital itself is broken down into two different types: ICT
capital, and non-ICT capital:
                                                     I      N
                                        Kcst = Kcst Kcst , Kcst               .                             (2)



    Similarly, there are J different categories of workers, which differ by demographic factors, skill level,
and so on. The total labor input is a combination of the hours worked by the different categories of workers

                                                   1      2           J
                                      Lcst = Lcst Ncst , Ncst , ..., Ncst                                   (3)


where the total hours worked is defined as:

                                                       J
                                                       X       j
                                              Ncst =          Ncst    .                                     (4)
                                                       j=1


    Let P, Rᴵ, Rᴺ, Wʲ be, respectively, the prices of output, ICT capital, non-ICT capital and type-j labor and
define the following notation for the natural logarithm of a generic variable X:


                                               xcst := log Xcst                                             (5)


under the assumption of constant returns to scale and competitive markets, we have


                                      Pcst Ycst = Rcst Kcst + Wcst Lcst                                     (6)


where the sector-level price indices W and R are defined implicitly by:

                                                   I    I      N    N
                                      Rcst Kcst = Rcst Kcst + Rcst Kcst                                     (7)
                                                    J
                                                    X      j    j
                                      Wcst Lcst =         Wcst Ncst       .                                 (8)
                                                    j=1


    As shown by Jorgenson et al. (1987, 2005), we can then obtain the sector-level growth of Total Factor




                                                          6
Productivity (TFP) from the following equation:
                                      ✓                                 ◆           ✓           ◆
                      dycst   dacst                   Wcst Lcst             dkcst     Wcst Lcst d`cst
                            =        + 1                                          +                              (9)
                       dt       dt }
                              | {z                    Pcst Ycst              dt       Pcst Ycst   dt
                                      |                   {z                    } |         {z       }
                               TFP growth           Capital Contribution                   Labor Contribution


where we have used the first-order condition:

                                                                        @Ycst
                                       M RP Lcst = Pcst ·                     = Wcst                            (10)
                                                                        @Lcst

which, after multiplying both sides by L/P Y yields:

                                            @Ycst Lcst   Wcst Lcst
                                                 ·     =                               .                        (11)
                                            @Lcst Ycst   Pcst Ycst

      The same result holds for capital. Also, the growth of capital and labor inputs can be further decomposed
as:

                                            ✓    I KI
                                                            ◆     I
                                                                             ✓    N KN
                                                                                             ◆     N
                                dkcst           Rcst  cst       dkcst            Rcst  cst       dkcst
                                      =                               +                                         (12)
                                 dt             Rcst Kcst        dt              Rcst Kcst        dt

                                            J
                                                                    !
                                d`cst X              j
                                                    Wcst  j
                                                         Ncst           dnjcst
                                     =                                             .                            (13)
                                 dt                 Wcst Ncst            dt
                                            j=1


      Based on these equilibrium relationships, the yearly growth of log value added at the sector level is




                                                                7
decomposed, in the EU KLEMS database, into the sum of the following five flow variables:

                                                      s                       {s      I KI
                                                                                                 {
                                                                 Wcst Lcst           Rcst  cst         I
                       ICT Contributioncst    :=       1                                              kcst           (14)
                                                                 Pcst Ycst           Rcst Kcst
                                                      s                       {s      N KN
                                                                                                 {
                                                                 Wcst Lcst           Rcst  cst         N
               Non     ICT Contributioncst    :=       1                                              kcst           (15)
                                                                 Pcst Ycst           Rcst Kcst
                                                      s               {
                                                          Wcst Lcst
            Human Capital Contributioncst     :=                              (`cst     ncst )                       (16)
                                                          Pcst Ycst
                                                      s               {
                                                          Wcst Lcst
            Hours Worked Contributioncst      :=                              ncst                                   (17)
                                                          Pcst Ycst


                                log TFPcst    :=          ycst     (14)       (15)      (16)         (17) =   acst   (18)


where the delta (Δ) symbol represents taking the one-period time difference operator and the thick bracket
J·K represents taking the average between the beginning and end-of-period values of a variable.
      As shown in Table 2, Panel A, over the 1996-2006 period, ΔlogTFP has an annual average of 0.012, and
ranges from -0.292 to 0.20 (with a standard deviation of 0.0364). ICT Contribution has an annual average of
0.005, a standard deviation of 0.006 and ranges from -0.005 to 0.055. Non-ICT Contribution has an annual
average of 0.008, a standard deviation of 0.013 and ranges from -0.028 to 0.095.
      For further information on the EU KLEMS dataset, please refer to O’Mahony and Timmer (2009).


2.2     Trade data

In order to measure the impact of competition from China across countries and sectors, we need trade data by
origin country, origin sector, destination country, destination sector and year. The output concept and industry
classification must be compatible with EU KLEMS (value added and ISIC rev 3.1, respectively). The only
database that satisfies all of these requirements is the World Input-Output database (WIOD), by Timmer et
al. (2015). For each year, the dataset contains data for 41² country pairs × 28² sector pairs combinations, for
a total of 1,317,904 observation in any given year.
      We start by computing the “China Shock” in sector s to destination market m as

                                              t                       |
                                                   Y
                          China Shocksmt :=       P China,smt             ·     log YChina,smt                       (19)
                                                   c6=China Ycsmt




                                                          8
where m identifies the country/sector of destination of the export. Ycmst is the export in value added (at
constant prices) of country c, sector s, into destination market m at time t. Note that the growth of Chinese
export is multiplied by the market share of Chinese export vis-a-vis all its competitors in destination market
m. The derivation and the rationale for this variable are explained more in detail in Appendix A.
      Then, for every country c sector s we compute China Exposure as the weighted average of China Shock
in sector s across all destination markets
                                                    u          }
                                               X      Ycsmt ~
                         China Exposurecst =        vP        · China Shocksmt      .                    (20)
                                                m
                                                       Ycsmt
                                                        m

Notice that what makes China Shock specific to country c is the weighting, given by the share that destination
market m represents c.
      We aggregate across 41 destination countries (including a “Rest of the world” aggregate) and 23 desti-
nation sectors, implying that every observation of China Exposure is the result of taking a weighted average
of 943 WIOD data points.
      Summary statistics for China Exposure are also presented in Table 2, Panel A: it has a mean of 0.012, a
standard deviation of 0.021 and it ranges from -0.001 to 0.193. For further information on the WIOD dataset,
please refer to Timmer et al. (2015).
      We also use a similar dataset, the OECD-WTO Trade in Value Added (TiVA) dataset, to compute the
following metric of openness to international trade.


                                                              Ecst + Icst
                                        Trade Opennesscst =                                              (21)
                                                                 Ycst

where E and I are, respectively, exports and imports in value added. The reason why we use a different
database for this variable is that the TiVA dataset, unlike WIOD, provides country/sector-level estimates
of total exports, imports and value added (the WIOD does not). At the same time, it does not provide a
detailed breakdown of trade by destination country and sector, which we do require in order to compute
China Exposure. The variable Trade Exposure has mean 0.897, standard deviation 0.849 and it ranges from
0.017 to 8.116.


2.3     Country-level variables

We present here variables that vary at the country level. Summary statistics are presented in Table 2, Panel
B.



                                                        9
    To measure the extent to which firms select, promote, and reward people based on merit, we construct a
variable called Country Meritocracy. It is built using response data from the WEF Global Competitiveness
Report Expert Opinion Survey (2012). We compute the variable as the average numerical answer to the fol-
lowing three questions: 1) “In your country, who holds senior management positions?” [1 = usually relatives
or friends without regard to merit; 7 = mostly professional managers chosen for merit and qualifications]; 2)
“In your country, how do you assess the willingness to delegate authority to subordinates?” [1 = not willing
at all – senior management makes all important decisions; 7 = very willing – authority is mostly delegated
to business unit heads and other lower-level managers]; and 3) “In your country, to what extent is pay re-
lated to employee productivity?” [1 = not at all; 7 = to a great extent]. The reason we opted to construct
our own measure of meritocratic management, is that the pool of countries for which similar measures are
already available (Bandiera et al., 2008; Bloom et al., 2012b) does not overlap with the EU KLEMS sample.
Using an alternative variable would shrink the size of our sector-level dataset by 38% or more, resulting in
insufficient country-level variation to identify the desired effect.
    Country Meritocracy has a mean of 4.683 and a standard deviation of 0.635. Italy has the lowest value:
3.387. Sweden has the highest: 5.504. This variable has the obvious downside of being perception-based
and we do not want our empirical results to hinge on its specific construction. Unfortunately, we do not
have access to data sources that allow us to compute an alternate measure of meritocratic management at the
country level. We do, however, have access to a firm-level dataset, which allows us to gauge meritocratic
management practices more objectively and granularly. This data is discussed in detail in 2.5.
    As the main measure of regulatory protection of employment we use the composite index Employment
Laws developed by Botero et al. (2004), which captures difficulty of hiring, rigidity of hours, difficulty of
redundancy, and redundancy costs: it has a mean value of 0.535, a standard deviation of 0.201, and it ranges
from 0.164 (Japan) to 0.745 (Spain). Italy has a value of 0.650.
    Because we do not want our results to rely on the specific variable chosen to quantify this effect, we
use an alternative measure for robustness: the OECD Employment Protection Legislation (EPL) composite
index (version 1). This variable has a panel structure and is available for different countries with different
start dates. We average it across the years included in the post-1995 sample period (1996-2006) for which
it is available; if the earliest available year is after 2006, we use the earliest available datapoint. Employ-
ment Protection has mean 2.153, standard deviation 0.747 and it ranges from 0.260 (USA) to 3.310 (Czech
Republic). Italy has a value of 2.76.
    The variable ICT Infrastructure is a sub-index of the Networked Readiness Index, published by the
World Economic Forum (2012); it measures the quality of ICT infrastructure that different countries have in


                                                       10
place and is constructed by combining country-level data on mobile network coverage, the number of secure
internet servers, internet bandwidth, and electricity production. ICT Infrastructure has mean 5.894, standard
deviation 0.708 and it ranges from 4.317 (Hungary) to 6.904 (Sweden). Italy has a value of 4.779.
      To control for cross-country differences in the quality of management training, we use the variable Man-
agement Schools, which is also derived from response data from a question of the WEF executive opinion
survey: “In your country, how do you assess the quality of business schools?” [1 = extremely poor – among
the worst in the world; 7 = excellent – among the best in the world]. It has a mean of 5.109, a standard
deviation of 0.645, and it ranges from 3.963 (Czech Republic) to 6.121 (Belgium). Italy has a value of
4.792.
      Finally we also use the variable Shadow Economy, an estimate of size of the shadow economy, as a share
of GDP, computed country-by-country by Schneider (2012): it has mean 0.172, standard deviation 0.055
and it ranges from 0.086 (USA) to 0.270 (Italy).
      In Section 5, we take into account the effect of variation in institutional quality across countries and
time. To do so, we use two indicators from the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI):
Rule of law and Control of Corruption. We use the changes in these variables (ΔRule of Law and ΔControl
of Corruption, respectively) over the period 1996-2006. ΔRule of Law has mean 0.002, standard deviation
0.021 and it ranges from -0.063 (Italy) to 0.023 (Ireland). ΔControl of Corruption has mean -0.003, standard
deviation 0.020 and it ranges from -0.034 (Czech Republic) to 0.027 (Japan). Italy has a value of 0.010.
      One important caveat about these measures is that they are standardized within years: they do not there-
fore carry, in theory, cardinal meaning, but only ordinal meaning. We believe nonetheless that they are
suitable for our analysis, for two reasons. Firstly, analysis by Kaufmann et al. (2006) finds “no systematic
time-trends” in these indicators. Secondly, Acemoglu et al. (2006) argue that a country’s distance from the
technological frontier depends on the relative, rather than absolute quality of its institutions.
      Nevertheless, for robustness, we also use a distinct, non-composite measure of the quality of government,
computed by Chong et al. (2014), that is expressed in levels. This last variable, which is based on the length of
time needed to get back a letter sent to a fictions address in a foreign country, we call Govt Inefficiency: it has
mean 94.3, standard deviation 42.0 and ranges from 16.2 (USA) to 173.4 (Italy): a higher value corresponds
to lower quality of public sector output.


2.4     Sector-level variables

We could not find an existing measure of how much each sector is dependent on government regulation and
intervention. Thus, we constructed one by counting news in major economics and financial news outlets


                                                        11
from Dow Jones’ Factiva News Search database. We exploit the fact that, in this database, news are tagged
by sector and topic. To construct our variable, we build a correspondence table between ISIC rev 3.1 (EU
KLEMS’s sector definition) with Factiva’s industry tags.
      The variable Govt Dependence is defined, for each sector s, as the number of news articles having “Gov-
ernment Contracts” or “Regulation/Government Policy” as topic, as a percentage of the total news articles
for sector s. We consider the universe of articles from Dow Jones, the Financial Times, Reuters, and the
Wall Street Journal published from 1984 to 2017. The value of this variable, for each sector, is displayed
in Figure 4. It has mean 0.045, standard deviation 0.024 and it ranges from 0.020 (Basic Metals) to 0.126
(Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing).
      In order to capture variation in the need for labor force mobility across sectors, we use mass layoff rates
in US industries, computed by Bassanini and Garnero (2013) using data from Current Population Survey
(CPS) displaced workers supplements covering the period 2000–2006 . The variable US Layoff has mean
0.052, standard deviation 0.017 and it ranges from 0.022 (Utilities) to 0.090 (Textiles and Apparel).


2.5     Firm-level data

For the firm-level analysis of Section 6, we use the EFIGE (European Firms in a Global Environment) dataset,
developed by Altomonte and Aquilante (2012). The dataset covers 14,759 manufacturing firms from seven
European countries (Austria, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom).
      In addition to balance sheet information obtained from the Amadeus-BvD databank, this dataset contains
response data from a survey undertaken in 2010 that covers a wide range of topics related to the firms’ oper-
ations. In particular, this survey contains questions about managerial practices, which allows us to compute
a measure of firm-level meritocracy. Specifically, the questions are: 1) “Can managers make autonomous
decisions in some business areas?” 2) “Are managers incentivized with financial benefits?” 3) “Has any of
your executives worked abroad for at least one year?” 4) “Is the firm not directly or indirectly controlled
by an individual or family-owned entity? If it is, was the CEO recruited from outside the firm?” 5) “Is the
share of managers related to the controlling family lower than 50%?” . We construct the variable Firm Mer-
itocracy by summing the number of affirmative answers to the above questions: it has mean 1.554, standard
deviation 1.272, and it ranges from 0 to 5. The average value for Italian firms is 1.07.
      Our firm-level metric of meritocratic management overlaps conceptually with the People Management
practices score by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007): therefore, if it is correctly constructed, we would expect
the two measures to correlate. In Appendix C, we show that this is indeed the case.
      Similarly, the survey asks whether a firm’s management uses: 1) IT systems for internal information


                                                        12
management; 2) IT systems for e-commerce; and 3) IT systems for management of the sales/purchase net-
work. We construct the variable ICT Usage as the sum of the affirmative answers to these questions: it has
mean 1.262, standard deviation 0.935, and it ranges from 0 to 3.
    The survey also collected information on the constraints faced by firms, by asking managers which of
the following (non-mutually exclusive) factors prevent the growth of their firms: 1) financial constraints,
2) labor market regulation, 3) legislative or bureaucratic restrictions, 4) lack of management and/or organi-
zational resources, 5) lack of demand, and 6) other. Firms are also offered the option to say that they face
no constraints. To measure these constraints, we create three dummy variables that represent, respectively,
whether the firm chooses the first (34.1% of the firms in EFIGE), and/or second (39.2%), and/or third option
(20.8%).
    In order to corroborate our findings from aggregate EU KLEMS series, we need to build a firm-level
measure of TFP. Unfortunately, there is no internally-consistent way to do this. The reason is that, in re-
sponse to different data availability constraints and methodological challenges, the macroeconomics and the
industrial organization (IO) literatures have developed widely different approaches to compute TFP, which
are not consistent with each other (Foster et al., 2016).
    The “macro” approach, exemplified by KLEMS, is to use aggregate value added at constant prices as the
measure of output, assume perfect competition, and obtain production function parameters from the share
of labor compensation in aggregate value added. IO economists, on the other hand, use (deflated) firm
revenues or gross output as the output concept, assume imperfect competition and use complex econometric
techniques to recover production function parameters from firm-level data.
    Our data does not allow to resolve this debate. The best we can do, given our data, is to compute TFP
at the firm-level, using a methodology that mimics as closely as possible the one used by EU KLEMS, and
studying its robustness. In Sub-section 6.5, we discuss why this methodology is problematic if we wish to
relax the assumption of perfect competition, and show how we can use EFIGE data to compute an alternative
firm-level TFP growth series under the assumption of monopolistic competition. We will use this alternative
TFP measure to investigate the robustness of our econometric results at the firm level to violations of the
perfect competition assumption.
    Our baseline, EU-KLEMS consistent measure of TFP at the firm level is given by the following formula:

                                           ✓                   ◆         ✓               ◆
                                                   Wcst Lcst                 Wcst Lcst
                     log TFPit =     yit       1                   kit                       `it   .    (22)
                                                   Pcst Ycst                 Pcst Ycst

    Firm-level value added is computed as EBITDA+labor costs (which implies the same intermediate input



                                                       13
definition as EU KLEMS), deflated using the EU KLEMS sector-level value added price index. Firm-level
labor input is given by labor costs, deflated using the EU KLEMS sector-level price index. The firm-level
capital stock is measured as Fixed Assets (lagged), deflated using sector-level GFCF price indices from the
OECD Structural Analysis (STAN) dataset.2
      BvD accounting data in the EFIGE dataset is available beginning in 2001: therefore (in order to avoid
using data from the crisis) our firm-level TFP growth will be computed for the period 2001-2007. The
resulting variable     log T F P2001    2007   has mean 0.002, standard deviation 0.073 and it ranges from -2.116
to 1.916.
      The dataset also contains information on the firms’ workforce composition. We use the percentage of
employees with a university degree and the percentage of employees with temporary employment contracts.
The variable Employees with Degree has mean mean 0.094, standard deviation 0.134; the variable Temporary
employees has mean 0.256 and standard deviation 0.385.



3      Evidence from sector-level data

3.1     Decomposing labor productivity growth by country

In order to understand Italy’s low labor productivity growth, for each country c and sector s, we decom-
pose the log growth of GDP per hour worked during 1996-2006, following the EU KLEMS methodology.
Subtracting the growth of hours worked from both sides of (18) and using the constant returns to scale as-
sumption, we obtain the following decomposition of labor productivity (GDP/hour worked):
                                     s                 {
                                           Wcst Lcst       RI K I
        (ycst ncst ) =     acst + 1                      · cst cst ·         I
                                                                           kcst     ncst +                                 (23)
      |     {z     }    | {z }              Pcst Ycst      Rcst Kcst
         LP growth     TFP growth    |                        {z                         }
                                                        ICT Contribution
                     s                {    N KN
                                                                           s             {
                          Wcst Lcst       Rcst   cst        N                 Wcst Lcst
                   + 1                  ·            ·     kcst ncst +                     · (`cst            ncst )   .
                           Pcst Ycst      Rcst Kcst                            Pcst Ycst
                     |                      {z                           } |               {z                     }
                                       Non ICT Contribution                          Human Capital Contribution


      This decomposition is shown for each of the countries in EU KLEMS in Table 3 and, graphically, in
Figure 2. The sector weight is the same (1/23) for all sectors in each country, in order to sterilize the effect
of differences in specialization across countries.
      Italy has by far the lowest labor productivity growth over the 11 year period: 5% vs an average of 33%
   2
     We use OECD StAn capital deflators because capital deflators for France and Hungary are not provided directly in the EU
KLEMS dataset (due to confidentiality constraints). OECD StAn is the most similar database to EU KLEMS and uses the same
sector definition.



                                                              14
for all other EU-KLEMS countries. The only other country with a single-digit labor productivity growth is
Spain (9%). During the same period Sweden saw its labor productivity soar by 49%. When we decompose
labor productivity growth in its four components we find that most of the action is in the residual (the TFP).
For Italy, changes in labor composition added 1.3 percentage points to labor productivity growth (versus
an average of 3.4%). Investment in non-ICT capital contributed 7.9 percentage points (versus an average
of 9.9%). ICT capital investments contributed 2.5 percentage points versus an average of 5.5%. Based on
OECD aggregate data, Hassan and Ottaviano (2013) attribute the low labor productivity growth in Italy to
low ICT investments. These figures seem to suggest that ICT investments only played a secondary role.
The overwhelming share of Italy’s labor productivity growth gap remains unexplained, absorbed into TFP:
Italian TFP shrank by 6.8% during this period, while for the average country it grew by 14.2%, amounting
to a gap of 21 percentage points.
      Overall, this analysis suggests that very little of Italy’s gap in labor productivity growth can be explained
by a failure to accumulate capital or to improve the skill mix of the labor force, or by the sectoral composition
of its economy. Italy’s slowdown appears to be overwhelmingly driven by its lag in TFP growth. This result
is not specific to Italy. The countries that do better in terms of labor productivity growth (Hungary, Austria,
Sweden) are also the same that do better in terms of TFP growth. The same is true for the two laggards (Italy
and Spain). Thus, we need to explain why Italian TFP growth fell behind. This is what we will try to do
next.


3.2     Decomposing output growth by sector

In Table 4 we perform the same decomposition by sector. Not surprisingly, the sectors experiencing the
greatest labor productivity growth tend to be the most high-tech sector, while the laggards tend to be services
or brick-and-mortar sectors.
      The variance across sectors is much larger than across countries: the fastest growing sector, electrical
equipment (30 to 33) experienced a labor productivity growth during the period of 88%. In the second one,
Post and Telecommunication, labor productivity grew by 73%. By contrast, real estate and business services
(70 to 74) and fuel production (23) showed a decline in labor productivity.
      By and large, the observed differences in labor productivity growth are mostly driven by differences in
TFP growth.




                                                         15
3.3     Productivity growth during the ICT revolution

We observed that high-tech sectors grew more both in labor productivity and TFP than low-tech ones. Sim-
ilarly, if we exclude Hungary (which is still catching up), we observe that richer countries (like Sweden and
Austria) grew more than poorer ones (like Spain and Italy), contrary to what traditional growth models would
predict. Most of these differences seem to be driven by variation in TFP growth. What can explain these
patterns?
      The mid-1990s marked the beginning of the ICT revolution. One of the unique characteristics of ICT
capital investment is the strong complementarity with organisational capital (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003;
Brynjolfsson et al., 2002). Consistent with this hypothesis, Bloom et al. (2012a) show that differences in
management style between Europe and the United States can explain why labor productivity growth in the
Old Continent fell behind the U.S. one after 1995. Is it possible that similar differences within Europe can
explain our observed patterns? If so, could this help explain Italy’s TFP drop?
      Before we move on to investigate this hypothesis further, however, we need to ask one question. Why
would the effect of ICT/management complementarities show up in TFP, rather than in the contribution
of ICT capital? If the marginal productivity of ICT capital varies systematically across firms or countries
according to managerial practices (and these are constant over time) then this should be reflected by the
compensation share of ICT capital. To see why this is the case, consider a simplified version of the model
presented in Bloom et al. (2012), in which the production function varies at the sector level and the output
concept is value added. Managerial capital is captured by the unobserved input M , which we assume for
simplicity to vary across countries, and which has the effect of increasing the output-ICT capital elasticity:


                                               ↵KI
                                                cst + Mc          ↵KN               Mc ↵KI   KN
                                       I
                   Ycst = Acst · Mc · Kcst                  N
                                                           Kcst    cst
                                                                         (Lcst )1       cst ↵cst          (24)

the first order condition for ICT capital is

                                      I      I                    Pcst Ycst    I
                                M RP Kcst = ↵cst + Mc                 I
                                                                            = Rcst                        (25)
                                                                   Kcst

implying:
                                           I KI
                                          Rcst   cst    I
                                                     = ↵cst + Mc                                          (26)
                                          Pcst Ycst

the contribution of ICT capital to output growth equals

                                                 I          I                  @ycst I
                          ICT Contributioncst = ↵cst + Mc dkcst =                I
                                                                                     dkcst                (27)
                                                                               @kcst


                                                       16
and TFP growth is given as before, by:


                                                log TFPcst = dacst                                       (28)


hence, the complementarity between ICTs and management style is captured by ICT Contribution and does
not affect TFP growth.
      For ICT-management complementarities to have an impact on TFP growth, we need to expand the growth
accounting framework. We do so by assuming externalities in ICT capital accumulation. While there are
other modeling choices (see 3.5) that could account for the observed correlations this is, in our view, the
simplest and most parsimonious way to allow ICT capital to affect TFP growth.


3.4     Modeling externalities

Let us start with the simplest version of the firm-level production function with externalities à la Romer
(1986) which we assume for simplicity to be a Cobb-Douglas function:

                                                     ↵KI           ↵KN           L
                                  Yit = Ait · KitI    cst
                                                            KitN    cst
                                                                          (Lit )↵cst                     (29)


                                                                         I :
where A depends on the country/sector-level accumulation of ICT capital Kcst


                                                    I        Mi ·↵KI
                                         Ait = Ait Kcst           cst
                                                                           .                             (30)

M is a country-level parameter that reflects country differences in the adoption of meritocratic management
practices and Ait is the exogenous component of TFP. Bloom et al. (2012a) and Garicano and Heaton (2010)
assume that there are complementarities between meritocratic management and ICT capital at the firm level.
We assume a similar complementarity between meritocratic management and ICT capital at the aggregate
level. For example, a firm that compensates management according to performance can benefit more from
electronic data that suppliers and customers generate when they digitize their production process. Note that
the magnitude of this externality depends on how ICT-intensive a firm’s production process is, as proxied by
the elasticity ↵KI . In the context of the previous example, this assumption implies that the impact of having
digitized customers and suppliers is greater if you are more digitized yourself.
      Given these assumptions, TFP growth at the firm level is given by:

                                                               KI
                                  log TFPit =     ait + Mi · ↵cst · kI                 .                 (31)
                                                             |    {z cst}
                                                               ICT Contributioncst


                                                       17
      At the EU KLEMS level, we do not observe capital as a stock, but only in changes; as a result, we are
going to estimate equation (31) in changes. Furthermore, we do not observe firm-level TFP, but sector level-
TFP. Finally, we don’t observe Meritocracy at the firm level, but only a country-level proxy: the variable
Country Meritocracy, which is described in Section 2. We therefore estimate the following relationship:


                                  log TFPcst =           acst + Mc · ICT Contributioncst      .                   (32)


      Since we don’t know the nature of the relationship between the “true” country-level meritocracy Mc and
the observed proxy Country Meritocracy, we assume the following linear relationship:


                                       Mc =     1    +       2   · Country Meritocracyc   .                       (33)


Substituting equation (33) into (32), we obtain the following regression specification, which we implement
in long-term differences (as in Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003):


                        log TFPcs =     c   + &s +       1   · ICT Contributioncs                                 (34)

                                   +    2   · (ICT Contributioncs ⇥ Country Meritocracyc ) + "cs


where the term    c   is a country fixed effect and &s is a sector fixed effect. In other terms, if there are external-
ities in ICT adoption, the EU KLEMS total factor productivity growth rate should be positively correlated
with an interaction term, which is equal to the product of a country-level measure of meritocratic manage-
ment and the contribution of ICT capital to value added growth.


3.5     Myopia as an alternative mechanism

Externalities are not the only way in which TFP growth might be dependent on the contribution of ICT
capital. A simpler explanation could be based on the failure of firms to recognize the complementarities
between ICT and organizational capital. Since there is a discussion even among economists about whether
these complementarities exist, it might be reasonable to assume that firms ignore them in their maximization
process.
      If firms ignore these complementarities, they equalize


                                                     @Yit    I Pit Yit    I
                                             Pit ·      I
                                                          = ↵cst   I
                                                                       = Rit                                      (35)
                                                     @Kit        Kit



                                                                     18
the result would be an under-investment in K I and a residual TFP which incorporates the effect of comple-
mentarities.
      Because the externalities model and the myopic model are observationally equivalent with respect to
productivity trends, we will not try to disentangle the two empirically in this paper. We recognize, however,
that the policy implications of these two models are not the same.


3.6     Identification

We have data for the periods 1985-1995 and 1996-2006. By estimating the regression model outlined in
equation (34) for each period we have a triple-difference design.
      Because our dataset has a dimensionality of three, we use fixed effects in all our specifications to control
for all potential confounders at the country and sector level. We will only be identifying the effect of interest
by using variation within country/sectors.
      Given this basic setup, our main identification concerns regard: 1) the possibility of an omitted variable
that correlates with ICT Contribution and varies both across countries and sectors (and therefore is not ab-
sorbed by fixed effects); 2) the possibility that causality goes from productivity to ICT Contribution and not
the other way round, as implied by equation (34).
      To perform a first basic test that our results are not driven by omitted variables, we run a regression in
which we lag the dependent variable - that is verify that the ICT-Meritocracy interaction (computed in the
post period) does not predict TFP growth in pre-treatment period (1985-1995). This is a test of the “parallel
trends” assumption.
      Even if the parallel trends assumption is satisfied, we are concerned that ICT capital growth, the main
component of ICT Contribution, may depend on sector-level productivity growth. This would be the case
in a simple neoclassical growth model, where the rate of capital accumulation along a balanced growth path
is directly proportional to the growth of aggregate productivity. If country and sector fixed effects fail to
control for this effect and there is a structural break in the capital accumulation process around 1995, it is
possible that the OLS estimates of     2   might capture not just the causal effect of Meritocracy and ICT on TFP
growth, but also the directionally opposite effect of TFP on ICT capital accumulation.
      We rule out this possibility using two different strategies. The first exploits differences and similarities
between ICT capital and non-ICT capital. If indeed factors tend to accumulate at a higher rate in sectors
where TFP grows faster, this should conceivably affect non-ICT capital as well as ICT capital. If, instead,
there is an effect of ICT capital accumulation on TFP that is mediated by meritocratic management, we would
expect TFP growth to correlate with the interaction of Country Meritocracy and ICT Contribution, but not


                                                          19
with the interaction of Country Meritocracy and Non-ICT Contribution. We incorporate this intuition into
our econometric analysis by using Non-ICT Contribution as a placebo treatment. If indeed ICT Contribution
is as good as exogenous, then we expect the same regression analysis to not yield a statistically significant
result when Non-ICT Contribution is used in its place.
    In a separate specification, we use the same intuition to construct an instrument for ICT Contribution:

                                   s                   {s    I KI
                                                                        {
                            ICT            Wcst Lcst        Rcst  cst        I      N
                           Zcst   = 1                                       kcst   kcst                     (36)
                                           Pcst Ycst        Rcst Kcst

which is identical to its endogenous counterpart, except for the fact that the growth of ICT capital is here
replaced by the differential rate of accumulation of ICT capital vis-à-vis non-ICT capital. For the exclu-
sion restriction to hold, it is necessary that, conditional on country and sector fixed effects, faster technical
progress does not differentially affect ICT and non-ICT capital accumulation.
    The second way we address for endogeneity of ICT Contribution is to instrument it with its own cross-
country, sector-level average:

                                                        1 X
                          ICT Contribution Avgst =          ICT Contributioncst           .                 (37)
                                                       18 c



    By shutting down all within sector/cross country variation in this variable, and controlling for country
and sector fixed effects, we eliminate any possible direct reverse causation of TFP on ICT. Hence, endo-
geneity could bias our results only if the interaction of ICT Contribution (averaged across countries) and
Country Meritocracy correlates with the regression residuals. Such a correlation could arise if TFP growth
causes, simultaneously, the adoption of meritocratic management practices as well as ICTs and if Country
Meritocracy (which is measured in 2012) captures some of the 1996-2006 time variation in management
practices due to TFP growth.
    While we are not particularly concerned about such temporal variation in Country Meritocracy (the WEF
surveys on which this variable is based do not exhibit substantial time variation), we still want to account
for this potential source of endogeneity by finding an instrumental variable for Country Meritocracy.
    The ideal instrument would pre-dispose a country to the adoption of meritocratic management, but not
change in response to the country’s TFP dynamics in 1996-2006. We think that Judicial Inefficiency (Djankov
et al., 2003), which measures the average number of days to enforce a contract (specifically, the eviction of
a tenant or the collection of a bounded check), represents such an instrument.
    Judicial Inefficiency influences meritocratic management practices because enforcement based on family


                                                       20
or personal ties is a substitute for legal enforcement. Thus, when legal enforcement is very slow, firms rely
more on loyalty-based bonds rather than formal contracts. Since judicial efficiency is a slow-moving institu-
tional variable, it is also unlikely to react to changes in TFP growth or in firm-level meritocratic management
over the period we analyze (1996-2006).
      We find that Judicial Inefficiency is a strong predictor of Country Meritocracy and that Judicial Ineffi-
ciency interacted with ICT Contribution (averaged across countries) is a strong predictor of the interaction
between Country Meritocracy and ICT Contribution. When Judicial Inefficiency is included as an interac-
tion effect in a regression in which Country Meritocracy is also present (that is, when it is used as a control
variable rather than as instrument) Country Meritocracy always dominates. While we understand all too well
that this is not a test of the exclusion restriction, we hope this check might offer readers some reassurance
that the effect of the ICT revolution is truly mediated by meritocracy, and not by judicial efficiency.
      In summary, our IV specification uses three instrumental variables for ICT Contribution and its interac-
tion with Country Meritocracy: the first is Z ICT (which is based on the differential rate of accumulation of
ICT capital vis-à-vis non-ICT capital); the second is the interaction Z ICT ⇥ Judicial Inefficiency; the third
is the interaction ICT Contribution Avg ⇥ Judicial Inefficiency. We use this combination of instruments
because we do not wish to rely only on the difference between ICT and Non-ICT capital, and because our
preferred instrument for ICT Contribution, ICT Contribution Avg, is collinear with sector fixed effects.
In addition, by using these three instruments together we over-identify the model and thus we can perform a
Sargan-Hansen test, which provides us with a useful diagnostic of whether the relevant exclusion restrictions
                       0      2                                                    31
                                                       ICT
                                                      Zcs
                       B      6                                                    7C
                       B      6                                                    7C
                     E B"cs · 6            ICT ⇥ Judicial Inefficiency
                                          Zcs                          c           7C = 0                 (38)
                       @      4                                                    5A
                                  ICT Contribution Avgs ⇥ Judicial Inefficiencyc

are satisfied in the data.


3.7     Sector-level TFP growth regressions

The estimation results for the specification in equation (34) are shown in Table 5. Column 1 shows the OLS
estimates when ICT Contribution as well as the interaction ICT Contribution ⇥ Country Meritocracy are
used as explanatory variables. In this specification, we find that the interaction coefficient is positive and
statistically significant at the 5% level. The two coefficients can be interpreted in the following way: the
combined effect of Meritocracy and ICT can either boost or dampen the impact of ICT investments on output,
depending on whether the sum of the baseline and interaction coefficient is positive or negative. For a typical

                                                       21
country (Country Meritocracy = 4.7 to 5) the effect of ICT Contribution is neither dampened not amplified,
as the interaction effect is approximately offset by the baseline coefficient on ICT Contribution. For Italy,
who has the lowest meritocracy score (Country Meritocracy = 3.4) the effect of ICT investments on TFP
(3.4 ⇥ 1.1 - 5.2 ⇡ -1.4) entirely offsets their direct effect on output growth, implying that ICT investments in
Italy are effectively not contributing to growth. For a country like Sweden, which has very high meritocracy
(= 5.5), the indirect effect of ICT investments on output growth mediated by TFP is nearly as large (5.5 ⇥
1.1 - 5.2 ⇡ +.85) as the direct effect, implying that the total effect of ICT investment on output growth is
nearly double the baseline effect.
       In column 2, we perform a “placebo” regression, using Non-ICT Contribution in place of ICT Contribu-
tion. Contrary to the previous specification, the interaction of this variable with Country Meritocracy does
not appear to predict TFP growth across countries and sectors: the interaction coefficient is negative and
not statistically significant. In column 4, we perform an Instrumental Variable regression, using the vari-
ables presented in equations (36) and (37) as instruments for ICT Contribution. The IV coefficient for the
interaction of ICT Contribution and Country Meritocracy is positive, statistically significant, and quantita-
tively close to the OLS estimate. We also present an under-identification test statistic (Kleibergen-Paap): it
rejects the null hypothesis that the first-stage coefficients are jointly zero. The Sargan-Hansen test and the
Wu-Hausman test yield p-values way above rejection thresholds, which we take as a reassurance that there
are no “red flags” of endogeneity in our analysis.
       In column 4, we test the parallel trend assumption by using, as dependent variable, the growth of TFP in
the period 1985-1995 instead of 1996-2006. The coefficient estimates for ICT Contribution and its interaction
with Country Meritocracy are statistically and economically insignificant: this suggests that, in our empirical
design, the parallel trend assumption is satisfied.
       In column 5, we perform an additional check: we use lagged values of both TFP growth and ICT Con-
tribution. The intuition for this specification is that, if there really exists a complementarity effect between
ICT and Meritocracy, we would expect to find an interaction coefficient of the same magnitude it in the pre-
period as well. While we do not want ICT intensiveness in the post-treatment period (1996-2006) to predict
TFP growth in the pre-treatment period (this would be a violation of the parallel trend assumption tested
in Column 4), we would expect the interaction coefficient to be broadly unchanged when we lag both the
left-hand side variable as well as the right-hand side variable. We also expect the standard errors to increase,
as in the pre-treatment period ICT capital made a very small contribution to output growth across all sectors
(there was no treatment)3 . Consistently with the hypothesis, we find a coefficient of nearly exactly the same
   3
       We wish to credit an anonymous referee for making this nifty remark.



                                                                22
magnitude as in column 1 that is statistically insignificant, with a standard error of twice the magnitude.
       In Figure 3, we summarize these results graphically: we sort countries according to their value of Country
Meritocracy 4 , and sectors according to their (cross-country, post-1995) average value of ICT Contribution.
i.e. how much growth in value added is attributable to higher ICT investments. We divide both countries
and sectors into terciles: we label the top country tercile of meritocracy as “High Merit” and the bottom
tercile as “Low Merit”; concordantly, we label the top tercile of sectors as “High ICT” and the bottom tercile
as “Low ICT”. Then, we sort countries/sectors into four groups: “High/High”, “High/Low”, “Low/High”,
“Low/Low”. For each of these groups we compute the cross-country, median TFP growth during the period
1985–2006. We then plot the four TFP indices so obtained, using 1995 as the base year.
       As we can see from Figure 3, before 1995 TFP growth was fairly similar across all four groups. By
contrast, after 1995 there is a clear pecking order. High-ICT sectors in high-meritocracy countries grow the
fastest (19.4% cumulatively). Then, low-ICT sectors in low-meritocracy countries (12.3%). Third come the
low-ICT sectors in high-meritocracy countries (9.8%) and last the high ICT sectors in low-meritocracy, with
barely positive growth (5.3%).


3.8      Magnitude of the Effect

How much of the Italian TFP growth gap can be explained by smaller ICT externalities due to lack of mer-
itocracy? To answer this question, we compute a counterfactual based on how higher Italy’s TFP would be
in 2006 had Italy had a Country Meritocracy of 5, which would place it at the same level of Germany and
Japan (but lower than US, UK and the Scandinavian countries).
       The key input to this counterfactual calculation is the magnitude of the interaction coefficient for ICT
Contribution and Country Meritocracy. We start from the value of 1.1, our baseline estimate in Table 5
column 1. Because our proxy of meritocratic management is measured with error, we consider this estimate
conservative (it is attenuated by the measurement error). We multiply this interaction effect times the average
ICT Contribution, times the gap in Country Meritocracy, and sum the gap in ICT Contribution. We obtain
that Italy would have grown 13.3 percentage points more in TFP. In other words, in a conservative scenario,
the interaction of ICT and meritocracy can explain 63% of Italy’s missing TFP. If we input a more aggressive
coefficient, to account for the attenuation bias, we obtain a counterfactual additional growth in TFP of 16.1
percentage points. In this scenario, we are able to explain up to 77% of Italy’s missing TFP growth.
   4
     We exclude countries for which there is no TFP data before 1995 (Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovenia), so that graph shows
the same countries before and after 1995




                                                              23
4      Robustness

4.1     Potential confounders of meritocracy

Because meritocracy correlates, at the country level, with many other institutional variables, we want to
make sure that the observed effect is truly due to meritocracy and not to other factors. To this purpose, in
Table 6, we regress TFP growth across countries and sectors on a batch of potential confounders of Country
Meritocracy, interacted with ICT Contribution. In particular, we use measures of ICT Infrastructure, the
quality of Management Schools computed by the World Economic Forum, as well as estimates of the size of
the Shadow Economy computed by Schneider (2012), all interacted with the ICT capital contribution. These
variables are described in detail in Section 2.
      ICT Infrastructure and Shadow Economy (columns 2-3) don’t seem to have a significant impact on TFP
growth, when interacted with ICT Contribution. Management Schools, on the other hand, is borderline sig-
nificant (10%, column 4). In column 5, we re-introduce Country Meritocracy and control for all these other
interactions. Only the interaction ICT Contribution ⇥ Country Meritocracy remains statistically significant.
      In Appendix B, we reproduce this table using an alternative batch of potential confounders, which include
an alternative measure of management training based on the number of GMAT score reports received by
business schools in each country, an estimate of average firm size by the OECD, and estimates of human
capital from Barro and Lee (2013).


4.2     Small sample size and measurement of meritocracy

Two obvious weaknesses of our sector-level analysis are the small size of the dataset and the fact that we have
to resort to a perception-based measure of meritocratic management. We address both of these shortcomings
by augmenting our analysis with a firm-level dataset in Section 6.
      Additionally, our firm-level data can be used to validate the World Economic Forum measure of Meri-
tocracy. Based on Bloom et al. (2012a)’s insight that it is the location of the firm’s ownership that determines
the ability to leverage ICT, we average the firm-level measure of meritocracy from EFIGE at the headquarter
country-level. We can then examine the correlation of Country Meritocracy and Firm Meritocracy across
44 countries. This relationship can be seen in Figure 6. The R2 of this regression is 64.3%, which suggests
that Country Meritocracy is an acceptable proxy for our sector-level regression analysis.
      Another important consideration is how both our measures of meritocratic management relate to the
People Management practices score of Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). Because only 11 countries overlap
across their sample and ours, we cannot use their measure in our sector-level analysis. We also cannot


                                                       24
use it in our firm-level analysis because the firm-level data is anonymized. Nonetheless, we are able to
carry out a cross-sectional validation exercise for both of our variables. In Appendix C, we show that both
Country Meritocracy and Firm Meritocracy correlated strongly with the WMS People Management score:
this provides further reassurance that these variables measure what we intend them to.


4.3     Emerging Europe and Italy

We want to exclude the possibility that our results are entirely driven by Italy, which has by far the lowest
Meritocracy score among the countries in our sample. In Appendix B (Table 13), we repeat our estimation
without Italy. Not only does the coefficient remain statistically significant, but its magnitude is very similar
to the one estimated in Table 5. We do the same (Table 14) for our China regressions.
      Moreover, our sample includes three developing European countries - Czech Republic, Hungary and
Slovenia - for which no growth accounting data is available before 1995. Hence, in the Appendix A (Tables
15-16), we show that our results are robust to the exclusion of these countries.


4.4     Mismeasurement of the production function

In the EU-KLEMS framework, sector-level input expenditures are used to estimate production function
elasticities. This approach has drawbacks that are well documented.
      In the last twenty years, significant advances have been made in production function estimation that
leverage firm-level data: econometric techniques have been introduced that account for sample selection
and simultaneity in the production function (see for example Olley and Pakes, 1996; Levinsohn and Petrin,
2003; Wooldridge, 2009). Unfortunately, these approaches are not implementable in our setting: this is the
case both for our sector-level data and our firm-level data. The reason is that we do not observe the input of
ICT capital at the firm level. Hence, we are forced to rely on EU KLEMS output/capital elasticities.
      One reason we make our analysis robust to mismeasurement of the production function parameters is
by using the instrumental variable specification. However, in order to have an additional safeguard against
this possibility, in Appendix D we investigate the robustness of our estimates from Table 5 to mismeasure-
ment of parameters of the production function. In particular, we worry about how non-constant returns to
scale and mismeasurement of the output/capital elasticities might bias our measures of Total Factor Produc-
tivity growth. We argue, and subsequently provide evidence by using the GMM framework, that if such
mismeasurement exists, it is small and does not undermine our estimates.




                                                      25
5        Alternative explanations

5.1       Capital and labor misallocation

In this section, we want to consider alternative explanations for Italy’s dismal productivity growth. The main
competing explanation is trade integration.
        Recent work by Gopinath et al. (2017) shows that Spain (and more broadly Southern Europe) has expe-
rienced a decrease in the efficiency of capital allocation as a consequence of the massive capital investments
triggered by the decline in the real interest rate that followed the introduction of the common currency. This
misallocation, in turn, led to sizable losses in aggregate TFP. We investigate whether this mechanism could
provide, at least quantitatively, an alternative explanation for Italy’s (as well as Spain’s) productivity decline.
        The explanation is very convincing for Spain, where gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) went from
21% of GDP in 1994 to 31% in 2007. It is less plausible for Italy, where GFCF went from 18% of GDP in
1994 to 21% in 2007.
        While Italy experienced an increase in the dispersion of the Marginal Revenue Product of Capital (a sign
of misallocation), their Figure A.2.b in the Online Appendix shows this is largely offset by a decrease in the
dispersion of the Marginal Revenue Product of Labor.
        The net effect, shown in their Figure A.3.b, suggests that capital misallocation can explain at most a 6%
gap in TFP vis-à-vis the first best vs. a 21% gap Italy accumulated with respect to the average of the most
advanced nations in the period 1996-2006.              5




5.2       The China shock

The second alternative alternative hypothesis that we want to consider is the China schock. China’s entry
in the WTO in 2001 threatened Italy’s market share in global manufactures (Tiffin, 2014), precisely at the
time when Italy had given up exchange rate flexibility by joining the euro. Contemporary trade theory
(see Melitz, 2003) suggests that trade liberalization should have a positive impact on productivity, since it
favors the downsizing of less productive firms and the reallocation of factors towards more productive ones.
However, this might not necessarily have been the case for countries, such as Italy, in which labor regulation
might have hindered such reallocation. It is indeed possible for a sector’s productivity to decrease in the
wake of a demand shock if the firms operating in that sector are unable to adjust their scale in response
to the shock. In other words, while in the US, where there are fewer labor markets frictions, competition
from Chinese products resulted in significant displacement of manufacturing workers and productivity gains
    5
        The relevant figures can be found in Online Appendix G of Gopinath et al. (2017).


                                                                  26
(Pierce and Schott, 2016), in Italy the effect might have been reversed, causing sizable productivity losses
with moderate effects on employment.
    In order to test this hypothesis, we regress TFP growth across countries and sectors on a proxy of the
magnitude of the China shock (China Exposure). The result of estimating this specification are presented
in Table 7, Column 1. As expected, we find a positive, albeit not statistically significant effect of China
Exposure on productivity growth. The economic significance of this coefficient can be described as follows:
if competition from China causes value added in a country/sector to drop by 10%, we expect TFP to rise by
about 0.4% as a consequence.
    If the impact of the China shock on TFP growth is mediated by labor regulation, we should find that the
positive effect of China Exposure on TFP growth is reverted for countries that make it difficult to reallocate
labor by granting a lot of regulatory protection to employees. To capture this in our regression specification,
in Column 2 we interact China Exposure with a measure of labor market employment protection. As our
primary measure, we use a composite index of employment law strictness from Botero et al. (2004). As
an alternative measure of employment regulations we use, in column 3, OECD’s Employment Protection
Legislation index. The resulting regression equation is:


                     log TFPcs =      c   + &s +     1   · China Exposurecs                                (39)

                                +     2   · (China Exposurecs ⇥ Employment Lawsc ) + "cs           .


    The regression intercept is allowed to vary across countries and sectors through the inclusion of fixed
effects; there is no time variation in the variables because we use long-term differences/averages. The results
of these regressions are presented in columns 2 and 3. Both interaction effects are statistically insignificant:
moreover, the effect is positive, contrary to what would be needed to explain Italy’s slowdown.
    The penetration of Chinese exports could be itself the result of low TFP growth in the country of desti-
nation. By averaging the China shock across countries-of-destination in the construction of China Exposure,
we mitigate this concern. To further alleviate endogeneity concerns about China Exposure, we use an in-
strumental variable. Our instrument, like China Exposure, is also a weighed average of the effect of the
variable China Shock across destination markets; however, it differs from China Exposure in that it excludes
the domestic market from the domain of summation:

                                                 t                      |
                                          X              Ycsmt
                          China
                         Zcst     =                  P                      · China Shocksmt   .           (40)
                                      m6=(c,s)         m6=(c,s) Ycsmt




                                                              27
      In column 4, we carry out the instrumental variable regression, obtaining similar results. The estimated
coefficients become larger in absolute terms (0.243 for the baseline coefficient and 1.086 for the interaction
with Employment Laws). The p-value for the Kleibergen-Paap test is below 0.01, suggesting that the first
stage is strong. The Wu-Hausman test yields a p-value of over 0.044, somewhat confirming our suspicion
that China Exposure might be endogenous.
      One potential concern is that the China shock might have impacted all sectors equally, resulting in in-
sufficient within-country variation to identify the effect of interest. Empirically, this does not appear to be
an issue. By computing the ratio of the 75th percentile to the 25th percentile of China Exposure, we find
that there is significant heterogeneity: the country/sector at the 75th percentile of the distribution is 8 times
as exposed to demand shocks from China as the country/sector lying at the 25th percentile. Furthermore,
if there was not enough country/sector variation, it would be impossible for the China shock to explain the
Italian disease, because the shock would have hit all countries equally.
      In sum, these findings suggest that, between 1995 and 2006, productivity tended to grow faster, not
slower, in countries/sectors that were more exposed to competition from China. This effect does not appear
to reverse for countries with strong regulatory protection of workers, regardless of the measure used. Hence,
the hypothesis that competition from China (combined with domestic labor market rigidity) caused Italy’s
slowdown does not find support in the data.


5.3     Labor market regulation

Some commentators (Calligaris et al., 2016) attribute Italy’s TFP drop to a lack of labor market flexibility.
The evidence in Table 7 suggests that this is not the case. However, the lack of findings in the previous
regression might be due to the fact that China’s entry into the WTO is not the only possible reason why
factors might need to be reallocated. In order to test the labor reallocation hypothesis more broadly, we
adopt an alternate variable to gauge the sectorial need for labor reallocation: US Layoff Rate. It is defined as
the rate of mass layoffs in US industries, computed by Bassanini and Garnero (2013) using data from the CPS
biennial displaced workers supplement. The rationale for using this variable, similar to that of the financial
dependence metric used in Rajan and Zingales (1998), is that we know United States to have minimal labor
market distortions. By using this variable, we aim to capture the technological demand for labor reallocation.
      In Table 7, column 5, we interact this variable with country-level Employment Laws. As expected, the
coefficient is negative, suggesting slower TFP growth in countries with rigid laws in sectors where the need
for reallocation is high; this effect is, however, quantitatively small and not statistically significant from zero.



                                                        28
5.4     The Eurozone accession

As the ICT revolution gained footing, Italy and other European countries adopted a common currency, the
Euro, preventing competitive devaluation. This restriction might have affected Italian exports due to the fact
that Italian exports had greatly benefited from competitive devaluation in the past.
      In the short term, a decrease in external demand for Italian products can adversely affect productivity
through several channels. First, there is a scale effect. A reduction in export volumes can slow down or
reverse firm growth. This, in turn, might adversely impact TFP gains through the scale elasticity and by
stopping learning-by-doing. Second, a decrease in external demand for Italian products has a negative impact
on the profitability of Italian firms. To the extent firms are liquidity constrained, this reduction in profitability
can also lead to a reduction in investments in R&D and new technologies, slowing down not only labor
productivity but also TFP growth. The third potential channel is labor adjustment costs. In the absence of
growth in internal demand, a decrease in external demand forces Italian firms to cut back production, at
least temporarily. If firms cannot easily lay off workers in response to this shock, productivity will drop, the
more so the harder it is to lay off workers (i.e., the stronger employment protection is). All these negative
effects should be short term. In the long term, if there is a permanent drop in demand for Italian products,
firms will eventually adjust or close. If they adjust, they will probably be forced to increase productivity. If
they close, the least productive firms will close first, increasing the average productivity simply through a
compositional effect. Thus, the predictions for the long term are the opposite. While it is hard to imagine
that 10 years are still the short term, we should let the data speak. If this were the case, the sectors that would
more affected would be those more open to trade at the beginning of the period and the countries that would
be more affected are those with stricter labor protection laws.
      In Table 8, column 1 we regress TFP growth on Trade Openness (defined in Section 2) as well country
and sector fixed effects. We find the effect of Trade Openness to be economically and statistically indis-
tinguishable from zero. In columns 2, we add an interaction term with Employment Laws. We find that
the interaction term is negative and borderline significant (at 10% confidence level) giving some credence
to Euro hypothesis. In column 3, we add to this specification our key explanatory variables ICT Contribu-
tion as well as it interaction with Country Meritocracy. The interaction term ICT Contribution × Country
Meritocracy has a positive, statistically significant coefficient that is very similar in magnitude to the one ob-
tained in Table 5. Interestingly, also the interaction between Trade Openness and Employment Laws remains
negative and statistically significant, suggesting that the two explanations are orthogonal. In column 4, we
test the robustness of this latter result by replacing Employment Laws with its OECD-supplied counterpart



                                                         29
Employment Protection. We find that the interaction term ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy remains
positive and statistically significant, while the interaction Trade Openness × Employment Protection is found
to be statistically and economically insignificant.
      In sum, while we cannot reject the Euro hypothesis, the evidence in favor of it is weak and it doesn’t
seem to undermine the ICT-based one.


5.5     Labor market reforms and shadow employment

Starting from 1997, the Italian government passed a series of legislative measures that regulated certain
categories of temporary and part-time work; these include the well-known “Biagi Law”, the “Pacchetto Treu”
as well as Law “2002 n.189”, which allowed for the regularization of illegal work of non-EU immigrants. The
aim of these regulations was, at least in part, to reduce shadow employment and increase official employment.
      Some observers, notably Krugman (2012) in a New York Times column, suggested that this might have
biased employment growth statistics upwards for Italy, bringing down Italy’s productivity: according to this
theory, Italy’s productivity slowdown might be nothing more than a statistical artifact.
      Unfortunately, we are unable to determine whether or to what extent this effect is present in the EU
KLEMS labor input time series. However, we can present two pieces of evidence which suggest that, if this
effect exists, it cannot account but for a small fraction of Italy’s productivity growth gap.
      First, recent empirical analysis of matched Italian employer-employees data (see Daruich et al. 2018)
determined that the increase in aggregate employment as a result of the reforms was minimal. Second, the
Italian Statistics Institute (Istat) has been computing estimates of the incidence of undeclared work since
the early 90s. We recovered these estimates for the years 1992, 1997 and 2003, from a statistical document
that Istat (2005) produced for a parliamentary commission. These estimates allow us to perform a back-of-
the-envelope calculation of the potential effect that these regulations might have had, based on conservative
assumptions.
      According to Istat’s estimates, the incidence of undeclared workers as a percentage of total employment
was 13.4% in 1992, 14.8% in 1997, and then again 13.4% in 2003. We make the conservative assumptions
that 1) this effect is totally missed by EU KLEMS employment data; 2) shadow employment would have
grown between 1997 and 2003 by the same percentage amount it did between 1992 and 1997, had the labor
market reforms not been passed. Then, employment growth has been overestimated by, at most, 2.8%. By
multiplying this by an assumed labor elasticity of 2/3, we obtain an upper bound to TFP underestimation of
1.9%, which is trivial vis-à-vis Italy’s 21.1% TFP growth gap.



                                                      30
5.6     An institutional decline?

An alternative explanation to Italy’s productivity decline is that Italy experienced, over the 1996-2006 period,
a decline in the quality of its institutions. Over this period, in fact, Italy recorded the sharpest decline in “Rule
of Law” (one of the Worldwide Governance Indicators) within our sample (Gros, 2011). If Italy’s government
is the real culprit of the TFP drop, we should observe that the sectors more dependent on regulations and
government inputs should experience a sharper TFP drop.
      We don’t lack country-level indicators of government effectiveness (e.g., La Porta et al., 1999), but we
do lack a measure of sectoral dependence on government inputs. As a source of country-level variation,
we use the change in the World Bank’s Rule of Law and Control of Corruption scores. To measure how
much each sector is dependent on the government, we compute our own measure of sectoral government
dependence. Specifically, we count news articles using the Factiva news search engine. The variable is
defined, for each sector, as the ratio of total news counts having “government” as the topic to total news
for that sector. Figure 4 shows how this variable varies across EU KLEMS sectors. This measure has been
validated by both Akcigit et al. (2017) and Giordano et al. (2015), who find a positive correlation between
the variation in public sector efficiency across Italian provinces and the level of value added per employee.
      In Table 9, column 1, we regress TFP growth on the interaction between Government Dependence and
ΔRule of Law. We find that these variables have no significant effect on TFP growth. Similarly, we verify
that our results from Table 9 are not sensitive to how we measure variation in institutional quality: in columns
2 and 3, we show that there is no substantial difference in the results when we use,        Control of Corruption,
Judicial Inefficiency or Govt Inefficiency (Chong et al., 2014; Djankov et al., 2003) as alternative measures
of institutional quality.
      In column 4, we include all four interaction effects, as well as ICT Contribution ⇥ Country Meritocracy.
None of our measures of institutional quality, interacted with Government Dependence, have a statistically
or economically significant effect on productivity growth, while the effect of the interaction term ICT Con-
tribution ⇥ Country Meritocracy, is positive, statistically significant and broadly unchanged in magnitude
with respect to our regression in Table 5.
      Based on this additional analysis, we conclude that our main results are unlikely to be driven by an
omitted variable linked to institutional quality.




                                                         31
6      Evidence from firm-level data

An even better way to ensure that our findings from Section 3 are not spurious is to try and corroborate
them using firm-level data. To this purpose, we use Bruegel’s EFIGE, which allows us to compute a firm-
level measure of meritocratic management (Firm Meritocracy, see Section 2). Besides varying at the firm
level, this measure has the advantage of reflecting factual information about firm characteristics, as opposed
to perceptions, allowing us to rule out that the effects we measured in the aggregate data are driven by
mismeasurement of the variable Country Meritocracy.
      EFIGE also contains data that allows us to test the effect of labor market frictions on growth and to
control in a much more careful way for human capital.
      The use of this dataset, however, comes with limitations too. First, we do not observe ICT Capital
at the firm level. More importantly, at the firm level specification (34) does follow from an accounting
decomposition, but it is applied just by analogy. Last but not least, the dataset contains too few country/sector
clusters to reproduce the IV specification we used for sector-level data. As a consequence, the firm level
results should be interpreted as corroborating evidence, rather than formal tests of our hypothesis.


6.1     Firm Level Meritocracy

Figure 5 shows the distribution of firm-level meritocracy variable by country. Notice that for Italy the dis-
tribution of this variable across firms is significantly skewed to the right with respect to other countries in
our sample. Almost half of the Italian firms in our sample score zero. Thus, Italy is an outlier according to
this measure too.
      Similarly, Figure 6 shows that Firm Meritocracy is highly correlated with Country Meritocracy, provid-
ing more credence to the sector-level results.


6.2     TFP growth regressions

As explained in Section 2, we compute annual growth rates in firm-level TFP in a way consistent with the EU
KLEMS methodology, by using firm financials from the Amadeus-BvD dataset, for the period 2001-2007.
If indeed meritocratic management mediates the productivity-enhancing effects of ICT adoption, we should
observe, at the firm level, the same qualitative effect that we estimated in Section 3.
      In Table 10, column 1, we reproduce a similar specification as in Table 5, column 1 using firm-level
data. One difference with respect to the sector-level analysis is that sector-level TFP growth is replaced by
firm-level TFP growth, and that Country Meritocracy is now replaced by Firm Meritocracy. In addition, the


                                                       32
greater number of degrees of freedom allow us to control not just for country and sector fixed effects but
for country-by-sector fixed effects. This allows us to control for potential reverse-causation of TFP on ICT
capital accumulation even better than we did in our sector-level analysis with EU KLEMS data6 . Because
Firm Meritocracy is not absorbed by country × sector fixed effects, it is now also included as a standalone
variable.
       The estimates obtained from the EFIGE firm-level regressions are presented in Table 10. The interaction
effect of ICT Contribution and Firm Meritocracy is positive and statistically significant, mimicking our
findings with sector-level KLEMS data.
       One of the advantages of the EFIGE firm-level dataset is that we can control more granularly for the
effect of labor market frictions on growth. We do so by using the variable Labor Frictions, which is described
in Section 2. Surprisingly, the coefficient of this variable is positive (not negative as expected) albeit not
statistically significant.
       At the firm level, one important determinant of the absorption of ICT is the amount of human capital
per employee. We can control for this factor because EFIGE provides the share of employees who are
college graduates. We add this variable, as well as its interaction with ICT contribution, as a control, in
columns 3. Unsurprisingly, the variable Employees with Degree has a positive and statistically significant
effect on TFP growth. However, when interacted with ICT contribution, it has a negative, statistically non-
significant coefficient. Most importantly, inserting this variable does not change the effect of the interaction
term between Firm Meritocracy and ICT Contribution.


6.3      Temporary workers and gerontocracy in the firm

The Italian labor market reforms of the late 90’s and early 2000’s, which we previously mentioned in sub-
section 5.5, might have contributed to Italy’s productivity slowdown through a different channel. Daveri
and Parisi (2015, henceforth DP), suggest that these reforms had the effect of increasing the incidence of
temporary employment contracts , which in turn reduced the firms’ incentives to invest in training. Accord-
ing to DP, this effect, combined with the elevated age of Italian CEOs, limited the ability of Italian firms to
innovate, ultimately causing the productivity slowdown.
       This hypothesis can potentially threaten identification in our econometric analysis if meritocratic man-
agement correlates with either the age of the CEO or the proclivity to use temporary employment contracts.
   6
    In the reported table, we do not control for firm size since our only consistently-available measure of size at the firm level is
observed at the end of the panel, and therefore could be influenced by cross-firm differences in productivity growth. Nevertheless,
to make sure that our results are robust, we repeat this set of regression in Appendix Table 10, by controlling for the number of
employees.



                                                                33
We account for this alternative hypothesis by adding the percentage of temporary workers and the age of the
firm’s CEO (which EFIGE measures in decades) as control variables, to the regression of Table 10, column
3. To make sure that Firm Meritocracy is not actually capturing the effect of neither of these variables, we
also interact them with ICT Contribution. The results are shown in the adjacent column 4.
      In contrast with the findings of DP, we find that the percentage of temporary workers does not have a
statistically significant effect on productivity growth. CEO age has actually a positive and statistically sig-
nificant effect on productivity growth. The estimated impact of meritocracy and its interaction with ICT
Contribution remains broadly unchanged. Provided that our controls are not impacted by significant mea-
surement error, we can therefore reasonably exclude that our findings of 6.2 are confounded by the effects
described by DP.


6.4     ICT usage regressions

Because Italy does not appear to under-invest significantly in ICT capital, our argument is that its productivity
slowdown is due to a lower ability to exploit these technologies. Using firm-level data, we can test whether
this interpretation is consistent with the data. We do this by computing the variable ICT Usage, a firm-level
score (ranging from 0 to 3) of the extent to which ICT technologies are utilized by the firm’s management.
The construction of this variable is outlined in Section 2.
      In Table 11, column 1, we estimate an Ordered Probit regression of ICT Usage on the same set of ex-
planatory variables as in Table 10. If the joint effect of Firm Meritocracy and ICT Contribution is mediated
by the effective integration of ICTs in the firm’s management, we would expect their interaction to predict
higher values of ICT Usage.
      We find that more meritocratic firms tend to use ICT more. This effect is more pronounced in sectors
where the contribution of ICT capital was larger. Both effects are statistically significant. Based on these
estimates, when a firm in a typical sector increases its level of meritocracy from 0 to 5, it doubles its proba-
bility of attaining a high level of ICT Usage (2 or 3), from 26.6% to 52%. The effect is even stronger in the
more ICT-intensive sectors.
      In Table 11, columns 2-3, we add, as a control variable, the percentage of employees with a college
degree. This variable has a positive and statistically significant effect on ICT Usage, but its interaction with
ICT Contribution does not. The coefficients of Firm Meritocracy and ICT Contribution, as well as their
interaction, remain substantially unchanged.
      In column 3, we add CEO Age and Temporary Employees as additional control variables, together with
their interaction with ICT Contribution. The coefficients for these variables are not statistically different


                                                       34
from zero, with the exception of the interaction term Temporary Employees × ICT Contribution, which has
a p-value just below 10. The sign of the coefficient, however is the opposite of what we would expect given
DP (positive rather than negative).


6.5      Imperfect competition, revenue and output productivity

In Sub-section 2.5, we warned that, while our firm-level measure of TFP is consistent with EU KLEMS
methodology, it is susceptible to violations of the assumption of perfect competition. This is because we
deflate value added using a sector-level index. If markets are not perfectly competitive and firms charge a
markup, our measure of TFP will capture idiosyncratic variation in firm-level prices. As a consequence, it
will be akin to revenue-based productivity (TFPR). This is problematic, because TFPR is known to capture a
variety of factors that are unrelated to actual productivity (TFPQ), such as firm-level distortions (Hsieh and
Klenow, 2009)7 .
       In order to make sure that our firm-level econometric results are not reliant on the assumption of per-
fect competition, we want to build an alternative (robust) firm-level measure of TFP growth that may not
necessarily be consistent with the EU KLEMS approach. The simplest way to do that is to use firm-level
output deflators. Unfortunately, while the EFIGE dataset contains plenty of information about management,
workforce and IT usage, it falls short of providing firm-level price data. To correct for firm-level variation in
prices, we therefore resort to an insight of De Loecker (2011) which allows us to do so by using sector-level
prices alone: this requires imposing some structure on demand.
       We follow the predominant practice in the literature and assume a CES demand system, which yields the
following firm-level demand function:
                                                                    ✓          ◆
                                                                        Pit
                                                     Yit = Ycst                                                                  (41)
                                                                        Pcst

where the parameter          is the elasticity of substitution, and Ycst and Pcst are the country/sector-level output
and price indices. Rearranging this demand function yields the following expression for the (estimated) real
log output growth at the firm level:


                                 ŷit =    ycst +             [   log (Pit Yit )      log (Pcst Ycst )]                          (42)
                                                          1
   7
    Specifically, we worry about the possibility that our firm-level results might be biased if our TFP measure incorporates variations
in markups, which would then become an omitted variable in the regression . The bias on the main coefficients would be positive
if more meritocratic firms increased their markups (rather than their physical productivity), in more ICT-intensive sectors.




                                                                   35
which we can compute using firm-level value added in conjunction with sector-level value added (volume
and price indices) from the EU KLEMS dataset.
      Our dataset does not allow us to estimate the elasticity of substitution , therefore we use the conservative
approach of inputing low values of       (similar to Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). Notice that, as          becomes large
(demand approaches perfect competition), output growth in equation (42) converges to our baseline TFP
measure (value added deflated using sector-level price indices).
      We use this estimate of firm-level output growth to compute an alternative measure of TFP:

                                               ✓                   ◆         ✓               ◆
                                                       Wcst Lcst                 Wcst Lcst
                         log TFPit =    ŷit       1                   kit                       `it            (43)
                                                       Pcst Ycst                 Pcst Ycst

input volumes and shares for capital and labor are the same as in equation (22).
      In Appendix E, we present alternative estimates of our regression of Table 10 where the dependent vari-
able is TFP computed according to equation (43), using the values of the elasticity of substitution             = 5
and     = 3, which account for substantial deviations from perfect competition. Because we implement the
regression in long-term differences, we can reasonably assume that short-term demand shocks are being av-
eraged out. We also present additional estimations, in which we use a similar TFP measure, computed using
the gross output concept (rather than value added).


6.6     Sample Selection in BvD-Amadeus

The EFIGE dataset is built out of the stratified sample of firms that received the EFIGE survey. It is equipped
by its authors with sampling weights which ensure that when we use survey data EFIGE is representative of
the population of manufacturing firms.
      By contrast, when EFIGE is matched with firm financials obtained from the Amadeus dataset, it inher-
its the sample selection issues of Amadeus. To address this problem, every time financial information is
employed, we use the methodology developed by Pellegrino and Zheng (2017) to generate new sampling
weights that make the sample representative.
      However, in order to completely rule out the possibility that our results are driven by sample selection,
we replicate our firm-level TFP regressions Appendix F by dropping the three countries for which sample
selection might be an issue (Austria, Germany and the UK), and show that the regression estimates are
virtually unchanged. For all other countries, sample coverage is close to 100%.




                                                          36
7    Distortions to competition and meritocracy in the firm

When we look at the decade ending in 1995, it appears that this loyalty-based management style had no
negative consequences on Italy’s TFP growth. By contrast, with the advent of the ICT revolution, the lower
ability of the loyalty-based system of translating ICT investments into productivity seems to have cost Italy
between 13 and 16 percentage points of TFP growth (see Sub-section 3.8).
    If this is the case, why did Italian firms fail to adopt superior managerial techniques? To be more specific,
how can we explain the persistence of the loyalty model of management in Italy, given its cost in terms of
lack of TFP growth?
    One explanation could be hysteresis. To use a metaphor from genetics, up to the 1980s the loyalty-based
management style was simply a neutral mutation. When the advantages of meritocracy came about, Italian
firms were slow to adapt. This explanation has the advantage of containing the hope that, in the long run,
the adaptation will take place, even absent policy interventions.
    A more rational (but less optimistic) interpretation is that in Italy, even today, there are some advantages
to adopting the loyalty-based management system which offset (or partially offset) the inability to fully
exploit the ICT revolution. If this were the case, then convergence in the long run might not occur without
a policy intervention.
    But what are the advantages of loyalty-based management? Caselli and Gennaioli (2005, 2013), for
example, argue that allocating power to cronies rather than talented managers can be individually efficient
(while socially inefficient) in the presence of credit frictions and/or lack of product market competition. An
alternative explanation is that loyalty-based management might better function in environments where legal
enforcement is either inefficient or unavailable. Among developed countries, Italy stands out for its lack of
competition in the banking sector, its inefficient legal system (the average time to enforce a contract, as mea-
sured by Djankov et al. (2003) is 638 days, nearly 2.5 times the cross-country average) and for the diffusion
of tax evasion and bribes (in 2017, it ranked 60th in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions
Index, behind every other country in our sample).
    Thus, a reasonable hypothesis is that, at the onset of the ICT revolution, Italy found itself with the optimal
level of management for its institutions, but the worst possible type for taking advantage of this revolution. To
corroborate this hypothesis, we need to find a way to measure the differential benefit of being loyalty-based
in Italy.
    To this end, we use another set of variables from the EFIGE survey. Specifically, we use the firms’
answers to a multiple-choice question in which they are asked to identify the main factors constraining the



                                                       37
firm’s growth. We focus on three most cited constraints, namely: financial constraints, labor regulation,
and bureaucracy. In Table 12, we estimate, using a probit model, the conditional probability that the firm
encounters each of these constraints. Beside sector fixed effects, the key explanatory variables are the firm’s
of meritocratic management score, and its interaction with a dummy for Italy.
    As expected, more meritocratic firms face fewer constraints (of any kind). However, this effect is not
present in Italy. The interaction between the meritocracy index and the Italy dummy is very similar in magni-
tude, but opposite in sign, to the baseline coefficient of meritocracy. Interestingly, this interaction effect for
Italy is significant for financial constraints and bureaucratic constraints, but not for labor market constraints.
This difference makes a lot of sense. Loyal management can exchange favors with banks and bypass bu-
reaucracy through political connections or bribes, but finds it more difficult to overcome the constraints that
labor regulation puts on growth. These results are obviously not hard proof that loyalty-based management
is advantageous in Italy, but they are consistent with this hypothesis. Moreover, our results resonate with the
findings of Akcigit et al. (2017), which focus on another channel that appears to worsen business dynamics
in Italy - namely, the role of political connections.
    We know from Demsetz (1983) that more efficient firms tend to grow larger. Thus, if meritocratic firms
tend to be more efficient in other countries, but not in Italy, we expect firm size to be positively correlated
with meritocratic practices at the firm level in general, but not in Italy. We test this hypothesis in column 4 of
Table 12. We find that indeed, on average, there is a positive and statistically significant correlation between
firm size meritocratic practices at the firm level. When we interact meritocracy with the Italian dummy,
however, the coefficient is negative and statistically significant. Thus, in Italy meritocratic practices are
less correlated with firm size than in the rest of the sample. In fact, we add the two coefficients, we find
that in Italy meritocracy and size are not significantly positively correlated. In sum, in Italy loyalty-based
management seems to pay off.



8    Conclusions

Economists have long tried to identify the institutional causes of economic development (e.g., Acemoglu et
al., 2001). By and large, this analysis has treated institutions as enabling conditions (i.e., enforcement of
property rights) rather than as inputs in the production function. One consequence of this choice is that the
institutional factors enabling development are independent of the technology used.
    Our diagnosis of the Italian disease suggests we should start studying how technological change inter-
acts with pre-existing institutions. As technological change can be skill-biased, it can also be biased in favor


                                                        38
of certain institutional arrangements (e.g., more formalized). If we accept Williamson’s (2000) characteri-
zation of institutions as slow-moving, a higher technological demand for certain institutional features will
not immediately produce the desired institutional change. Thus, transparency-biased technological change
will foster growth in countries with more transparency and meritocracy, and will delay it in countries where
informality and cronyism prevail.
    In this paper we argue that the ICT revolution represents an example of transparency-biased technological
change, which favors countries with more meritocratic institutions and more objective incentive-schemes.
We show that – given existing management practices – this bias can go a long way towards explaining not
only the Italian productivity slowdown, but the productivity slowdown of Southern Europe in general. We
also show that in Italy, loyalty-based management is not necessarily a leftover of the past. Even today, un-
meritocratic managerial practices provide a comparative advantage in the Italian institutional environment.
    We do not attempt here to prescribe a medicine for the Italian disease. Entrepreneurs lose out collectively
from an environment that is less prone to the adoption of new technology; yet, they lose out individually from
adopting transparency-biased technologies when their peers are not. Given this conundrum and the fact that
country’s institutions are intrinsically hard to change, it appears that Italy serves as a cautionary tale of the
importance of building institutions that aren’t simply appropriate at one historical juncture, but that are also
attuned the pace of technological progress.




                                                       39
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Distance to frontier, selection, and economic
  growth,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2006, 4 (1), 37–74.

  , Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson, “The colonial origins of comparative development: An em-
  pirical investigation,” American economic review, 2001, 91 (5), 1369–1401.

Akcigit, Ufuk, Salomé Baslandze, and Francesca Lotti, “Connecting to Power: Political Connections,
 Innovation, and Firm Dynamics,” 2017.

Altomonte, Carlo and Tommaso Aquilante, “The EU-EFIGE/Bruegel-Unicredit dataset,” Technical Re-
  port, No. 2012/13. Bruegel working paper 2012.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H Hanson, “The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of
 import competition in the US,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (6), 2121–68.

Bandiera, Oriana, Luigi Guiso, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun, Italian managers: fidelity or perfor-
  mance? (in T. Boeri, A. Merlo, and A. Prat. The ruling class: Management and politics in modern Italy),
  Oxford University Press, 2008.

Barro, Robert J and Jong Wha Lee, “A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950–2010,”
  Journal of development economics, 2013, 104, 184–198.

Bassanini, Andrea and Andrea Garnero, “Dismissal protection and worker flows in OECD countries:
  Evidence from cross-country/cross-industry data,” Labour Economics, 2013, 21, 25–41.

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and explaining management practices across firms
  and countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1351–1408.

  , Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, “Americans Do IT Better: US Multinationals and the Produc-
  tivity Miracle,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 167–201.

  , , and John Van Reenen, “The organization of firms across countries,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2012, 127 (4), 1663–1705.

Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
  “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119, 4.

Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt, “Information technology, workplace orga-
  nization, and the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002,
  117 (1), 339–376.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin M Hitt, “Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence,” Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (4), 793–808.

  , Lorin M. Hitt, and Shinkyu Yang, “Intangible assets: Computers and organizational capital,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2002, 2002 (1), 137–198.

Bugamelli, Matteo and Patrizio Pagano, “Barriers to Investment in ICT,” Applied Economics, 2004, 36
  (20), 2275–2286.




                                                   40
Calligaris, Sara, Massimo Del Gatto, Fadi Hassan, Gianmarco IP Ottaviano, Fabiano Schivardi et al.,
  “Italy’s productivity conundrum. a study on resource misallocation in Italy,” Technical Report, Directorate
  General Economic and Financial Affairs (DG ECFIN), European Commission 2016.

Caselli, Francesco and Nicola Gennaioli, “Credit constraints, competition, and meritocracy,” Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 2005, 3 (2-3), 679–689.

   and    , “Dynastic management,” Economic Inquiry, 2013, 51 (1), 971–996.

Chong, Alberto, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Letter Grading
 Government Efficiency,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12, 277–299.

Daruich, Diego, Sabrina Di Addario, and Raffaele Saggio, “The Effects of Partial Employment Protection
  Reforms: Evidence from Italy,” 2018.

Daveri, Francesco and Maria Laura Parisi, “Experience, innovation, and productivity: empirical evidence
  from Italy’s slowdown,” ILR Review, 2015, 68 (4), 889–915.

Demsetz, Harold, “The structure of ownership and the theory of the firm,” The Journal of law and eco-
  nomics, 1983, 26 (2), 375–390.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Courts,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2003, pp. 453–517.

Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus and Lee Ohanian, “The Lack of European Productivity Growth: Causes and
  Lessons for the US,” Technical Report, Penn Institute for Economic Research, Department of Economics,
  University of … 2018.

Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger, and Zoltan Wolf, “Firm-Level Dispersion in Productivity:
  Is the Devil in the Details?,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (5), 95–98.

Garicano, Luis and Paul Heaton, “Information Technology, Organization, and Productivity in the Public
 Sector: Evidence from Police Departments,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (1), 167–201.

Giordano, Raffaela, Sergi Lanau, Pietro Tommasino, and Petia Topalova, “Does Public Sector Ineffi-
  ciency Constrain Firm Productivity; Evidence from Italian Provinces,” Technical Report, International
  Monetary Fund 2015.

Gopinath, Gita, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez,
 “Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4),
 1915–1967.

Gros, Daniel, “What is holding Italy back?,” Vox. Research-based policy analysis and commentary, 2011.

Hassan, Fadi and Gianmarco Ottaviano, “Productivity in Italy: The great unlearning,” VoxEU. org, 2013,
 30.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow, “Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Istat, “L’economia sommersa e il lavoro non regolare,” in “Audizione del Presidente dell’Istituto nazionale
   di statistica, Luigi Biggeri presso le Commissioni riunite V Commissione “Programmazione economica,
   bilancio” del Senato e V Commissione “Bilancio” della Camera” 2005.


                                                     41
Jorgenson, Dale W, Frank M Gollop, and Barbara M Fraumeni, “Productivity and US Economic
  Growth,” 1987.

  , Mun Ho, and Kevin Stiroh, “Productivity, Volume 3: Information Technology and the American
  Growth Resurgence,” Technical Report, The MIT Press 2005.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, Governance matters V: aggregate and individ-
 ual governance indicators for 1996-2005, Vol. 4012, World Bank Publications, 2006.

Krugman, Paul, “More about Italy,” New York Times, 2012, 28.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating production functions using inputs to control for unobserv-
  ables,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (2), 317–341.

Loecker, Jan De, “Product differentiation, multiproduct firms, and estimating the impact of trade liberal-
  ization on productivity,” Econometrica, 2011, 79 (5), 1407–1451.

Melitz, Marc J, “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity,”
 Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Milana, Carlo and Alessandro Zeli, “Productivity Slowdown and the Role of ICT in Italy,” The Economic
 Impact of ICT, 2004, pp. 261–277.

Olley, Steven G. and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
  Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–1297.

O’Mahony, Mary and Marcel P. Timmer, “Output, input and productivity measures at the industry level:
  The EU KLEMS database,” Economic Journal, 2009, 119 (538), F374–F403.

Pellegrino, Bruno and Geoffery Zheng, “What is the extent of Misallocation?,” 2017.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott, “The surprisingly swift decline of US manufacturing employment,”
  American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7), 1632–1662.

Porta, Rafael La, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The quality of
  government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1999, 15 (1), 222–279.

Rajan, Raghuram G and Luigi Zingales, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic Re-
  view, 1998, 88 (3), 559–586.

Romer, Paul M, “Increasing returns and long-run growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 1986, 94 (5),
  1002–1037.

Sapienza, Paola, “The effects of government ownership on bank lending,” Journal of financial economics,
  2004, 72 (2), 357–384.

Schivardi, Fabiano and Tom Schmitz, The ICT Revolution and Italy’s Two Lost Decades, IGIER WP, 2017.

Schneider, Friedrich, “The shadow economy and work in the shadow: what do we (not) know?,” 2012.

Stiroh, Kevin J., “Are ICT spillovers driving the new economy?,” Review of Income and Wealth, 2002, 48
  (1), 33–57.

Tiffin, Andrew, “European Productivity, Innovation and Competitiveness: The Case of Italy,” Working
  Paper, IMF May 2014.

                                                   42
Timmer, Marcel P, Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J Vries, “An illustrated
  user guide to the world input–output database: the case of global automotive production,” Review of
  International Economics, 2015, 23 (3), 575–605.

Williamson, Oliver E, “The new institutional economics: taking stock, looking ahead,” Journal of economic
 literature, 2000, 38 (3), 595–613.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., “On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy variables to control
 for unobservables,” Economics Letters, 2009, 104 (3), 112–114.




                                                   43
                       Figure 1: Aggregate labor productivity in selected countries (1974-2016)

This chart shows GDP per hour worked for USA, Germany, France and Italy in 1974-2016 in 2010 US$.
        65




                                                                                        USA
        60




                                                                    France
        55




                                                                                      Germany
              50
     2010 US$
        45




                                                                                        Italy
  40    35
        30




                                                                                      source: OECD
        25




                   1971 1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019




                                                          44
             Figure 2: Decomposition of labor productivity growth (unweighted, 1996-2006)


This chart shows the breakdown of log growth in GDP per hour worked at constant prices between 1996
and 2006 into its four components: TFP growth and the contributions of ICT capital, non-ICT capital and
labor composition. For this chart we use industry-level data in the business sector. Growth across sectors is
unweighted, in order to factor out the sectoral composition of the economy.


                      TFP Growth                                  ICT Capital Contribution
                      Non-ICT Capital Contribution                Human Capital Contribution
                      Labor Productivity Growth
          50%



          40%



          30%



          20%



          10%



           0%



         -10%




                                                     45
                             Figure 3: Productivity growth by country Meritocracy and sector ICT intensiveness


This figure displays the evolution of TFP estimates, indexed at 1995, from the EU KLEMS database for
different country/sector groups. We sort high-Meritocracy versus low-Meritocracy countries (top tercile
versus bottom tercile based on our country-level measure of meritocracy) and high ICT intensiveness versus
low ICT intensiveness sectors (top eight versus bottom eight sectors based on the sector-level, cross-country
average contribution of ICT capital to output growth in 1996–2006). We take the median TFP growth rate
for each group/year. giving equal weight to all country/sectors. Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovenia are
excluded since there is no TFP data for these countries before 1995.
   100 105 110 115 120 125
   TFP (1995=100)
              95
              90
              85




                              1985                1990                1995
                                                                         year
                                                                                          2000                   2005

                                               High ICT, High Merit                   High ICT, Low Merit
                                               Low ICT, High Merit                    Low ICT, Low Merit




                                                                    46
                                   Figure 4: Government dependence scores

This chart depicts values of the variable Govt Dependence, built using news count data from Dow Jones’ Fac-
tiva News Search service. We exploit the Factiva topic and industry “tags”. Govt Dependence is defined, for
each sector, as the share of news articles having the topic tag “Government Contracts” or “Regulation/Gov-
ernment Policy”. We use all news articles from Dow Jones, the Financial Times, Reuters, and the Wall Street
Journal published from January 1st 1984 to December 31st 2017.




      Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry and Fishing
                         Financial Intermediation
                                       Chemicals
                             Transport Equipment
                   Post and Telecommunications
      Coke, Refined Petroleum and Nuclear Fuel
               Electricity, Gas and Water Supply
                                     Construction
                            Transport and Storage
                   Food, Beverages and Tobacco
     Real Estate, Renting and Business Activities
             Pulp, Paper, Printing and Publishing
          Wood and Products of Wood And Cork
                               Machinery, N.E.C.
                   Manufacturing Nec; Recycling
                            Mining and Quarrying
                           Hotels and Restaurants
                  Textiles, Leather and Footwear
                      Wholesale and Retail Trade
                              Rubber and Plastics
           Other Non-Metallic Mineral Products
                Electrical and Optical Equipment
              Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal


                                                    0   .025   .05      .075       .1      .125




                                                        47
                                  Figure 5: Distribution of firm-level Meritocracy


The figure below displays histograms, by countries and for the whole sample, of firm-level meritocracy.
Observations are weighted using the sampling weights of the EFIGE survey in order to obtain consistent
population estimates of the distribution of the Meritocracy index.




                           AUT                DEU                      ESP              FRA
              .5
              .4
              .3
              .2
              .1
  Frequency
              0




                           GBR                HUN                      ITA              Total
              .5
              .4
              .3
              .2
              .1
              0




                      0 1 2 3 4 5         0 1 2 3 4 5            0 1 2 3 4 5         0 1 2 3 4 5
                                    Firm-level index of Meritocratic management
              Graphs by country




                                                        48
                                            Figure 6: Firm-level and country-level Meritocracy


The following figure plots of our country-level measure of meritocratic management, derived from WEF
surveys, against our firm-level meritocratic management metric, constructed from firm-level EFIGE survey
data. The latter is averaged at the level of the country of headquarters. To account for the fact that all the
firms in our sample are operating in Austria, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain or the UK, the Firm-
level score is adjusted by including a dummy variable for these 7 countries on the right hand side of the
regression equation here depicted. The effect of the dummy is summed to these firms’ meritocracy score.
Countries that are represented by fewer than 10 firms in the EFIGE dataset are excluded.
                  5.5




                                                                                                       SWE   CHE
                                                                                                 DNK

                                                                                                       NLD FIN CAN
                                                                          GBR                                USA

                                                                                                                    JPN
                               5




                                                                                   DEU IRL
      Country Meritocracy (WEF)




                                                                                             BEL

                                                                                   AUT                    LUX
                   4.5




                                                                          CHN
                                                               FRA
                                                                                   IND


                                           R² = .643
        4




                                                   ESP                          HUN
                  3.5




                                     ITA

                                   1.75       2            2.25           2.5           2.75                    3
                                                   Firm Meritocracy (by HQ country, EFIGE)




                                                                     49
                                           Table 1: Variables Descriptions

   Variable                                              Description                                                   Source
 Bureaucratic     Dummy equal to one if the firm selects “Bureaucracy/Government Regulation” when                Bruegel-Unicredit
   Frictions          prompted to “indicate the main factors that hamper the growth of your firm.”               EU-EFIGE Dataset
  CEO Age        Age of current CEO/company head in years, grouped into seven categories: <25, 26-35,            Bruegel-Unicredit
                                              36-45, 46-55, 56-65, 66-75, >75.                                   EU-EFIGE Dataset
China Exposure     Predicted effect of China exports growth on domestic output, by country and sector.                 World
                   Computed assuming that the effect of China export growth is symmetric across all                 Input/Output
                                    competitor countries. See Section 2 for derivation.                               Database
   Country        Average of three Global Competitiveness Report Expert Surveys (2012): 1) “In your               World Economic
 Meritocracy       country, who holds senior management positions?” [1 = usually relatives or friends               Forum, 2012
                     without regard to merit; 7 = mostly professional managers chosen for merit and
                    qualifications]; 2) “In your country, how do you assess the willingness to delegate
                    authority to subordinates?” [1 = not willing at all – senior management makes all
                  important decisions; 7 = very willing – authority is mostly delegated to business unit
                  heads and other lower-level managers]; and 3) “In your country, to what extent is pay
                         related to employee productivity?” [1 = not at all; 7 = to a great extent].
Employees with      (Firm-reported) Share of the firm’s workforce that are university graduates. If the          Bruegel-Unicredit
    degree       percentage of employees with a college degree is not reported, but the absolute level is        EU-EFIGE Dataset
                  reported, we compute the percentage ourselves from the absolute figures, dividing the
                          number of employees with degree by the total number of employees.
 Employment      Composite Index of Strictness of Employment Laws. Obtained by Botero et al. (2004)              Botero et al. (2004)
    Laws          combining measures of difficulty of hiring, rigidity of hours, difficulty of redundancy,
                                         and redundancy costs (in weeks of salary).
  Financial         Dummy equal to one if the firm selects “Financial Constraints” when prompted to              Bruegel-Unicredit
 Constraints                 “indicate the main factors that hamper the growth of your firm.”                    EU-EFIGE Dataset
     Firm            Takes on integers 0–5. It is the sum of the affirmative answers to the following            Bruegel-Unicredit
 Meritocracy     questions: 1) “Can managers make autonomous decisions in some business areas?” 2)               EU-EFIGE Dataset
                  “Are managers incentivized with financial benefits?” 3) “Has any of your executives
                 worked abroad for at least one year?” 4) “Is the firm not directly or indirectly controlled
                  by an individual or family-owned entity? If it is, was the CEO recruited from outside
                   the firm?” 5) “Is the share of managers related to the controlling family lower than
                    50%?”. If the percentage of managers affiliated with the controlling family is not
                 reported, we use 1 minus the percentage of managers not affiliated with the controlling
                  family (if this is reported). If this is also missing, but the absolute levels are reported,
                             we compute the percentage ourselves from the absolute figures.
 Government       Ratio of government-related news to total sector news in a pool of articles from Dow              Factiva News
 Dependence        Jones, Financial Times, Reuters, and the Wall Street Journal from 1984 to 2017. We                  Search
                 define as government-related news items that have at least one of the following subject
                 tags in the Factiva news database: 1) government policy/regulation, 2) government aid,
                                                  3) government contracts.
 Government        Average number of days needed for the authors of Chong et al. (2014) to get back a            Chong et al. (2014)
 Inefficiency                     letter sent to an inexistent address in a certain country.




                                                              50
     ICT           Average yearly contribution of ICT (Information and Communication Technologies)              EU KLEMS
 Contribution       capital to value added growth in 1996–2006. It is defined as the two-period average
                       compensation share of capital in value added (estimated by subtracting labor
                   compensation from value added) times the ICT assets share of capital compensation
                       (estimated using current rental prices), times the rate of growth in ICT capital
                                     (estimated through a perpetual inventory model).
     ICT           Infrastructure component of the 2012 Networked Readiness Index. It is computed by           World Economic
Infrastructure       the World Economic Forum using country data on mobile network coverage, the                Forum, 2012
                     number of secure internet servers, internet bandwidth, and electricity production.
  ICT Usage       Sum of “YES” answers to the following three EFIGE survey questions on whether the           Bruegel-Unicredit
                     firm has access to/uses: 1) IT systems for internal information management; 2) IT        EU-EFIGE Dataset
                  systems for e-commerce; 3) IT systems for management of the sales/purchase network
   Judicial       Estimate of the number of days required to enforce a contract. Average of the estimate        Djankov et al.
 Inefficiency                     for “cashing a bounced check” and “evicting a tenant”.                           (2003)
   Non-ICT              Average yearly contribution of non-ICT (Information and Communication                   EU KLEMS
 Contribution         Technologies) capital to value added growth in 1996–2006. It is defined as the
                      two-period average compensation share of capital in value added (estimated by
                   subtracting labor compensation from value added) times the non-ICT assets share of
                  capital compensation (estimated using current rental prices), times the rate of growth in
                             non-ICT capital (estimated through a perpetual inventory model).
Labor Frictions   Dummy equal to one if the firm selects “Labor Market Regulation” when prompted to           Bruegel-Unicredit
                              “indicate the main factors that hamper the growth of your firm.”                EU-EFIGE Dataset
US Layoff Rate    Mass layoff rates for US sector. Computed by Bassanini and Garnero (2013) using the           Bassanini and
                          CPS biennial Displaced Workers Supplement (2000–2006, even years).                   Garnero (2013)
 Management        Average of Global Competitiveness Report Expert Survey (2012): “In your country,            World Economic
   Schools         how do you assess the quality of business schools? [1 = extremely poor – among the           Forum, 2012
                             worst in the world; 7 = excellent – among the best in the world]”
   Shadow          Shadow Economy, percent of GDP (average in 1999–2006). Estimated by the authors            Schneider (2012)
   Economy             using a latent variable, Multiple Indicators Multiple Causes (MIMIC) model.
  Temporary       (Firm-reported) Percentage of employees which, in 2008, have worked for the firm with       Bruegel-Unicredit
  Employees                                        a fixed-term contract.                                     EU-EFIGE Dataset
Trade Openness      Sector-level exports (Domestic value added embodied in foreign final demand) plus         OECD-WTO TiVA
                   imports (Foreign value added embodied in domestic final demand), divided by value               Dataset
                                  added. All variables measured in 1995 in millions US$.
 ΔControl of      Average yearly change in Control of Corruption Index, from the Worldwide Governance            World Bank
  Corruption        Indicators (time series sourced through the Quality of Government OECD dataset)
   ΔlogTFP        Average log growth of total factor productivity growth over a certain period: 1996-2006      sector-level: EU
                    for sector-level data and 2001-2007 for firm-level data, unless otherwise noted. It is         KLEMS
                   estimated as the residual growth in value added at constant prices after subtracting the      firm-level:
                  contributions of capital and of the labor services (see Section 2 for more information).    Bruegel-Unicredit
                   For firm-level data, we use output/input elasticities and deflators for added value and     EU-EFIGE, EU
                   labor input from the EU KLEMS dataset, as well as capital deflators from the OECD            KLEMS and
                                             Structural Analysis (StAn) dataset.                                   OECD.
 ΔRule of Law         Average yearly change in Rule of Law Index, from the Worldwide Governance                  World Bank
                    Indicators (time series sourced through the Quality of Government OECD dataset)




                                                             51
                                       Table 2: Descriptive statistics

We present here summary statistics for our main variables, sorted by their level of variation (firm, country,
sector). Additional variables (used for robustness tests) are presented in the appendix.

                 Panel A: Variables that vary across countries and sectors (1996-2006)
         Variable             Obs            Mean             SD              Min               Max
  China Exposure              414            0.012           0.021           -0.001            0.193
  ICT Contribution            414            0.005           0.006           -0.005            0.055
      -
  Non ICT Contribution        414            0.008           0.013           -0.028            0.095
  Trade Openness              414            0.897           0.849           0.017             8.116
  ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆                414            0.012           0.036           -0.292            0.204

                               Panel B: Variables that vary across countries
        Variable                Obs            Mean             SD              Min             Max
 Country Meritocracy             18           4.683            0.635           3.387           5.504
 Employment Laws                 18           0.535            0.201           0.164           0.745
 Employment Protection           18           2.153            0.747           0.260           3.310
 Firm Size                       17           18.129          10.284           6.183          39.289
 Govt Inefficiency               18           94.256          41.955           16.200         173.400
 ICT Infrastructure              18           5.894            0.708           4.317           6.904
 Management Schools              18           5.109            0.645           3.963           6.121
 Shadow Economy                  18           0.172            0.055           0.086           0.270
 ΔControl of Corruption          18           -0.003           0.020           -0.034          0.027
 ΔRule of Law                    18           0.002            0.021           -0.063          0.023


                         Panel C: Variables that vary across EU KLEMS sectors
        Variable               Obs            Mean             SD          Min                  Max
  Govt Dependence               23            0.045           0.024       0.020                0.126
  US Layoff Rate                20            0.052           0.017       0.022                0.090


                                Panel D: Variables that vary across firms
         Variable              Obs           Mean              SD               Min             Max
  Bureaucratic Frictions      12,444         0.208           0.406             0.000           1.000
  CEO Age                     14,701         4.254           1.038             1.000           7.000
  Employees with degree       14,749         0.094           0.134             0.000           1.000
  Financial Frictions         12,444         0.341           0.474             0.000           1.000
  Firm Meritocracy            14,205         1.554           1.272             0.000           5.000
  ICT Usage                   14,756         1.262           0.935             0.000           3.000
  Labor Frictions             12,444         0.190           0.392             0.000           1.000
  Temporary employees         14,640         0.256           0.385             0.000           1.000
  ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇                9,880          0.004           0.150             -2.301          2.355



                                                     52
                       Table 3: Decomposition of labor productivity growth, by country


This table presents the breakdown, at the country level, of the log growth in GDP per hour worked at constant
prices between 1996 and 2006 into its four components: TFP growth and the contributions of ICT capital,
non-ICT capital and human capital. For this table, we use industry-level data in the business sector. Growth
across sectors is unweighted, in order to factor out the sectoral composition of the economy.


                                       ICT Capital    Non-ICT Capital   Human Capital Labor Productivity
     Country           TFP Growth
                                       Contribution    Contribution      Contribution      Growth

       AUS                 3.4%            9.2%            6.6%              1.6%              20.8%
       AUT                32.7%            4.7%            4.9%              2.3%              44.5%
       BEL                 7.0%            7.9%            7.3%              2.9%              25.1%
       CZE                 4.7%            7.2%            24.1%             2.1%              38.1%
       DEU                19.7%            2.9%            5.1%              1.1%              28.8%
       DNK                 0.6%            8.6%            7.1%              2.8%              19.1%
        ESP               -6.0%            4.1%            6.7%              4.4%               9.2%
        FIN               24.2%            5.5%            3.5%              2.0%              35.1%
       FRA                22.0%            3.7%            7.3%              4.5%              37.3%
       GBR                14.6%            7.1%            4.8%              5.2%              31.8%
       HUN                34.6%            3.3%            6.4%              4.1%              48.3%
        IRL                8.5%            3.6%            22.2%             3.7%              38.2%
        ITA               -6.8%            2.5%            7.9%              1.3%               5.0%
        JPN                2.6%            3.3%            16.0%             3.8%              25.7%
       NLD                15.3%            4.8%            5.2%              5.1%              30.3%
       SVN                13.5%            3.8%            21.4%             5.6%              43.4%
       SWE                27.4%            5.5%            12.8%             3.4%              49.0%
       USA                16.7%            7.8%            7.0%              2.8%              34.4%
 Average ex.Italy         14.2%            5.5%            9.9%              3.4%              32.9%
Difference vs. Italy      21.1%            3.0%            2.0%              2.1%              28.0%




                                                      53
                                                 Table 4: Decomposition of labor productivity growth, by sector


     This table presents the breakdown, at the sector level, of the log growth in GDP per hour worked at constant prices between 1996 and 2006 into its
     four components: TFP growth and the contributions of ICT capital, non-ICT capital and human capital. For this table, we use industry-level data in
     the business sector. Growth across sectors is unweighted, in order to factor out the sectoral composition of the economy.

                                                                                  ICT Capital    Non-ICT Capital   Human Capital Labor Productivity
                            Sector                       Code     TFP Growth
                                                                                  Contribution    Contribution      Contribution      Growth

          Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry and Fishing     01t05      26.6%             0.8%           8.6%              3.4%            39.4%
                     Mining and Quarrying                10t14       -1.0%            2.6%           19.8%             1.7%            23.1%
                 Food, Beverages and Tobacco             15t16       -0.9%            3.5%           10.6%             3.6%            16.7%
                Textiles, Leather and Footwear           17t19      17.5%             2.8%           8.6%              5.5%            34.5%
            Wood and Products of Wood And Cork            20        18.8%             2.5%           6.2%              3.7%            31.3%
             Pulp, Paper, Printing and Publishing        21t22      13.8%             8.3%           11.5%             3.7%            37.3%
          Coke, Refined Petroleum and Nuclear Fuel        23        -41.6%            6.1%           28.5%             3.9%            -4.8%




54
               Chemicals and Chemical Products            24        16.3%             4.7%           21.6%             2.7%            45.4%
                       Rubber and Plastics                25        26.4%             2.5%           8.8%              3.6%            41.4%
             Other Non-Metallic Mineral Products          26        20.2%             3.9%           9.5%              3.4%            37.0%
               Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal         27t28      14.2%             2.5%           4.4%              3.6%            24.9%
                         Machinery, Nec                   29        25.4%             4.4%           10.5%             4.0%            44.3%
               Electrical and Optical Equipment          30t33      63.8%             7.3%           12.4%             4.1%            87.9%
                      Transport Equipment                34t35      30.8%             3.7%           9.9%              3.6%            48.0%
                Manufacturing Nec; Recycling             36t37      12.5%             2.8%           5.4%              4.8%            25.6%
               Electricity, Gas and Water Supply         40t41      10.6%             4.7%           18.9%             1.4%            35.4%
                           Construction                   45         -4.8%            1.7%           2.8%              2.5%            2.3%
                  Wholesale and Retail Trade             50t52      16.0%             6.0%           7.4%              2.5%            31.8%
                     Hotels and Restaurants               55        -10.5%            2.3%           3.4%              2.2%            -2.4%
                     Transport and Storage               60t63        3.2%            4.9%           6.8%              2.3%            17.2%
                 Post and Telecommunications              64        36.0%            22.8%           11.9%             2.9%            73.5%
                    Financial Intermediation             65t67      17.4%            16.5%           0.2%              3.9%            38.0%
          Real Estate, Renting and Business Activities   70t74      -10.9%            4.9%           -2.6%             2.2%            -6.7%
                                                         Table 5: Sector-level TFP-ICT Regressions

     This table displays estimation results of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and Instrumental Variable (IV) regressions of sector-level total factor pro-
     ductivity growth from the EU KLEMS dataset on ICT Contribution, Non-ICT Contribution and interaction terms. In all regressions, the left-side
     variable is log TFP growth, averaged over a 11-year period. In columns 1-3, TFP growth is computed over the period 1996–2006; in columns 4-5,
     it is computed over the 1985-1995 period. Each observation represents a country-sector. Country Meritocracy varies at the country level. ΔlogTFP,
     ICT Contribution and Non-ICT Contribution vary at the country/sector level.

                                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
                                                                ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₈₅₋₉₅ ΔlogTFP₈₅₋₉₅
                                                                    OLS           OLS           IV            OLS           OLS
               ICT Contribution                                   -5.247**                       -5.411***          0.414           -7.277
                                                                   (2.151)                        (1.285)          (6.171)         (4.943)

               ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy             1.094**                         0.977***          0.030           1.167
                                                                  (0.510)                          (0.325)         (1.201)         (1.044)




55
               Non-ICT Contribution                                                 0.525
                                                                                   (2.171)

               Non-ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy                           -0.077
                                                                                   (0.444)
               R²                                                   0.350           0.339            0.344          0.153           0.162
               Kleibergen-Paap underid. test P-value                                                 0.000
               Sargan-Hansen overid. test P-value                                                    0.406
               Wu-Hausman exogeneity test P-value                                                    0.351
               Observations                                          414             414             414             345             345
               Lagged ICT Contribution ('85-'95)
               Country Fixed Effects
               Sector Fixed Effects
               Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                    * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                    Table 6: Sector-level TFP-ICT Regressions with additional country-level covariates


     This table displays estimation results of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of sector-level total factor productivity growth from the EU
     KLEMS dataset on ICT Contribution and interaction terms. In all regressions, the left-side variable is log TFP growth, averaged over the 1996–2006
     period. Each observation represents a country-sector. Country Meritocracy, ICT Infrastructure, Shadow Economy and Management Schools vary at
     the country level. ΔlogTFP and ICT Contribution vary at the country/sector level.


                                                                (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
                                                            ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆    ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                OLS              OLS             OLS              OLS              OLS
              ICT Contribution                                -5.247**           -5.461          0.552           -3.278*          -10.540
                                                               (2.151)          (3.359)         (1.016)          (1.676)          (6.545)

              ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy           1.094**                                                           2.272**




56
                                                               (0.510)                                                           (0.910)

              ICT Contribution × ICT Infrastructure                              0.876                                             -0.424
                                                                                (0.599)                                           (0.818)

              ICT Contribution × Shadow Economy                                                  -4.480                           12.270
                                                                                                (4.699)                           (8.774)

              ICT Contribution × Management Schools                                                              0.612*            0.004
                                                                                                                 (0.364)          (0.405)

              R²                                                0.350            0.345           0.340            0.344            0.355
              Observations                                       414              414             414              414              414

              Country Fixed Effects
              Sector Fixed Effects

              Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                  * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                                         Table 7: Sector-level TFP-China regressions


     This table displays estimation results of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and Instrumental Variable (IV) regressions of sector-level total factor produc-
     tivity growth from the EU KLEMS data set on China Exposure, US Layoff Rate and interaction terms. In all regressions, the left-side variable is log
     TFP growth, averaged over a the 1996–2006 period. Each observation represents a country-sector. Employment Laws, and Employment Protection
     vary at the country level. US Layoff Rate varies at the sector level. ΔlogTFP and China Exposure vary at the country/sector level.


                                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
                                                                  ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                      OLS              OLS              OLS              IV               OLS
           US Layoff Rate × Employment Laws                                                                                               -0.082
                                                                                                                                         (0.375)

           China Exposure                                             0.040            0.034            -0.059           0.243




57
                                                                     (0.060)          (0.183)          (0.271)          (0.480)

           China Exposure × Employment Laws                                            0.012                             1.086
                                                                                      (0.325)                           (1.193)

           China Exposure × Employment Protection                                                       0.047
                                                                                                       (0.120)
           R²                                                         0.337            0.337            0.337            0.204            0.409
           Kleibergen-Paap underid. test P-value                                                                         0.002
           Wu-Hausman exogeneity test P-value                                                                            0.044
           Observations                                                414              414              414              414              360

           Country Fixed Effects
           Sector Fixed Effects

           Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                            * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                                    Table 8: Sector-level TFP-Trade Openness regressions


     This table displays estimation results of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of sector-level total factor productivity growth from the EU KLEMS
     dataset on Trade Openness and interaction terms. In all regressions, the left-side variable is log TFP growth, averaged over the 1996–2006 period.
     Each observation represents a country-sector. Employment Laws and Employment Protection vary at the country level. ΔlogTFP, Trade Openness
     and ICT Contribution vary at the country/sector level.


                                                                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                                                     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆       ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆         ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                         OLS                OLS               OLS                 OLS
                ICT Contribution                                                                             -5.841***          -5.785***
                                                                                                              (1.993)            (1.920)

                ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy                                                        1.219**            1.206**




58
                                                                                                              (0.500)            (0.486)

                Trade Openness                                           -0.002           0.018**             0.020**             0.017
                                                                        (0.006)           (0.008)             (0.008)            (0.020)

                Trade Openness × Employment Protection                                                                            -0.009
                                                                                                                                 (0.011)

                Trade Openness × Employment Laws                                           -0.039*           -0.041**
                                                                                           (0.020)            (0.021)

                R²                                                       0.338              0.359              0.376              0.361
                Observations                                              414                414                414                414

                Country Fixed Effects
                Sector Fixed Effects
                Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                    * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                                     Table 9: TFP-government effectiveness regressions


     This table displays estimation results of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of sector-level total factor productivity growth from the EU KLEMS
     dataset on ICT Contribution and interaction terms. In all regressions, the left-side variable is log TFP growth, averaged over 1995–2006 period. Each
     observation represents a country-sector. Country Meritocracy, ΔRule of Law, ΔControl of Corruption, Control of Corruption vary at the country level.
     ΔlogTFP and Trade Openness vary at the country/sector level.

                                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                                 ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                     OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS
                ICT Contribution                                                                                                  -4.954**
                                                                                                                                   (2.245)

                ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy                                                                            1.045**
                                                                                                                                  (0.525)




59
                Govt Dependence × ΔRule of Law                       1.512                                                         1.305
                                                                    (1.939)                                                       (2.845)

                Govt Dependence × ΔControl of Corruption                             2.145                                         1.018
                                                                                    (2.597)                                       (2.794)

                Govt Dependence × Govt Inefficiency                                                 0.001                          0.002
                                                                                                   (0.001)                        (0.001)

                Govt Dependence × Judicial Inefficiency                                                            -0.000         -0.000
                                                                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)

                R²                                                   0.337          0.337           0.338          0.340           0.356
                Observations                                          414            414             414            414             414
                Country Fixed Effects
                Sector Fixed Effects
                Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                   * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                 Table 10: Firm-level productivity regressions

This table displays estimation results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of firm-level total factor
productivity growth computed using Amadeus data in the EFIGE dataset. In all regressions, the left-side vari-
able is log TFP growth averaged over 2001–2007. Every data point is a firm. The variable ICT Contribution,
which comes from the EU KLEMS dataset, varies at the country/sector level. The explanatory variable Firm
Meritocracy ranges from 0 to 5, and is constructed using firm-level information from the EFIGE survey. The
variable CEO Age is categorical: a unit increment represents a 10-year increase in the age of the firm’s CEO.
The variables Employees with Degree and Temporary Employees are expressed as a percentage of the firm’s
labor force and are part of the EFIGE survey response data. Labor Frictions is a dummy that varies at the
firm level. Observations are weighted to ensure that the regression sample is representative.


                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                  ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇    ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇
                                                      OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS

Firm Meritocracy                                      -0.001         -0.001         -0.002         -0.002
                                                     (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)

Firm Meritocracy × ICT Contribution                 2.181***       2.123***       2.355***       2.413***
                                                     (0.695)        (0.687)        (0.724)        (0.730)

Employees with degree                                                              0.055**        0.057**
                                                                                   (0.023)        (0.023)

Employees with degree × ICT Contribution                                            -8.445         -8.522
                                                                                   (8.163)        (8.175)

CEO Age                                                                                           0.004**
                                                                                                  (0.002)

CEO Age × ICT Contribution                                                                         -1.204
                                                                                                  (0.837)

Temporary employees                                                                                -0.001
                                                                                                  (0.008)

Temporary employees × ICT Contribution                                                             -0.298
                                                                                                  (2.854)
Labor Frictions                                                      0.002
                                                                    (0.004)

R²                                                    0.034         0.038           0.035          0.036
Observations                                          9,486         7,309           9,482          9,437
Country × Sector Fixed Effects
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                            * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                      60
                                Table 11: Firm-level ICT Usage regressions


This table displays estimation results of ordered probit regressions of firm-level ICT Usage, from the EFIGE
survey (2009). In all regressions, the left-side variable is a firm-level measure of ICT usage, which ranges
from 0 to 3 and which we compute using information from the EFIGE survey. The variable ICT Contribution,
which comes from the EU KLEMS dataset, varies at the country/sector level. The explanatory variable Firm
Meritocracy ranges from 0 to 5, and is constructed using firm-level information from the EFIGE survey. The
variable CEO Age is categorical: a unit increment represents a 10-year increase in the age of the firm’s CEO.
The variables Employees with Degree and Temporary Employees are expressed as percentage of the firm’s
labor force and are part of the EFIGE survey response data. Observations are weighted to ensure that the
regression sample is representative.




                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)
                                                          ICT Usage        ICT Usage        ICT Usage
                                                           O.Probit         O.Probit         O.Probit
  Firm Meritocracy                                        0.127***         0.113***         0.112***
                                                           (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.013)

  Firm Meritocracy × ICT Contribution                     13.078**         12.358**         12.170**
                                                           (5.177)          (5.244)          (5.276)

  Employees with degree                                                    0.770***         0.811***
                                                                            (0.119)          (0.121)

  Employees with degree × ICT Contribution                                  -29.676          -31.024
                                                                            (33.180)         (33.318)

  CEO Age                                                                                     0.011
                                                                                             (0.014)

  CEO Age × ICT Contribution                                                                 -5.174
                                                                                             (6.694)

  Temporary employees                                                                        -0.047
                                                                                             (0.068)

  Temporary employees × ICT Contribution                                                     47.695*
                                                                                             (24.359)

  Observations                                              14,204           14,196           14,058
  Country × Sector Fixed Effects
  Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                          * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                      I
                                 Table 12: Meritocracy and Misallocation


In this table, we regress firm-level variables from the EFIGE survey on our firm-level metric of meritocratic
management and its interaction with a dummy for Italian firms. Column (1)-(3) present Probit estimates of
a regression in which the dependent variables are firm-level dummies representing the firms’ answers to the
question “Indicate the main factors preventing the growth of your firm” from the EFIGE survey (firms may
indicate more than one choice). Column (4) presents OLS estimates of a regression in which the dependent
variable is the logarithm of the number of employees of the company. The explanatory variable Firm Meri-
tocracy ranges from 0 to 5, and is constructed using firm-level information from the EFIGE survey. “Italy” is
the dummy variable identifying Italian firms. Observations are weighted to ensure that the regression sample
is representative.


                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                                                Financial        Labor        Bureaucratic      log
                                               constraints      Frictions      Frictions      Employees
                                                 Probit          Probit          Probit           OLS
Italy                                           -0.135           0.364           0.242          0.114*
                                                (0.213)         (0.450)         (0.399)         (0.049)

Firm Meritocracy                               -0.059**        -0.090**        -0.075***       0.288***
                                                (0.027)         (0.042)          (0.026)        (0.020)

Firm Meritocracy × Italy                        0.063**          0.059         0.075***        -0.114***
                                                (0.028)         (0.043)         (0.028)          (0.020)
R²                                                                                               0.161
Sector Fixed Effects
Standard errors clustering variable             Country         Country         Country         Country
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                        * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                     II
                             Diagnosing the Italian Disease

                          Appendices (for online publication)



A    Derivation of the variable China Exposure

In this appendix we derive analytically our variable China Exposure . We start from the following identity,
which breaks down the demand of market m for product s into two components: the demand share which is
filled by China and the demand share which is filled by every other country:


                                         Dsmt = YChina,smt + Y(China),smt                                             (44)


where
                                                                      X
                                            Y(China),smt :=                     Ycsmt                                 (45)
                                                                     c6=China

then, by rearranging equation (44) with Y(China),smt on the left hand side, taking logs and differentiating both
sides with respect to time, we can break down the log growth of China’s competitors’ share in market m, into
two effects. The first captures the growth of the destination market, while the second captures the (negative)
effect of competition from China on the market share of its competitors:
                                                                                
             d log Y(China),smt            Dsmt             d log Dsmt                YChina,smt d log YChina,smt
                                =                                                                                     (46)
                     dt                 Y(China),smt             dt                  Y(China),smt       dt
                                    |                {z                  }       |                {z              }
                                         Growth of destination market                    Competition from China


    Our measure the effect of the China shock, measured at the level of the destination country m, is the
discrete-time approximation of the latter component. Using again equation (44), it can be re-written as:
                                                    t                           |
                                                         Y
                          China Shockmst :=             P China,mst                 ·   log YChina,smt                (47)
                                                         c6=China Ycsmt


Aggregating across countries, we obtain our measure of the exposure of country c sector s to the China shock:

                                                      Xs       Y
                                                                                {
                         China Exposurecst =                  P csmt                 · China Shocksmt                 (48)
                                                        m      m Ycsmt




                                                               III
B    Robustness to change in sample/specification

This appendix contains robustness tests to sector-level regressions of Tables 6-7. We show that our results
from Section 3 are robust to exclusion of emerging countries and Italy, and to using alternative sets of country-
level variables. Tables 13 and 14 replicate the analysis of Tables 5 and 7, by excluding Italy. Tables 15 and 16
replicate the analysis of Tables 5 and 7, by excluding three emerging European countries for which data is not
available in the pre-treatment period 1985-1995 (Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovenia). Table 17 replicates
the analysis of Table 6, using an alternative set of country-level variables.




                                                       IV
                                                          Table 13: Sector-level TFP-ICT Regressions

    This table replicates the analysis of Table 5, excluding Italy.

                                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
                                                                  ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₈₅₋₉₅ ΔlogTFP₈₅₋₉₅
                                                                      OLS           OLS           IV            OLS           OLS
              ICT Contribution                                        -5.447***                  -6.100***        0.285      -7.862
                                                                       (1.956)                    (1.503)        (6.578)    (6.508)

              ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy                  1.161***                   1.144***         0.050      1.269
                                                                       (0.431)                    (0.367)        (1.288)    (1.225)

              Non-ICT Contribution                                                  0.940
                                                                                   (1.226)




V
              Non-ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy                            -0.161
                                                                                   (0.264)
              R²                                                       0.338        0.326          0.331          0.152      0.163
              Kleibergen-Paap underid. test P-value                                                0.000
              Sargan-Hansen overid. test P-value                                                   0.061
              Wu-Hausman exogeneity test P-value                                                   0.131
              Observations                                              391          391               391         322        322


              Country Fixed Effects
              Sector Fixed Effects
              Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                     * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                                          Table 14: Sector-level TFP-China regressions


     This table replicates the analysis of Table 7, excluding Italy.


                                                                           (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                                       ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                           OLS            OLS            OLS            IV             OLS
           US Layoff Rate × Employment Laws                                                                                           -0.006
                                                                                                                                     (0.379)

           China Exposure                                                 0.042          0.017            -0.086       0.203
                                                                         (0.061)        (0.185)          (0.279)      (0.478)




VI
           China Exposure × Employment Laws                                              0.049                         1.359
                                                                                        (0.328)                       (1.230)

           China Exposure × Employment Protection                                                         0.061
                                                                                                         (0.123)
           R²                                                             0.323          0.323           0.324         0.143          0.414
           Kleibergen-Paap underid. test P-value                                                                       0.003
           Wu-Hausman exogeneity test P-value                                                                          0.026
           Observations                                                    391            391             391           391            340
           Country Fixed Effects
           Sector Fixed Effects

           Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                             * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                                         Table 15: Sector-level TFP-ICT Regressions


      This table replicates the analysis of Table 5, excluding Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovenia.


                                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
                                                                 ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₉₆₋₀₆ ΔlogTFP ₈₅₋₉₅ ΔlogTFP₈₅₋₉₅
                                                                     OLS           OLS           IV            OLS           OLS
                ICT Contribution                                   -6.346**                         -10.902        0.414     -7.277
                                                                    (3.038)                        (10.773)       (6.049)   (5.749)

                ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy             1.304**                              2.028      0.030     1.167
                                                                   (0.592)                             (2.065)    (1.178)   (1.080)

                Non-ICT Contribution                                              -5.420***




VII
                                                                                   (1.608)

                Non-ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy                         1.041***
                                                                                    (0.324)
                R²                                                  0.402           0.417              0.389       0.153    0.162
                Kleibergen-Paap underid. test P-value                                                  0.038
                Sargan-Hansen overid. test P-value                                                     0.598
                Wu-Hausman exogeneity test P-value                                                     0.461
                Observations                                          345             345               345         345      345


                Country Fixed Effects
                Sector Fixed Effects
                Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                    * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                                         Table 16: Sector-level TFP-China regressions


       This table replicates the analysis of Table 7, excluding Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovenia.


                                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                                   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆    ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                       OLS             OLS              OLS            IV             OLS
             US Layoff Rate × Employment Laws                                                                                        -0.094
                                                                                                                                    (0.399)

             China Exposure                                            0.064           0.055             0.187        0.304
                                                                      (0.052)         (0.171)           (0.230)      (0.488)




VIII
             China Exposure × Employment Laws                                          0.017                          0.442
                                                                                      (0.317)                        (1.176)
             China Exposure × Employment Protection                                                     -0.058
                                                                                                        (0.106)
             R²                                                        0.393           0.393            0.394         0.304          0.434
             Kleibergen-Paap underid. test P-value                                                                    0.002
             Wu-Hausman exogeneity test P-value                                                                       0.218
             Observations                                               345             345              345           345            300
             Country Fixed Effects
             Sector Fixed Effects

             Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                          * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
                                    Table 17: Sector-level TFP-ICT Regressions with additional country-level covariates


     This table replicates the analysis of Table 6 using an alternative set of country-level variables. Human Capital is compiled by Barro and Lee and
     sourced via the Penn World Tables (v9.0). Firm Size is the average size of firms obtained from the OECD SBS database, obtained by dividing the total
     number of employees by the total number of establishments. GMAT Received is the number of GMAT score reports received by business schools in
     the relevant country, per thousands of heads of population.


                                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
                                                             ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆     ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆    ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                 OLS              OLS              OLS              OLS             OLS
               ICT Contribution                                -5.247**           3.196            -1.026           -0.405          0.355
                                                                (2.151)          (3.880)          (0.774)          (0.595)         (3.933)

               ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy          1.094**                                                              1.268




IX
                                                               (0.510)                                                             (0.826)

               ICT Contribution × Human Capital                                   -1.062                                            -1.912
                                                                                 (1.096)                                           (1.468)

               ICT Contribution × Firm Size                                                       0.050*                            -0.000
                                                                                                  (0.028)                          (0.059)

               ICT Contribution × GMAT Received                                                                     0.449           0.049
                                                                                                                   (0.505)         (0.747)

               R²                                                0.350            0.340            0.347           0.339            0.359
               Observations                                       414              414              391             414              391

               Country Fixed Effects
               Sector Fixed Effects

               Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                                  * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01
C    Validation of the Meritocracy Indicators

Our meritocratic management metrics Country Meritocracy and Firm Meritocracy have substantial concep-
tual overlap with the People Management Score from the widely used-World Management Survey (Bloom
and Van Reenen, 2007), henceforth WMS. Unfortunately, we cannot use that dataset in our analysis because
it has too few observations overlapping with our productivity data. However, we have enough to carry out a
basic validation of our meritocracy measures.
    There are two graphs attached to this appendix: the first plots our country-level measure of meritocratic
management against country averages of the WMS people management score, for a total of 33 observations.
For the second graph, we computed country/2-digit sector/size class averages of Firm Meritocracy and of
People Management Score, merged the two series at the cluster level and plotted them against each other, for
a total of 60 observations. Because the public release of the WMS data only include firms with more than
50 employees, only two of the four size classes in EFIGE are represented in this graph. Also, we excluded
clusters on which the Firm Meritocracy averages were based on fewer than 15 observations. Both graphs
include regression lines and R2 statistics.
    As can be seen from the figures, both Country Meritocracy and Firm Meritocracy strongly predict People
Management Score at their respective averaging levels. For both regressions the R2 is about 50%, suggesting
that our meritocracy scores are reliable proxies of the WMS measure.
    In order to merge Firm Meritocracy and People Management Score data, we created a 2-digit correspon-
dence between NACE rev.2 and US SIC by tabulating the joint distribution of firms across the two industry
definitions using the ORBIS pivot table tool.




                                                     X
               3.25
                                                                                                                      USA

                              3
  People Management Score (WMS)


                                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                                                JPN            SGP
                                                                                POL                                   GBR            SWE
                    2.75




                                                                    MEX
                                                  ITA     TUR                          FRA                     IRL AUS
                                                                                         CHN
                                                                          NGA
                                                                         KEN            CHL                                 NZL
                                             NIC
                                              GRC         PRT             VNM     IND
           2.5




                                                         ARG      ESP            BRA
                                                                    COL
                                                              TZA  ZMB
                                                                  GHA
                                                                                                   R² = .487
2.25




                                       MOZ


                                                    ETH
               2




                                  3                     3.5               4              4.5                     5                   5.5
                                                                      Country Meritocracy (WEF)



                                                                                                                DEU
               3.2




                                                                                                                  DEU

                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                      ITA
 People Management Score (WMS)




                                                  R² = .508                                        DEU
                            3




                                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                  DEU               FRA
                                                                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                                                               ITA
                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                            DEU      GBR   DEU              FRA
                  2.8




                                                                                    DEU  GBR
                                                                                        GBR
                                                                        FRA GBR                        DEU
                                                                                                         FRA DEU
                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                    FRA
                                                                           ITADEU DEU                             DEU
                                                                                GBR
                                                                               FRA
                                                                                 FRA
                                                    ITA
                                      ITA             ITA                       FRA
                                                                    ITA
         2.6




                                                                          GBR           ESP
                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                GBR
                                                                         ESP                 ESP      ESP
                                                                                       DEU
                                             FRA                                 FRA
                                                                                FRA                   ESP
2.4




                                                              ITA
                                  ITA                   ITA
                                            ESP                 ESPESP
                                                    FRA                                  FRA
               2.2




                                  1                     1.5             2              2.5              3                            3.5
                                                         Firm Meritocracy (by country of location, EFIGE)




                                                                                XI
D     Robustness to production function mismeasurement

A key step in the EU KLEMS growth accounting is that output-input elasticities are estimated using sector-
level input compensation shares. This approach cannot accommodate adjustment costs or deviation from
perfect competition.
    Control function approaches to production function estimation tools (see for example Olley and Pakes,
1996; Levinsohn and Petrin, 2003; Wooldridge, 2009), cannot be convincingly implemented in our setting:
this is the case for both our sector-level data (these methods require firm-level data) as well as our firm-level
data (we do not observe the input of ICT capital at the firm level, but only at the sector-level).
    As a consequence, for our sector-level analysis, we are forced to rely on EU KLEMS productivity esti-
mates. If the KLEMS capital-output elasticity is biased, the EU KLEMS estimates of TFP growth are going
to be biased as well. In this Appendix, we argue that, if such mismeasurement exists, it does not undermine
our econometric results: in our specific setting, if anything, mismeasurement of the output/capital elasticity
seems to attenuate the estimated effect of ICT on productivity growth.
    To see why this is the case, it is important to first clarify two points. First, the EU KLEMS TFP estimates
are not based on a panel regression of output on inputs, but on growth accounting. In this framework, the key
unobservable needed to estimate TFP, that is, the output/capital elasticity, is not estimated econometrically,
but backed out from the aggregate labor compensation share. Second, we are trying to measure the effect
of ICT and meritocracy on the estimated, not the actual total factor productivity. Our objective is not to
use sector or firm-level data to produce new measures of TFP. Our data does not allow us to. Rather, our
objective is to explain why the TFP growth of Italy, measured using the KLEMS methodology, diverged
from that of other countries around the mid-90s, regardless of whether it is biased or not. In this Sub-section,
we investigate how unobserved bias in the KLEMS TFP might affect our estimates.
    Growth accounting is based on the assumption of perfectly competitive markets, which allows to obtain
the output-capital elasticity as one minus the labor share of value added. If firms charge a markup, then the
labor share and the capital share sum to less than the total revenues; as a consequence, the KLEMS estimate
of the output/capital elasticity is likely to be upward biased. To see how this bias might affect the regression
specified in equation (34), let us suppose, for the sake of tractability, that the capital share over-estimates the
actual output/capital elasticity by a fixed δ percent - that is:
                                       ✓                   ◆
                                               Wcst Lcst                  @fcst
                                           1                   = (1 + )                                       (49)
                                               Pcst Ycst                  @kcst




                                                           XII
this implies that the true contribution ICT capital is also over-estimated, in EU KLEMS, by the same factor:


                                       \                                   @fcst  I
                                  ICT Contribution cst = (1 + )              I
                                                                                 kcst                     (50)
                                                                           @kcst

We use the hat ^ notation to indicate that the EU KLEMS estimates are now potentially biased. Let us
re-derive the regression specification from equation (34) accordingly:
                                             ✓               ◆          ✓           ◆
                       d cst :=                   Wcst Lcst               Wcst Lcst
                   log TFP          ycst       1                  kcst                 `cst
                                                   Pcst Ycst              Pcst Ycst
                                                                    
                                                    @fcst                        @fcst
                              =     ycst     (1 + )          kcst     1 (1 + )            `cst
                                                    @kcst                        @kcst

                              =     acst +
                                                 1              \
                                                         · ICT Contribution cst                           (51)
                                             1+
                                    +
                                          2        \
                                            · ICT Contributioncst · Country Meritocracyc
                                        1+ ✓                ◆
                                                  Wcst Lcst
                                               1                (kcst `cst )
                                        1+        Pcst Ycst

In what follows, it is of crucial importance for the reader to understand that it is not the objective of our
econometric exercise to consistently estimate the β parameters. Instead, we want to quantify how much
of the variation in the estimated TFP can be accounted for by the interaction of meritocracy and the esti-
mated contribution of ICT. In other words, when mismeasurement is present, our objective is to consistently
estimate β / (1+δ), not β. When no mismeasurement is present, the two are the same.
    Having made this key distinction, notice that measurement bias in the output/capital elasticity introduces,
in the regression equation, an additional error term:
                                                 ✓                     ◆
                                                           Wcst Lcst
                              KL Errorcst =          1                      (kcst   `cst )                (52)
                                                           Pcst Ycst

this error term includes the log growth of the capital / labor ratio, and depends positively on the growth
of ICT capital. Because this term appears with a minus sign in the regression and is incorporated in the
error term, it biases the econometric estimate of β / (1+δ) downwards. This implies that, provided that δ is
non-negative, our empirical estimates of the reaction coefficient β / (1+δ) are, in the worst-case scenario,
conservative when the capital/output ratio is mismeasured.
    Equation (51) suggests a way to verify econometrically that our estimates from Table 3 are robust to




                                                            XIII
mismeasurement of the output/labor elasticity. First, consider the standard identification assumption of OLS:
                     0       2                                                         3        1
                                 Country Meritocracyc · ICT Contributioncs
                   E @ "cs 4                                                           5   c , &s A   =0     (53)
                                               ICT Contributioncs

where ε is the residual term of regression 34. Suppose now that there is no mismeasurement in the out-
put/capital elasticity and that the exogenous component of TFP growth is orthogonal to the capital/labor
ratio: then, ε is equal to ∆a and orthogonal to KL Error. This implication can be tested by re-estimating
regression equation (34) in GMM using the following expanded set of moment conditions
                     0       2                                                         3        1
                                 Country Meritocracyc · ICT Contributioncs
                     B 6                                                               7        C
                     B 6                                                               7        C
                   E B "cs 6                   ICT Contributioncs                      7   c sC = 0
                                                                                            , &              (54)
                     @ 4                                                               5        A
                                                          KL Errorcs

and performing a Hansen J test: if there is mismeasurement, as described in equation (51), the J test will
tend to reject, and the GMM coefficient estimates will be closer to the true coefficient than OLS. Hence,
unless we find that 1) the GMM coefficient for the interaction term is lower than the OLS one and 2) the J
test null hypothesis is rejected, our OLS estimates should be, at worst, conservative.
   Using the the very same intuition, we can also investigate the robustness of our estimates to violations of
the constant returns to scale (CRS) assumption, which underpins the KLEMS growth accounting framework.
Suppose, for example, that
                                             @fcst   @fcst
                                                   +       = (1 + ) 6= 1                                     (55)
                                             @kcst   @`cst

then we have the following amended regression specification:
                                                  ✓                     ◆           ✓           ◆
                       d cst :=                             Wcst Lcst                 Wcst Lcst
                   log TFP            ycst            1                      kcst                  `cst
                                                              Pcst Ycst               Pcst Ycst
                                                                                      
                                                   1          @fcst               1          @fcst
                                 =   ycst                   ·           kcst         · 1              `cst
                                                  1+          @kcst            1+            @kcst
                                                      1
                                 =   acst +                        \
                                                            · ICT Contributioncst                            (56)
                                                  1+
                                              2
                                     +                       \
                                                      · ICT Contribution cst · Country Meritocracyc
                                         1+
                                     +                · KL Contributioncst
                                         1+




                                                               XIV
where                                      ✓                   ◆              ✓               ◆
                                                   Wcst Lcst                      Wcst Lcst
                   KL Contributioncst =        1                     kcst +                        `cst       (57)
                                                   Pcst Ycst                      Pcst Ycst

Again, by estimating the regression equation with an added instrument
                     0      2                                                       3         1
                                Country Meritocracyc · ICT Contributioncs
                    B 6                                                             7         C
                    B 6                                                             7         C
                  E B "cs 6                ICT Contributioncs                       7   c , &s C=0            (58)
                    @ 4                                                             5         A
                                           KL Contributioncs

and performing a J test, we can obtain a valuable diagnostic of the robustness of our coefficient estimates
to violations of the CRS assumption. We conduct both estimations in Table 18. In both cases, the GMM
estimate of the interaction coefficient of Country Meritocracy and ICT Contribution is slightly higher than
the OLS (1.312 and 1.123, respectively) and the Sargan statistic has a p-value above 10. We take this result
as a reassurance that our econometric results are not inflated by mis-measurement of the production function
parameters.




                                          Table 18: GMM Estimates
                                                                       (1)                        (2)
                                                                   ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆               ΔlogTFP₉₆₋₀₆
                                                                      GMM                        GMM

         ICT Contribution                                           -6.452***                     -5.711***
                                                                      (2.377)                       (1.811)

         ICT Contribution × Country Meritocracy                      1.312**                       1.123**
                                                                     (0.520)                       (0.461)
         Hansen overid. J test P-value                                0.232                         0.516
         Observations                                                  414                           414
         Additional instrument                                      KL Error              KL Contribution
         Country Fixed Effects
         Sector Fixed Effects
         Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                       * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                      XV
E    Robustness to imperfect competition

In this appendix, we explore the robustness of our firm level TFP regressions. In particular, we want to
investigate the importance of the assumption of perfect competition in the computation of TFP growth. This
assumption underpins the computation of our baseline estimates of firm TFP, which use, as the measure of
output volume, firm-level value added (EBITDA+labor costs), deflated using sector level indices from EU
KLEMS.
    In Tables (19)-(20) we repeat the estimation of Table (10) by recomputing the dependent variable, the
growth of firm-level total factor productivity, according to equation (43). To compute this alternative TFP
measure, we need to assume a value for the elasticity of substitution parameter . We show regression results
for conservative values   = 5 and    = 3. For       = 1, TFP growth converges to our baseline estimate (value
added deflated using sector-level price indices).
    In Tables (21)-(22) we repeat out firm-level TFP regressions by again recomputing the dependent variable
in a way similar to that of (43), but using gross output, instead of value added, as the output concept.




                                                       XVI
                                 Table 19: Firm-level productivity regressions

This table replicates the analysis of Table 10, using the alternative firm-level value added-based TFP growth
computed according to equation (43), using demand elasticity of substitution = 5.


                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                  ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇    ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇
                                                      OLS           OLS             OLS            OLS

Firm Meritocracy                                      0.001          0.001          -0.000         -0.001
                                                     (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)

Firm Meritocracy × ICT Contribution                  2.058**       2.025**        2.280***       2.400***
                                                     (0.830)       (0.817)         (0.873)        (0.883)

Employees with degree                                                             0.074***       0.076***
                                                                                   (0.028)        (0.028)

Employees with degree × ICT Contribution                                           -11.178        -11.386
                                                                                  (10.279)       (10.284)

CEO Age                                                                                            0.002
                                                                                                  (0.002)

CEO Age × ICT Contribution                                                                         -1.280
                                                                                                  (0.996)

Temporary employees                                                                                -0.000
                                                                                                  (0.010)

Temporary employees × ICT Contribution                                                             -2.551
                                                                                                  (3.463)
Labor Frictions                                                      0.001
                                                                    (0.004)

R²                                                    0.033         0.037           0.034          0.035
Observations                                          9,833         7,656           9,829          9,779
Country × Sector Fixed Effects
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                            * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                    XVII
                                 Table 20: Firm-level productivity regressions


This table replicates the analysis of Table 10, using the alternative firm-level value added-based TFP growth
computed according to equation (43), using demand elasticity of substitution = 3.



                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                  ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇    ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇
                                                      OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS

Firm Meritocracy                                      0.003          0.002          0.001          0.001
                                                     (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)

Firm Meritocracy × ICT Contribution                  2.162**       2.196**         2.376**        2.514**
                                                     (0.991)       (0.972)         (1.048)        (1.061)

Employees with degree                                                             0.098***       0.102***
                                                                                   (0.034)        (0.034)

Employees with degree × ICT Contribution                                            -12.771        -13.216
                                                                                   (12.624)       (12.624)

CEO Age                                                                                            -0.000
                                                                                                  (0.003)

CEO Age × ICT Contribution                                                                         -1.232
                                                                                                  (1.186)

Temporary employees                                                                                -0.001
                                                                                                  (0.012)

Temporary employees × ICT Contribution                                                             -3.517
                                                                                                  (4.062)
Labor Frictions                                                      -0.001
                                                                    (0.005)

R²                                                    0.030         0.034           0.032          0.033
Observations                                          9,833         7,656           9,829          9,779
Country × Sector Fixed Effects
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                            * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                    XVIII
                                 Table 21: Firm-level productivity regressions


This table replicates the analysis of Table 10, using an alternative gross output-based measure of TFP growth
at the firm level. It is computed according to the following formula
                              ✓        XX
                                                           ◆          ✓           ◆       ✓ X         ◆
                                     Pcst  cst + Wcst Lcst              Wcst Lcst           Pcst Xcst
     log TFPit =         ŷit   1                               kit                   `it                xit
                                           Pcst Ycst                    Pcst Ycst           Pcst Ycst

where Y is not value added but gross output, estimated at the firm level using demand elasticity of substitution
 = 5. P X and X are intermediate input prices and volume, respectively.



                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇    ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇
                                                       OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS

Firm Meritocracy                                      0.002           0.001          0.001           0.001
                                                     (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)

Firm Meritocracy × ICT Contribution                  0.945**        1.001**         0.982**        1.024**
                                                     (0.451)        (0.495)         (0.439)        (0.446)

Employees with degree                                                              0.044***        0.046***
                                                                                    (0.015)         (0.015)

Employees with degree × ICT Contribution                                             -3.970          -4.281
                                                                                    (3.741)         (3.746)

CEO Age                                                                                             -0.002*
                                                                                                    (0.001)

CEO Age × ICT Contribution                                                                           -0.105
                                                                                                    (0.494)

Temporary employees                                                                                  -0.002
                                                                                                    (0.005)

Temporary employees × ICT Contribution                                                              -1.225
                                                                                                    (1.771)
Labor Frictions                                                       0.000
                                                                     (0.002)

R²                                                    0.027           0.033          0.029           0.031
Observations                                          9,498           7,319          9,494           9,448
Country × Sector Fixed Effects
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                             * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                     XIX
                                 Table 22: Firm-level productivity regressions


This table replicates the analysis of Table 10, using an alternative gross output-based measure of TFP growth
at the firm level. It is computed according to the following formula
                              ✓        XX
                                                           ◆          ✓           ◆       ✓ X         ◆
                                     Pcst  cst + Wcst Lcst              Wcst Lcst           Pcst Xcst
     log TFPit =         ŷit   1                               kit                   `it                xit
                                           Pcst Ycst                    Pcst Ycst           Pcst Ycst

where Y is not value added but gross output, estimated at the firm level using demand elasticity of substitution
 = 3. P X and X are intermediate input prices and volume, respectively.



                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇    ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇
                                                       OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS

Firm Meritocracy                                     0.004**          0.002          0.003           0.002
                                                     (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)

Firm Meritocracy × ICT Contribution                   1.013          1.125*         1.031*          1.093*
                                                     (0.620)         (0.670)        (0.606)         (0.615)

Employees with degree                                                              0.059***        0.063***
                                                                                    (0.021)         (0.021)

Employees with degree × ICT Contribution                                             -4.552          -5.114
                                                                                    (5.244)         (5.247)

CEO Age                                                                                            -0.005***
                                                                                                    (0.002)

CEO Age × ICT Contribution                                                                           -0.110
                                                                                                    (0.676)

Temporary employees                                                                                  -0.004
                                                                                                    (0.007)

Temporary employees × ICT Contribution                                                              -2.383
                                                                                                    (2.409)
Labor Frictions                                                       -0.001
                                                                     (0.003)

R²                                                    0.028           0.034          0.030           0.034
Observations                                          9,498           7,319          9,494           9,448
Country × Sector Fixed Effects
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                             * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                      XX
F Sample selection in EFIGE-BvD

Firm financials from the EFIGE dataset are sourced from BvD, and therefore suffer from sample selection
in three of the seven countries in our sample, namely Austria, Germany and the UK. The coverage of our
data 94% or above in the other four countries (France, Hungary, Italy and Spain). In this appendix, we prove
that the findings of Section 6 are not driven by selection into sample, by replicating the analysis presented
in Table 10 while excluding the three countries where the risk of sample selection is material.

                                                     (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)
                                                 ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇    ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇   ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇      ΔlogTFP₀₁₋₀₇
                                                     OLS             OLS            OLS               OLS

Firm Meritocracy                                     0.001          0.001          -0.000            -0.000
                                                    (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.002)

Firm Meritocracy × ICT Contribution                1.816***       1.773***       2.044***          2.093***
                                                    (0.661)        (0.621)        (0.697)           (0.700)

Employees with degree                                                             0.043*            0.042*
                                                                                  (0.022)           (0.022)

Employees with degree × ICT Contribution                                           -8.674            -8.581
                                                                                  (8.172)           (8.182)

CEO Age                                                                                             0.005**
                                                                                                    (0.002)

CEO Age × ICT Contribution                                                                           -1.204
                                                                                                    (0.811)

Temporary employees                                                                                  0.001
                                                                                                    (0.007)

Temporary employees × ICT Contribution                                                               -0.622
                                                                                                    (2.617)
Labor Frictions                                                     0.001
                                                                   (0.004)

R²                                                   0.025          0.029          0.026             0.027
Observations                                         8,514          6,337          8,510             8,507
Country × Sector Fixed Effects
Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses                           * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                    XXI
