                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    WHY ARE WAGES
                                CYCLICAL IN THE 197OS?




                                  Rebecca M. Blank




                               Working Paper No. 2396




                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 1987




Thanks are due to David Card for useful
                                         comments. Support for this project was
provided by the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton
                                                    University, and by NSF Project
SES-8606456. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2396
                                                 October 1987




                    Why Are Wages Cyclical in the 1970s?




                                 ABSTRACT




      This paper investigates cyclicality in real wages between 1969 and 1982,
 using 14 years of data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics. First, it
 investigates the extent to which movements in and out of the labor market
 created apparent wage cyclicality. Second, it investigates whether cyclical
movements of workers between heterogeneous wage sectors within the labor market
created cyclicality. Little evidence of the first effect is found. The second
effect is much more important, and cyclicality clearly occurs in the movement
of workers between different labor market sectors. However, sector selection
is not correlated with wage determination. Thus, individual wage change
estimates of cyclicality need to control for sector location, but need not
account for sector selection. The third conclusion of the paper is that
cyclicality is present in real wages even within sectors over this time period,
and is the result of both cyclicality in overall wage levels (cyclicality in
the constant term in wage equations), as well as in the coefficients associated
with particular worker characteristics.




                                               Rebecca M. Blank
                                               Woodrow Wilson School
                                               Princeton University
                                               Princeton, NJ 08544
                                  I. INTRODUTJON

       The relationship between the business cycle and wages has been a much

  discussed topic. Keynes suggested that real wages should be countercyclical,

  since decreases in the real wage should induce increases in employment.

 However, early empirical evidence found that aggregate wages moved procy-

 clically (Dunlop [1938]). More recent empirical work utilized time series

 analysis to suggest that aggregate real wages since the 1940s show little

 evidence of any cyclicality (Neftci [1978], Sargent [1978], Altonji and

 Ashenfelter [1980] or Geary and Kennan [1982]).   However, the latest studies
 have indicated that, at least in the decade of the
                                                      1970s, aggregate wages
 showed a clear procyclical pattern (Bils [1985], Blank [1985], Coleman [1984],

 or Raisian [1983].) These later studies typically use broader wage defini-

 tions', which somewhat accounts for their divergent results. However, Coleman

 repeats several earlier studies on equivalent data from the 1970s and finds

 evidence of procyclical wage movements. These more recent studies also make a

point of using micro data. They uniformly conclude that cyclical effects are

apparent in the micro data as well as in the aggregate wage data.

     Given that predictions regarding wage cyclicality emerge from a wide

variety of economic models, it is important to understand the nature of the

apparent wage cyclicality that has been observed in recent years. This paper

further investigates cyclicality in real wages between 1969 and 1982, focussing

on two issues. First, changes In the composition of the labor force over the

cycle can create cyclical wage changes. This paper investigates cyclical

changes in worker selection in and out of the labor market as well as in

movements between heterogeneous labor market sectors. As we shall see below,

if such selection issues are not explicitly addressed empirically, then even

micro data estimates of wage changes may exhibit spurious wage cyclicality.

While I find little evidence of significant selection in and out of the labor

                                      1
market (at least among white men), there is clear evidence that aggregate wage

estimates are affected by cyclical worker movements between heterogeneous

sectors; but because there is little correlation between sectoral choice and

wage determination, micro data estimates are not affected by these movements.

       Second, once compositional labor market changes are accounted for, there

are two ways by which individual wage changes may be associated with changes in

macroeconomic activity. There may be a direct relationship to overall wage

levels, manifest by cyclicality in the constant of the wage equation over time,

which can be measured by including a cyclical variable in a wage change

equation. This is the approach taken by all existing research. Alternatively,

this paper also explores the possibility that there may be cyclical changes in
                                                     in the coefficients determining
the entire wage/skill relationship (cyclicality

the return to individual skill characteristics.)       This paper finds significant

evidence that both types of cyclicality have occured in recent years.
                                                                         MARKET
 II. MODELLING THE CYCLICALITY IN AGGREGATE WAGES IN A HOMOGENEOUS LABOR

       The basic labor market model used in this paper is the classic human

capital wage equation for individual i in year t,

                    wit = ln(W±t) =    +   Xt + u + Ejt,
 (1)

where W represents the wage rate, X is a vector of individual characteristics

 which affect productivity and hence determine wages, 'r is a vector of related

 coefficients, which represents the weights these characteristics are given in

 the wage determination process, u is the cyclical effect on individual i's
                                                                      variables
 wage, and s is a random error term. The X's often include additional

 which are institutionally important in the labor market, although they may or
                                               (such as union status or region. )2
 may not have direct productivity impacts

 Define the cyclical effect as

            u = f(Xt)ut,      where    f(Xjt) =       + Xit6.



                                           2
 Ut is the pure cyclical effect, while f(Xt) is the effect associated with the

  characteristics vector X. (1) can be rewritten as

  (2)       Wit ( + &0Ut) + Xit(t + &ut) + it
                =
                    B0t + Xt13t + it•
 If wages are determined homogeneously throughout the labor market, differing

 only across the variables included in the vector X, then equation (2) represents

 the wage determination process for any individual i.

        Let Wt represent the mean wage in period t, calculated from among all

 labor force participants, with X being the vector of mean characteristics for

 these workers. The change in aggregate wages between periods is

 (3) (Wt+l - Wt) = (Bot+i       -
                                    Bot)   + (Xt÷iJ3÷1 -
                                                            XtI3t)
                     =
                         ot+l ot)
                                -          + Xt(13t÷1 -
                                                          13t + (Xt+i - Xt)13t÷1
The three terms on the right hand side of equation (3) decompose the change in

aggregate mean wages into three parts: a homogeneous time-varying effect which

occurs for all demographic groups; changes in the wage coefficients which

differ across demographic groups; and aggregation effects, resulting from

changes in the means of the X's.

        The third term will be nonzero when there is selectivity in the workers

who move in and out of the labor force over the cycle. For instance, assume

period t represents a recession period and period t+l a boom period. If

additional workers are attracted into the labor market in boom periods who have

lower average skills than the mean worker in a recession period, then this

implies that             X. for all elements of the vector X.3 In this case, the

third term on the right hand side of (3) is clearly negative, and is a measure

of the aggregation bias. If the 13's are procyclical (13t÷l > 13) then measured

cyclicality in aggregate wages will understate the true cyclicality in in-

dividual wages. In fact, depending on the relative size of these three terms,

it is possible that aggregate wages could even appear to be countercyclical.

                                               3
That research which investigates cyclicality in aggregate wage data obviously

suffers from an inability to separate aggregation bias effects from true

cyclical effects.

      In contrast, the micro data research cited above typically estimates
                                                         the unemployment rate as
individual wage change equations, including changes in

one of the independent variables.    The sign and significance on the change in

unemployment is taken as a measure of the cyclicality imbedded in wages. Note

that there are two problems with this approach. First, these equations can

typically be estimated only from data on those persons who are stably employed

over several time periods. As Moffitt, Keane and Runkle [1987] note, focusing

only on workers who do not leave the labor market does not guarantee unbiased

estimates of wage cyclicality. Assume we can characterize the decision to

participate in the labor market as

(4)
        *
       P it =   Zjwt   +   u,
where P is a measure of the utility comparison between labor market

participation and nonparticipation for individual i, Z is a vector of individual

characteristics, ¶1 is a related coefficient vector, and u is a random error

term. If the error term in (2) is correlated with u, the error in (4), then

estimating (2) (or some transformation of it such as individual wage changes)

will result in biased estimates of the J3t•4 Thus, in order to accurately

estimate the true 13's (and their underlying cyclicality), one must empirically

account for labor market participation choices made by workers.

      Second, the inclusion of a simple change in unemployment rates in an
                                                             the cyclicality in the
 individual wage change equation essentially measures only

 first term of equation (3) (by parameterizing it as a change in unemployment

 rates), and ignores the second term, which allows for changes over time in the

 determinants of wages. There are good theoretical reasons to expect that

 macroeconomic cycles will have different impacts on workers with different

                                       4
 labor market characteristics. In a world where both capital and labor are

 completely replicable in the short run and where there are no economies or

 diseconomies of scale in the production process, wage determination should

 remain unaffected by levels of production. If demand doubles, the firm can

 immediately duplicate its production process and double its output with no

 change in the nature of production. However, if these conditions are not met,

 then the nature of the production process itself will change as activity levels

 vary. This can readily affect the value of worker skills to the firm, changing

 the wage/skill relationship which human capital models describe.

      If capital is not immediately replicable in the short run, any attempt to

 increase production in response to rising demand will require more intensive

utilization of existing capital. Multiple shifts or speeded—up production

lines are common in times of high economic growth. These changes might

increase the value of coordinational activities within the firm, thus increasing

the value of formal training and/or management experience. For workers on the

production line, if the increase in production is accomplished by a greater

division of labor, job de-skilling could occur as workers are given more

limited tasks. Formal training, or job experience could become less important

to the firm. Alternatively, if equivalent additional labor is not available to

the firm, the value of experience and training could increase, as attempts are

made to increase the productivity level of the existing work force.

     Realize that this analysis assumes that wages reflect the current product-

ive value of the worker to the firm. A variety of institutional arrangements

might prevent changes in the value of the worker to the firm from being

translated into immediate wage changes. The effect of worker/firm wage
contracts - -   both   explicit and implicit - -   has   been much explored in the

literature. There may clearly exist incentives for both workers and firms to

provide "wage smoothing" of some nature, breaking the link between point-in-

                                           5
                                          the worker. In this case, wage levels
-time wages and the marginal product of

and their determinants will vary less over the cycle, although in many models

the decrease in wage variation over the cycle is offset by an increase in

employment variability. Thus, the greater the extent of wage smoothing in the

labor market, the more one would expect to find aggregate wages affected

primarily by changes in labor market participation and composition.5
                                                   or if it is not available in
     However, if wage smoothing is not complete,

certain sectors of the labor market, one might find changes over the cycle in

the estimated coefficients of the entire wage equation.    This effect can be

modelled by allowing the vector 13 to vary over time.

       III. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON WAGE CYCLICALITY IN A HOMOGENEOUS LABOR MARKET

     This section will present evidence on the components of aggregate wage

cyclicality. I will also provide evidence on the extent to which accounting for

labor market participation decisions changes estimates of wage cyclicality.

Throughout this section, I assume that a single wage equation adequately

characterizes the entire labor market, an assumption which will be dropped in

the next section when I investigate the effect of sectoral heterogeneity on

wage cyclicality.

SOME COMMENTS ON DATA
                                                           (PSID) from the 14
     This study uses the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics
                              this initial set of results I do not make use of
years 1969 through 1982. In

 the longitudinal nature of this data set, but use it as a series of consecutive

 cross sections. While it might at first appear desirable to estimate cyclical-

 ity from individual wage change equations, this creates potential problems.

 am interested in describing the sources of recent aggregate wage cyclicality.
                                                    necessarily focus only on
 As noted above, individual wage change equations

 those individuals who remain in the labor market for several consecutive years.

 For persons who enter or leave the labor market, or who are unemployed for long

                                          6
 periods of time, Continuous wage observations are not available.
                                                                    Omitting
 these people from the sample may eliminate the most likely sources of aggregate

 cyclicality. Similarly, as we shall discuss below, workers who switch jobs

 between heterogeneous sectors may experience changes in their whole wage

 determination process, a difficult process to model at the individual level if

 there are different wage/skill regimes in different sectors. As a result of

 these problems, I take a different approach in the estimates below, which

 provides consistent estimation of the effects I seek to explore, but which may

 not always be fully efficient since it ignores some of the cross-time informa-

 tion available on those individuals who remain in the labor market for multiple

 periods.

      I initially treat the PSID as a series of 14 sequential cross-sections. I

utilize the data for all male household heads in each designated year between

the ages of 20 and 65 who report labor market earnings. I use the entire PSID

sample to create these yearly data sets, which is composed of a random sample

and a low-income sample. (I make separate estimates for black and white men;

without using the low-income sample, I would not have enough observations on

black men to be able to investigate them separately.) As a result, sample

weights must be used to weight my sample back to a random sample. These are

provided within the PSID. All numbers and estimates reported here are based on

weighted data. These weights change over time as the demographics of the PSID

sample and the demographics of the country change.6

     Wages are defined as average hourly earnings, calculated by dividing total

labor market income over the year by total hours of work. As a result, they

include overtime and second-job income.7 All wage data is transformed to 1981

dollars. Note that by using a measure of wages based on annual earnings, I

thus include in my sample of employed workers any individuals who had some labor



                                     7
income over the year. This should decrease the effect of changes in labor

market participation on labor force composition.8

EtIPIRICAL RESULTS

       Using the 14 cross-sections described above, I estimate 14 separate OLS

wage equations for white men and for black men. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1

describe the data used in these estimations.                At the top of Table 1 is summary

                                                             hourly earnings. Row 1 shows
information on the dependent variable, average

the mean wage in 1981 dollars during these 14 years, calculated as the average
                                          each sample. For white men, the average
of the 14 mean wage variables from
                                                   $.04/year.9 To estimate
wage level is $10.70, with a mean annual change of
                                         the mean wage rates from each of the 14 years
aggregate wage cyclicality, I use

to estimate the 13-observation regression

(5)       Wager - Wage_1 =          + ai((GNPt       -
                                                         GNPt_i)/GNPt_l) +
                                                rates induced by a 1% increase
The coefficient a1 indicates the change in wage
in GNP.1° For both white and black men, significant evidence of cyclicality in
                                       1% increase in GNP increases white men's wages
aggregate wages is apparent: A
                                        and increases black men's wages by almost
by slightly more than $.04/hour,

$. 06/hour.

       The variables which compose the X vector in the estimated wage equations

 are also described in Table 1.        For each variable, I indicate their mean level

 across all individuals and all years.           I also estimate cyclicality in these

                                           running a regression similar to (5). Thus,
 means over the 14 years of data by

 for education, this is the regression

 (6)       Educt -   Educt_i
                               =
                                   a0 + ai((GNPt -        GNP..)/GNP1) +
                                            below the means for each variable.
 The resulting a1 coefficients are reported
       Within this aggregate data there is no evidence of cyclicality in any of

 the means of these variables, for either white or black men. Thus, there is

 little support for the hypothesis that much of the cyclicality in aggregate

                                                 8
 wages can be explained by workers with different skill characteristics moving

 in and out of the labor market.       The results in Table 1 indicate that changes

 in mean worker characteristics show virtually no cyclicality over time.11

      The coefficients resulting from the 14 OLS wage equations are presented in

 columns 1 and 2 of Table 2.12     i have 14 estimates of each coefficient. The

 mean of these 14 estimates is presented first, followed by the mean of their

 standard errors.     I also report the standard deviation of the coefficients over

 the 14 years, which provides a comparison of the average variation in the

 estimates across the years to the average within-year standard errors. There

 is clearly some significant variation in the coefficient estimates over the

years --   the   cross-year standard deviation is typically higher than the mean

within-year standard error for all the coefficients.

     The cyclical patterns in these coefficients are estimated by regressing

the change in these coefficients against the percent change in GNP, similar to

equations (5) and (6) above.13 The estimated relationship between percent

growth in GNP and the change in the coefficients over time is shown in the

fourth row for each variable. The earlier discussion noted both the possibility

of overall shifts in the wage level (cyclicality in the constant) as well as

cyclicality in the other wage determinants. The results in Table 2 demonstrate

both effects. While there is evidence of procyclicality in the constant for

white men (a homogeneous upward shift in wage levels as the economy expands),

there is also evidence that an increase in macroeconomic activity increases the

effect of age and age squared (a proxy for experience) in determining wages.

The coefficients on education and union status show little evidence of cyclical-

ity. For black men only the education coefficient shows mildly procyclical

effects.

     The implication of these results is that most of the cyclicality in

aggregate wages appears to be explained by shifts in the constant and the

                                         9
                                     with little effect of aggregation bias due to
coefficients of the wage equation,

changes in the characteristics
                                 of workers over the cycle. To further test this

                                                                      additional
proposition, I estimate a set of wage equations for each year with an
                                           in and out of the labor force. This is
term included to adjust for selectivity

a standard econometric technique, first developed by Heckman [1974]. Briefly,
                                  in (4)), representing the probability of labor
a probit equation (as specified
                                     estimated using all data, from both workers
market participation is initially

and nonworkers. The results of this probit are used to calculate a selection

                                  included in the wage equation, and corrects the
correctivity term, \t which is
                                                                        and the
error term for any correlation between the probability of participation

       level)4 The means of the 14 coefficients which result from the select-
wage
                                       their mean standard errors, as well as the
ivity-corrected wage estimates, and

standard errors of the coefficients over the 14 years are given in columns 3

and 4 of Table 2.   It is clear that the none of the coefficients for either

                                                      as a result of this selectivity
white or black men change in any significant way

 correction. The reason for this is apparent at the bottom of Table 2, where
                                                   presented. In only two of the 14
 the coefficients on the selectivity terms are
                                     coefficient significant. It is also clear
 regressions for white men is this
                                               in the coefficient. Thus, for white
 that there is no significant cyclicality
                                       data that cyclical movements in and out of
 males, there is no evidence in this
                                                          This picture is slightly
 the labor market affect aggregate wage cyclicality.

 less clear for black men. In 6 of the 14 regressionS, there is significance on

 the selectivity term. (The mean coefficient and mean standard error indicate

 insignificance, but the variance in the coefficients over the years is large.)

 This indicates that there is some effect on wages due to the selectivity of who

 moves in and out of the labor market among black men. However, the regression

 coefficient relating changes in GNP to changes in the estimated selectivity

 coefficients indicates that there is no cyclicality in these coefficients.

                                          10
        I am not the first to research this issue, Moffitt, Keane and Runkle

  [1987] investigate the effects of selectivity into the labor market, using

 several relatively complex models of individual wage changes, corrected for

 selectivity bias. In contrast to my results, they do find this correction
 makes a difference --   in   fact, worker movements in and out of the labor market

 appear to increase the procyclicality in aggregate wage measures. There are at

 least two reasons why these results differ from mine.     First, they use a

 different data set, with observations only on young men, a group which may be

 more prone to labor force participation changes. Second, they have point-in-

 time estimates of wages and labor market participation, rather than the

 annualized measure available in my data set.15 As noted above, one would

 expect reater compositional changes with higher-frequency data.      However, even
after these selectivity effects are accounted for, they find evidence of

further wage cyclicality, similar to the results presented here.

       The conclusion is that there are no clear cyclical shifts in worker

characteristics over time in this data, and thus little evidence of aggregation

bias due to changes in the skill levels of labor market participants. Given no

evidence of correlation between labor force participation and
                                                                 wages, especially
for white men, micro data estimating procedures which ignore this issue should

provide consistent estimates of wage cyclicality.

         IV. HETEROGENEITY IN TIlE WAGE/SKILL RELATIONSHIP BENEEN SECTORS

       Although there is little evidence of aggregation bias in this data induced
by labor market participation changes, there is another    way in which labor

market composition may change over the cycle. Until now I have     assumed that
the   relationship between wages and worker skills is the same for all workers at

a point in time. However, if wage determination is heterogeneous across

different sectors of the labor market, and if workers move between these

sectors in a cyclical manner, then apparent cyclicality in the determinants of

                                        11
                                      in sectoral composition. To see this, assume that
wages may be due to changes
                                                           of jobs, each of which utilize worker
the labor market is composed of two types

skills differently. Call these manufacturing and non-manufacturing jobs. For
                                                              relationship is
any worker I in a manufacturing job in time t, the wage/skill

(7)       Wmit = XmitBrnt + Emits

while for any nonmanufacturing worker j the relationship is

(8)      wt =       XtBt +
Because of the difference In the nature of the jobs, one expects that mean
                                                           these sectors as workers choose the
worker characteristics will vary between

sector which best repays their set
                                                of skills. What happens if this heterogene-

                                                                all workers,
ity is ignored, and one estimates a single wage equation across

calculating a single t? It can be shown that the resulting estimate of

from the combined sample is

(9)
          =
               0mtmt +
where    8mt       (Xmt'Xmt)/(Xmt'Xmt + Xnt'Xnt)

 and           =
                   (XnttXnt)/(Xmt'Xmt + Xt'Xt)
 and Xj represents the mean vector of characteristics in sector j at time t.
                                                combined sample is a weighted combination of
 That is, the 3t estimated from the
                                                 where the weights are determined by the
 the underlying "true" coefficients,

 variance of the respective X's. In a similar manner,

 (10) t+1 = 9mt+lBmt+1 +
        Let 6mt 'mt1mt +                      and 6nt =     nt/mt +                 -


                                                                      1 -               The change in
 while mt+1 = nmt+i/(nmt+1 + t+i and &nt+1 =                                6mt+1

 aggregate wages is now

                          =               -
 (11) (wt+l -       wt)       (Xt÷lBt÷l       X13t)
                                                                              +
                              (&mt+lXmt+l 1 8nt+1Xnt+1)(0mt+1mt1
                                  -
                                      (&mtXmt   + 6ntXntmtmt +


                                                      12
       In this situation changes in the aggregate 13's can no longer be interpret-

 ed as "pure" cyclical effects. 13t and 13t have become implicated in the

 aggregation bias. Part of their observed cyclicality may be due to cyclical

 changes in 13m and I3 but part may also be due to cyclical changes in the

 weights, em and en. In fact, in the absence of any cyclicality in the underly-

 ing coefficients mt = 13mt+l and 13nt =
                                         13nt+1)' there may still be cyclicality
 in the aggregate coefficients, I3 and          as em and 0n change over time. The

 primary implication of this section is that if there is heterogeneity in the

 wage/skill determination process across sectors and if the mix of workers

 between sectors changes over the cycle, it will be almost impossible to

 separate out the effects of aggregation bias from the effects of true cyclical-

 ity, unless one can clearly identify and estimate separate wage functions for

 each heterogeneous group. Even micro data studies which estimate individual

wage change equations may be affected by this problem. If job shifts between

sectors are not explicitly accounted for in the estimation, then cyclical

variables (such as the unemployment rate) may pick up the effects of these

omitted variables, reflecting cyclical shifts between wage regimes on the part

of individual workers, rather than actual cyclicality in wage rates.

     IV. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE   ON LABOR   MARKET HETEROGENEITY AN]) CYCLICALITY

     As an initial exploration of the possibility of sectoral heterogeneity in

the labor market, I estimate OLS wage equations for three different categories

of workers from each successive cross-section of workers. Because of my concern

regarding aggregation of workers whose wage/skill relationship may vary I

separate all professional, managerial, and administrative employees (hereafter

referred to as PMA workers) and estimate a wage equation for them. With the

remaining non-PMA workers, I create two groups, one composed of all workers in

manufacturing industries, and the other composed of non-manufacturing employ-

ees.'7 Separate wage regressions provide 14 annual observations on each

                                         13
coefficient for each group. The means of the data (over all individuals and

all years) in each of the groups are shown in Table 1, columns 3 through 5 for

white men and columns 6 through 8 for black men.

     As Table 1 indicates, PMA workers have much higher average hourly earnings,

than do other workers, but there is no sign of cyclicality in their wages.

However, both manufacturing and non-manufacturing wages show significant

cyclicality among both white and black men. Although there is no cyclicality

in their aggregate wages, PNA workers appear to have procyclical education

levels and mild countercyclicality in unionization rates (which are low among

these workers). Ilanufacturing workers show evidence of procyclicality in

education levels, and non-manufacturing workers show evidence of procyclicality

in age and age squared. Given previous evidence that significant shifts in and

out of the labor force do not occur, these results are consistent with a story

in which the manufacturing sector in boom times attracts and/or keeps workers

with more education than the typical manufacturing worker, but less education

than the average PMA worker, raising educational levels in both sectors. From

the nonmanufacturing sector, manufacturing attracts and/or keeps workers who

match the average age in that sector, but who in low-growth times move into the

nonmanufacturing sector, lowering average age in that sector. Thus, while the

aggregate measures of worker characteristics in columns 1 and 2 indicated

little shift over time, disaggregation into sectors indicates that workers

appear to be moving between sectors over the cycle in such a way that the

characteristics of the mean worker in each sector changes with macroeconomic

activity.

     The coefficients from the wage regressions for each of these three groups

are presented in Table 3. Table 3 is essentially the sector-specific analogue

of Table 2, which estimated a single wage equation for all workers. As Table 3

indicates, there are significant differences in the wage/skill determination

                                      14
 process among workers in each of these three labor market groups.1-8 For

 instance, the return to education among black PHA workers is very high (perhaps

 indicating a scarcity of educated black men.) The return to experience (here

 proxied by age19) is highest in manufacturing for blacks and in PHA jobs for

 whites. Unionization clearly has the strongest impact on nonmanufacturing wages

 for both black and white workers.

      Table 3 also investigates the cyclical pattern in these coefficients.

 Among white men, the coefficient on education shows procyclical effects

 (greater returns to education in boom times) in manufacturing. In nonmanufac-

 turing, returns to age are procyclical and the union coefficient is counter-

 cyclical. Surprisingly, the constant is significantly countercyclical for both

manufacturing and nonmanufacturing workers among whites. Thus, although

aggregate wage patterns are procyclical, there is a countercyclical homogeneous

effect on wages in these two sectors, which is then offset by other cyclical

effects. Among black men, there is less evidence of cyclicality on these

coefficients.    In short, compared to Table 2, when wages are estimated

separately by sector, many new cyclical patterns in the coefficients emerge.

     The differences in wage coefficient estimates between the three labor

market groups, the cyclicality in the means of worker characteristics within

the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors, and the differences in the

cyclical patterns of wage determinants between Tables 2 and 3 indicates there

are changes in the sectoral composition of the labor force over the cycle. If

wages are correlated with sectoral choice, estimating wage equations without

accounting for the sectoral choice process may result in biased coefficient

estimates, and apparent cyclicality in wage determinants may merely reflect

cyclicality in sectoral movements as discussed above.

     Of the studies cited earlier which present evidence of wage cyclicality

over the l970s, few deal with the problem of heterogeneous wage determination

                                     15
between sectors. Bus explicitly considers the role of job switches in wage

changes and concludes that virtually all of the cyclicality in his estimates is

coming from individuals who change jobs between time periods. Moffitt, Keane

and Runkle estimate a limited selection model among manufacturing workers and

find evidence of selectivity effects. To fully explore this issue, I implement

a joint estimation procedure of a three-way sectoral choice model and three

simultaneous sectoral wage equations.2°

       Assume that workers choose between three labor market possibilities:

employment as a PMA worker, or work in the manufacturing or nonmanufacturing

sector. Designate these three labor market groups as P. N, and N. Observing a

worker in sector P is equivalent to knowing that sector P is preferred to N and

that P is preferred to N. If wage levels are correlated with sectoral choice,

then one wants to estimate wages for PMA workers jointly accounting for the two

sectoral preferences they have demonstrated.

       Let the utility gained by a worker in sector j be denoted Uj.            Then

preferences among three sectors can be completely characterized by three equa-

tions (it is assumed that these equations are for individual i at time t):
         *          -        = Z61 + i (determines the selection of P over N);
(12)    U PN = U,       UN
         *   =      -        =         + '2 (determines the selection of M over N);
(13)    U      UM       UN       Z62

(14) U*PM =    U    -
                        UN       Z63 + p., (determines the selection of P over N).

Note that the third preference equation is completely determined by the first

two. In other words, U*pN = U*PN
                                              -
                                                  U*.2l   While we clearly do not observe the

value of U in any situation, we do observe whether or not a particular sector

has been chosen. Thus, choice of the sector P is assumed to imply that upN >

o and U*PM >   0.       Choice of sector N implies that U* > 0 and *p           0. Choice

of sector N implies that U' < 0 and U*pN < 0.
       Because wage determination is assumed to differ between these labor market

groups, there are three possible wage regimes an individual can enter:

                                                   16
  (15) W=XB+
 (16) WM=Xf3M+M
 (17) WN =            +
 If   there is a correlation between sector selection and wage levels, then

 estimating equations (15) - (17) alone will produce biased estimates of the 13

 coefficients, since the expected value of the 's will be correlated with the

 p's and hence will not equal zero. To correct for this intercorrelation, one

 must estimate the wage equations jointly with the sector selection equations.

          For any individual i, the likelihood that he or she is observed in sector

 P earning W1,, can be written as

 (18) Pr( p (Wp - X1Bp)/p                  ,        > Z&1, 3i > Z63     ).

The likelihood of earning a wage in sector £1 is

(19) Pr( M = (WMj          -
                               XfI3M)/aM       2i > -Z162,   i31   -Z63 ),
while     the likelihood of earning a wage in sector N is

(20) Pr( tN = (WNI         -
                               XjBN)/N         li            2i -Z162 ).
Assuming that the 's and p's are jointly normally distributed, Appendix 1

provides the statistical details as to how these 3-element probability functjons

can be written in terms of univarjate and bivariate conditional normal func-

tions. Estimation of the resulting likelihood function across all individuals

(equation A9 in Appendix 1) will provide estimates of the three vectors of wage

coefficients (13p, 6M' and 6N)' the standard errors of these three wage equations

      °M' and c5N), two vectors of sectoral choice coefficients ('l and 62, from

which 63 can be derived), and 5 correlation coefficients (p12, the correlation

between p1 and p2; r1EP, the correlation between p1 and c; rlN, the correla-

tion between l and              F2€M, the correlation between p2 and         and r2CN, the
correlation between p2 and                 from these r3 and r3M can be derived; r1 =

r2    =
          r3N   =   0.)   Significant parameter estimates of these correlation

coefficients would indicate that the sectoral choice and sectoral wage equations

                                                    17
are correlated and must be jointly estimated to produce unbiased estimates of

the 13's.

     The results of estimating this joint sectoral choice/wage model for white

men on each of the 14 years are presented in Table 4. As before, I show the

mean of the 14 estimated coeffients and their standard errors, as well as the

standard deviation of the coefficients over the 14 years, and the regression

coefficient that correlates changes in these coefficients to changes to GNP.

The coefficients on the sectoral choice equations are consistent with what one

might expect. Less educated and older men are more likely to be manufacturing

workers than nonmanufacturing workers, and are also more likely to be non-

manufacturing than PMA workers. Manufacturing jobs are less likely to be

located in the south or the west.

      There is little evidence of cyclicality in the determinants of choice

between the PNA and manufacturing sectors. However, countercyclicality in both

age coefficients in the choice of manufacturing over nonmanufacturing implies

that more young workers move into or remain employed in manufacturing in boom

times. Procyclicality in the constant in the choice manufacturing over

nonmanufacturing and countercyclicality in the constant of PMA over manufactur-

ing implies that the manufacturing sector draws workers away from both other

sectors in boom times.

      Comparing the wage coefficients in Table 4, with joint wage/sectoral

choice estimation, to those in Table 3, where each sector's wage is independent-

ly estimated, there are few differences. Not only are estimated values

similar, but so are the patterns of cyclicality. In nonmanufacturing, there is

cyclicality in the coefficients on age, union status and the constant; in

manufacturing there is mild cyclicality on the education coefficient, while PHA

workers show little evidence of any cyclical effects.



                                       18
       The reason for this similarity is clear at the bottom of Table 4, where the

  mean estimates of the correlation coefficients
                                                   resulting from this joint

  estimating procedure are presented. These are uniformly small and insig-

  nificant, and none of them demonstrate any cyclical effects. (In no equation

  for any year do any of the estimated correlation coefficients show signifi-

 cance.) This indicates that there is no correlation between the errors in the

 wage equations and the errors in the sectoral choice
                                                        equations, which means that

 sectoral choice, although cyclically affected, need not be accounted for in

 order to derived unbiased estimates of the wage determinants in each sector.

 This implies that estimated cyclicality in the wage coefficients in manufactur-

 ing and nonmanufacturing shown in Table 3 reflect actual changes in the wage

 determination process over the cycle in these sectors, and are not contaminated

 by sector selection.

      The results in Table 4 indicate that
                                             some sector-specific cyclicality
occurs due to movements between sectors (as shown by cyclicality in worker

characteristics in manufacturing and nonmanufacturing), while some of it occurs

because of actual cyclical changes in the determinants of wages within each

sector. To further explore the issue of movement between sectors, I investigate

both the nature of cross-sectoral movements
                                              over these 14 years, as well as the
extent to which wage cyclicality occurs among those who do not change sectors.

     Using the longitudinal nature of the PSID, I construct 13 samples, each a

two-year matched sample containing two years of information on all male

household heads who participated in the labor market for both years. Thus the

first sample contains all male heads who work in both 1969 and 1970, while the

last sample is composed of all male heads who work in both 1981 and 1982. With

these two-year samples I can compare wage changes and labor market movements

across each two year period using data from the same individuals.



                                     19
    There are six possible inter-sectoral moves that a worker can make between

years. These are listed at the top of Table 5. Using the two-year matched

samples I derive 13 observations on the percent of workers who make each type of

sectoral move in each two-year period. As Table 5 indicates, the largest flows

are clearly in and out of the non-manufacturing sector -- on average 4.9% of

all workers move into this sector each year (2.9% from PMA jobs and 2.1% from

manufacturing jobs), and 5.6% of all workers leave it for work in another

sector. The ratio of intersectoral movers to total workers in each two year

period is regressed against the percent change in GNP over these years, and the

results are shown in the second row of Table 5. Significant cyclicality is

evident, as more workers leave nonmanufacturing and move into manufacturing

when the economy expands, while fewer workers move into PMA jobs during an

expansion, being more content to stay in manufacturing or in nonmanufacturing.

     Yet, while movements between sectors are cyclical, there is little

cyclicality in the number of people who remain in each sector over each two

year period. The bottom of Table 5 uses the two-year matched samples to look

at workers who stay in each sector for both years. On average, 30.2% of all

workers stay in PMA jobs, 17.6% stay in manufacturing, while 40% remain in non-

manufacturing. There is no cyclicality in these numbers. Although more people

leave nonmanufacturing to move into manufacturing during boom times, fewer of

them leave to move into PNA work, thus leaving about the same percentage of

tstayers in non-manufacturing. Examination of the other sectors reveals

similar offsetting patterns. The cyclical movements between sectors does not

change the percent remaining in a given sector.

     Average wage changes over each two-year period for movers and stayers are

also shown in Table 5. There is clearly a great deal of variation in the wage

changes different individual experience as they move between sectors, as

evidenced by the large average standard deviations. However, there is no

                                      20
 evidence of cyclicality in these wage changes. In contrast, among the stayers

 in a sector, while PMA workers show no cyclicality in their wage changes across

 years, both manufacturing and non-manufacturing workers exhibit strong procyc-

 licality in wages. Realize the implication of this result: individual
                                                                           wage
 changes among workers who remain stably employed within the
                                                               manufacturing and
 nonmanufacturing sector show cyclical patterns. Since there can be no issue of

 aggregation bias or compositional change among these workers, this is perhaps
 the strongest possible evidence of real wage cyclicality over decade.
                                          Pt




                                   VI. SUMMARY

      Aggregate wages are clearly cyclical during the 14 year period investigated

 in this study. Little of this cyclicality at the aggregate level appears to be

related-to selective movements of workers in and out of the labor market; in

fact, there is no evidence here that any correlation between labor force

participation and wage levels occurs for white men, once education, age and

union status are accounted for. However, cyclicality in the determinants of

wages is apparent; there is procyclicality in both the constant (a homogeneous

shift in wages with business activity) and in the weighting on age, which means

that older and more experienced workers have a wage advantage in boom times.

     However, these aggregate estimates assume a homogeneous labor market.

There is significant evidence that wages are separately determined for at least

three groups: professional, managerial and administrative workers, and all

other workers in manufacturing and in nonmanufacturing.   Significant movement

in the work force occurs between these sectors over the cycle. In particular,

more workers either move into or stay in manufacturing, or stay in nonmanufac-

turing. This shift is strongest among younger workers, so that the average age

of workers in manufacturing drops in boom times. However, there is no correla-

tion between these sectoral movements and sector-specific wage levels, once a

standard set of worker characteristics are accounted for. Thus, micro-data

                                     21
studies of wage changes should control for sector location, but can ignore

sector selectivity and still produce unbiased estimates of cyclical effects.

     In addition to cyclicality in cross-sector movements among workers with

different skill characteristics, there is also cyclicality in wage determinants

within sectors over these years. Both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing

workers show homogeneous countercyclical changes in wage levels (countercyc-

licality in the constant.) This is offset by other procyclical effects.

Nanufacturing workers experience an increase in the coefficient on education

over the cycle. Nonmanufacturing workers receive more repayment for experience

in boom times, and less repayment to unionization.   PNA workers experience no

cyclicality in their aggregate wages, and this is reflected in a lack of

cyclicality in any of their wage coefficients.   This group is thus largely

unaffected by business cycles.   In short, both cyclical changes in the

constant as well as changes in the weighting on skill characteristics occurs

over the cycle, so that even workers who remain stably employed within a given

sector evince wage cyclicality if they are not in PMA jobs.

     The results of this study raise a variety of issues which deserve further

investigation. First, given that aggregate wages prior to the 1970s showed

little cyclicality, it would be interesting to compare the labor market in the

l970s to an earlier time period and investigate what has changed. Second, the

nature and effect of individual job changes has been little studied in the

 literature. More careful micro-data analysis of this issue would add to our

understanding of the sectoral labor market movements noted here. Third, while

this paper provides evidence that the wage determination process changes over

 the cycle, a better understanding of how production and hiring processes

 actually vary over the cycle, would be useful to provide some causal understand-

 ing of the empirical results reported here.



                                      22
 1. Earlier studies looked only at manufacturing wages. More recent work uses
 aggregate wages from the entire labor market. In addition, wage definitions in
 these newer studies often include overtime pay, second job income, and other
 more cyclical components.

 2.   There are more complex (and probably more realistic) ways of modeling the
 relationship between wages and worker skills. See, for instance, Heckman and
 Sedlacek [1985]. Unfortunately, the data we typically have available contains
 only rather gross measures of worker skills, such as education level, age or
 experience. It is certainly possible to view the standard wage-estimating
 equation in (1) as a reduced form of a more complex relationship between worker
 skills, job requirements and wages. In this case, the t's still provide a
 translation of worker skills into wage levels, but a causal interpretation of
 the process by which r is determined may be less clear.

 3. In this example I assume that it is less skilled workers who leave the labor
 market during recessions, but this is not clear a pori. More skilled workers
 may have higher reservation wages, or a higher value of non-market time, and
 thus may remain out of the labor market longer once unemployed.

 4. This is a straightforward conclusion from the sample selectivity literature.
 See Heckman [1974].

5. See Abowd and Card [l987J for empirical evidence on the extent of wage
smoothing.

6. The PSID follows everyone from the original sample and adds in all new
individuals who join the households of an existing sample member. Thus, the
size of the PSID is steadily increasing over time as new children and spouses
appear. Existing PSID individuals also enter my cross-sections as they age and
become household heads. The white male sample increases from 1657 to 2641
during these 14 years, and the black male sample increases from 694 to 1297.

7. As others have noted, this type of wage definition can be subject to serious
errors. It would be preferable to have actual reported wage rates, but this is
not available for all workers within the PSID. To the extent that errors in
the average hourly earnings series are not correlated with business activity,
this might create noise in my data, but should not bias my results.

8. If labor market participation is selectively chosen during the year, then
the coefficient on any annual measure of economic growth will be downward
biased. The preZerred alternative is a measure of growth derived only during
the period the worker is in the labor market. To the extent that I find
significant cyclical effects, they are minimum estimates of the true effect.

9. The small real annual change in wages reflects the overall stagnant macro-
economy during this time period. However, though real earnings grow very
little during these 14 years, there is significant cyclical activity. In 5 of
these years GNP growth is negative, in 5 years it exceeds 5%, and in the
remaining 4 years it varies between 2.6% and 3.4%.

10. I choose to proxy the business cycle with changes in GNP. This is the
variable which is used to officially define cyclical activity in the economy.
I have duplicated all results reported here using changes in unemployment rates
rather than changes in GNP. In no case do the results differ.

                                     23
11. As noted above, this is at least partially due to the fact that I am using a
measure of average hourly earnings
                                   based on annual income and hours. Those
excluded from the sample of workers in any given year must be non-labor market
participants over the entire year.

12. The wage equation estimated for each year uses ln(wage) as the dependent
variable, and includes education, age, age squared, a dummy variable for
unionization, and a constant.

13. I could regress individual wage changes against changes in GNP, rather than
using just the mean wage change. This would mean using only individuals who
are employed in two consecutive years; it would also involve an enormous number
of observations over the 14 yeas. This would produce the same estimates as
reported here since OLS fits through the means. The standard errors of the two
techniques will differ. Under reasonable assumptions, the standard errors
reported here are larger than those which would be produced if all the micro-
data were utilized jointly. Further problems in the standard errors arise from
the fact that the dependent variable itself is an estimate. While I could
adjust the variance/covariance matrix for the standard deviations in the
estimated 13's for each year, I have no idea how to calculate the covariance
between the estimates of 13 across the years. (The fact that the estimated
regression is in first difference form only increases these problems.) Not
adjusting for this should produce smaller standard errors than is accurate. A
priori I cannot tell which of these two effects would dominate. I have chosen
to report the uncorrected standard errors.

14. This technique is quite common in the empirical literature, thus I do not
repeat the econometric specification in great detail. In brief, the selectivity
term is calculated as
                  f(5Zt)/(1 - F(6Zt))
where 6 is the vector of coefficients estimated from a probit equation on labor
market participation. In my estimates, 6 includes education, age, age squared,
                                                     marital status and
number of dependents, and dummy variables indicating
residence in the northeast, northcentral or southern regions of the country.

15. Although the estimation procedures differ between the two papers, they both
should provide consistent estimates of wage cyclicality. Hoff itt, Keane and
Runkle follow the approach of other papers and measure cyclicality by including
a change in the unemployment rate in their individual wage change regressions.


16. Like equation (4), this too can be written in terms of the changes in the
13's and the changes in the X's. However, the mathematical expression is long
and not at all revealing.

17. Heckman and Sedlacek as well as Hoff itt, Keane and Runkle note differences
between the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sector. I experimented with a
variety of different sectoral breakdowns. While the manufacturing distinction
was important, it was also clear that white collar workers needed to be
differentiated from other workers.
                                                           are similar in their
18. One can reject the hypothesis that the three subgroups
wage equations at the 1% level of significance for both black and white workers
in each of the 14 years. (The mean coefficients over the 14 years look more
similar than the estimated coefficients in any given year.)

                                      24
19. Of course, I would much prefer to use a variable which measured actual years
of work experience. The PSID provides this only after 1973. Since I need all
the time observations I can get, this leaves me with no choice but to use the
less accurate "age" variable in place of experience.

20. I report the results of this estimation only for white males for two
reasons: First, white men's wages show no evidence of being affected by labor
force participation movements, as noted above, so ignoring the participation
selectivity issue should not effect these results. (It would be very difficult
to estimate a model in which both labor market participation and choice between
three sectors occurs simultaneously.) Second, because of the small number of
black men in the PSID sample, estimating sectoral choices and separate wage
equations for each of the three sectors in a complex econometric model can be
difficult. This is particularly a problem for the PMA group of workers; in the
early years of the PSID, less than 50 black men are in this group.

21. For a more detailed presentation and an empirical example of the use of
this type of a three-way choice model, see Blank [1985].




                                    25
                                  REFERENCES


Abowd, John M. and David Card. "Intertemporal Labor Supply and Long Term
  Employment Contracts." American Economic Review, March 1987.

Altonji, Joseph and Orley Ashenfelter. "Wage Movements and the Labour Market
  Equilibrium Hypothesis." Economica, August 1980.

Bus, Mark J. "Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data."
  Journal of Political Economy, September 1985.

Blank, Rebecca M. "An Analysis of Workers' Choice Between Employment in the
  Public and Private Sectors," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January
  1985.

                                 the Effect of the Business Cycle on the
  Distribution of Income," Princeton Industrial Relations Section Working
  Paper #189 May 1985.
Coleman, Thomas S. "Essays on Aggregate Labor Market Business Cycle Fluctu-
  ations." PhD thesis, University of Chicago. December 1984.

Dunlop, John T. "The Movement of Real and Money Wage Rates." Economic
  Journal, September 1938.

Geary, Patrick T. and John Kennan, "The Employment-Real Wage Relationship: An
  International Study." Journal of Political Economy, August 1982.

Heckman, James J. "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply,"
  Econometrica,   1974.

                  and Guilherme Sedlacek, "Heterogeneity, Aggregation, and
  Market Wage Functions: An Empirical Model of Self-Selection in the Labor
  Market." Journal of Political Econoy, December 1985.

Moffitt, Robert, Michael Keane and David Runkle, "Real Wages Over the Business
  Cycle: Estimating the Impact of Heterogeneity with Micro Data," NBER
  Working Paper No. 87-10, March 1987.

Neftci, Salih N. "A Time-Series Analysis of the Real Wages - Employment
  Relationship." Journal of Political Economy, April 1978.

Raisain, John, "Contracts, Job Experience and Cyclical Labor Market Adjust-
  ments." Journal of Labor Economics, April 1983.

Sargent, Thomas J. "Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules Under
  Rational Expectations." Journal of Political Economy, December 1978.




                                     26
                                                              Table 1

                 MEAN LEVELS AND CYCLICAL PATTERNS IN WORKER CHARACTERISTICS -                       1969-1982



                                                                                      Sectoral Groups1'
                                All Workers                             White Men                          Black Men
                              White     Black                                          Non—                                    Non-
                               Men             Men           PMA          Mfg.         Mfg.        PMA           Mfg.          MI g.



 Dependent Variable: Average Bonny Earnings             ($81)
 Mean LevelV               10.70              8.67          13.72        9.79         8.89      15.14            8.12          7.25
 Avg. Annual Change          .04              .09       -   .02         .04          -.01      -.10             .08         .06
 Cyclical Coefficient—      .0412*            .0599*    -.0029          .0566*        .0791*   -   .0066        .0507*      .0462*
                           (.0220)           (.0272)    (.0413)         (.0198)      (.0267)   (.1413)      (.0235)        (.0236)
 Independent Variables: Education (years)
Mean Level                 12.66             10.70       14.67        11.03          11.92      14.06           10.09         10.12
Cyclical Coefficient      -.oooi         -   .0157       .0143*       .0150*        -.0024     -.0722                     -   .0143
                          (.0023)        (.0133)        (.0103)      (.0096)        (.0058)    (.0731)      (.0164)       (.0188)
Age

Mean Level                 40.16             39.89       40.31        41.08          39.54      41.17           38.51      40.11
Cyclical Coefficient       .0052          .0402         -.0648       -.0150                                 -
                                                                                     .0546*     .0902           .0509      .0933
                          (.0250)        (.0615)        (.0519)      (.0441)        (.0245)    (.1716)      (.0888)       (.0865)
Age Squared

Mean Level               1765.29    1743.43             1754.20     1847.22        1729.25   1817.48        1625.52      1771.79
Cyclical Clefficient       .5651    3.9015             -4.8732      -.7513         4.0088*   6.6278        -3.8002       8.9401
                         (2.0530) (5.1600)             (4.4026)     (3.6048)      (1.8074) (14.6390)       (6.9582)      (7.2261)
Union (1 = Union Bo.brr)

Mean Level                 .250              .297       .107            .496         .240      .106         .418           .268
Cyclical Coefficient     —.0003              .0005                  —.0010          -.00001    .0009        .00007         .0001
                         (.0010)         (.0013)



5significant at 10% level.

1"Sectoral Groups: PMA             =   All   Professional, Managerial and Administrative workers;
                    Mfg.     =         All   Non-PMA workers in manufacturing industries;
                    Non—Mfg. =         All   Non-PMA workers in nonnanufacturing industries.

"Represents the mean   (over   14 years) of each annual mean variable.

Represents the coefficient a1 from the 13-observation regression (Xt1 -
   +           -
                                                                                                   Xt)
     a1((GNP1 GNPt)/GNPt) ÷ e , where      is the mean in year t
                                                        Table 2

            MEAN LEVELS. VARIANCE AND CYCLICAL PATTERNS IN COEFFICIENTS

                               FROM OLS WAGE REGRESSIONS - 1969—1982



                                                   Simple OLS                         Selectivity Term
                                      White Men             Black Men              White Men    Black Men

Education
                                           .0689              .0584                     .0661           .0606
Mean Coefficient-"
                           .0039                              .0044                     .0038           .0046
Mean Std Error!!
                                                              .0118                     .0051           .0155
Std Dev of CoeffIcients!" .0063
                         - .0006                              .0018*                —.0005              .0020*
Cyclical Coefficient!'
                                       (.0006)               (.0012)                    (.0005)        (.0014)


Age
                                           .0635                 .0638                   .0637           .0630
Mean Coefficient                                                                         .0032           .0036
Mean Std Error                             .0032                 .0035
                                           .0081                 .0130                   .0070           .0143
Std Dev of Coefficients
                                        .0008*               -.0013                      .0006*        -.0010
Cyclical Coefficient
                                       (.0004)               (.0014)                    (.0003)        (.0014)


Age Squared
                                                             -   .0006              -.0006             - .0006
Mean Coefficient                       -   .0006
                                           .00004                .00005               .00005                .00006
Mean Std Error
                                           .0001              .0002                      .0001              .0002
Std Dev of Coefficients
                                       -   .00001*            .00002                     .000008*           .00001
Cyclical Coefficient
                                       (.000005)             (.00002)                   (.000003)       (.00002)

Union (1 = Union          .ber)
                                           .2667              .3416                      .2496           .3322
Mean Coefficient
                                           .0295              .0659                      .0286           .0653
Mean Std Error
                                           .0342              .0801                      .0315           .0720
Std Dev of Coefficients
                                       -   .0018              .0038                     -.0016           .0027
Cyclical Coefficient
                                       (.0022)               (.0094)                    (.0022)         (.0086)


Conatant
                                       —.1810                —.2093                     -.1569          -   .2018
Mean Coefficient
                                        .0327                    .0403                      .0328           .0402
Mean Std Error
                                           .0681                 .0215                      .0648           .0287
Std Dev of Coefficients
                                        .0154*                   .0013                      .0116*      -   .0005
Cyclical Coefficient
                                       (.0099)               (.0027)                    (.0087)         (.0040)


Selectivity      Correction
                                                                                        —.2686           .0290
Mean Coefficient
                                                                                         .1528           .1204
Mean Std Error
                                                                                            .1407        .4640
Std Dcv of Coefficients                                                                 —   .0113        .0832
Cyclical Coefficient
                                                                                        (.0208)         (.0658)



 *Significant at 10% level.

 !/'Represents the mean of 14 coefficient estimates (1969—1983).

 !"Represents the mean of 14 coefficient standard errors (1969—1983).

 !"Represents the standard deviation of the coefficients over the 14 years.

 "Represents the coefficient a1 from the 13—observation regression

            —         =        +                    —                     + e   where            is the estimated
                Xt)       a0       c1((GNPt+i           GNPt)/GNPt)
      coefficient in year t
                                                   Table 3

              MEAN LEVELS, VARIANCE, AND CYCLICAL PATTERNS IN COEFFICIENTS

                        FROM SECTORjL OLS WAGE REGRESSIONS'- 1969-1982



                                               White Men                                    Black Men
                                                                Non-                                     Non-
                                    PMA             Mfg.        Mfg.

 Education
 Mean CoefficjentV                 .0517           .0515       .0500           .0688        .0310       .0403
 Mean Std Errorg/                  .0073           .0071       .0064           .0169        .0091       .0058
 Std 0ev of Coefficients1 .0077                    .0149       .0105           .0227        .0183       .0196
 Cyclical Coefficient4/  - .0007   .0022* —.0006                               .0025        .0011       .0028
                          (.0008) (.0014) (.0016)                          (.0027) (.0030) (.0024)
 Age
 Mean Coefficient                  .0767           .0729      .0709            .0641        .0845       .0691
 Mean Std Error                    .0060           .0052      .0050            .0153        .0067       .0044
 Std Dev of Coefficients           .0087           .0142      .0075            .0251        .0140     .0177
 Cyclical Coefficient              .0004       -
                                           .0002                                        — .0013     — .0029*
                                                              .0019*           .0005
                                 (.0005) (.0011) (.0011)                   (.0029) (.0023) (.0021)
 Age Squared
 Mean Coefficient                - .0007       - .0007       - .0008       - .0006  — .0009  - .0007
 Mean Std Error                   •oooi            .0001      .0001         .0002     .0001    .0001
 Std 0ev of Coefficients          .oooi            .0002      .0001         .0004     .0002    .0003
 Cyclical Coefficient              .000006 -.00001 - .00002                -.00003    .00002   .00005*
                                 (.000007)(.00001) (.00002)                (.00005) (.00003) (.00003)
Union (1 - Union eaber)
Mean Coefficient                  .0531         .1862       .4545              .0436        .3187       .5132
Mean Std Error                    .0641         .0408       .0465              .3498        .0808       .0833
Std Dev of Coefficients           .0292         .0595       .0490              .1608        .0710       .1104
Cyclical Coefficient              .0007         .0058      _.0098*             .0049.0095* - .0054
                                 (.0037) (.0049) (.0050)                  (.0198) (.0058) (.0120)
Conatant
Mean Coefficient                 -.1231       —.1174       —.1818         -.1029        —   .2768   —.1998
Mean Std Error                    .0568        .0525        .0490              .1388        .0564    .0478
Std Dev of Coefficients           .0628        .0826        .0718          .0654            .0465    .0469
Cyclical Coefficient              .0040   _.0088* _.0058*                 -.0042            .0003       .0116
                                 (.0031) (.0063) (.0043)                  (.0088) (.0062) (.0047)

*significant at 10% level.

Sectoral Groups: PMA                =   All   Professional., Managerial and Administrative workers;
                          Mfg.     =    All   Non—PMA workers In manufacturing industries;
                          Non-Mfg. =    All   Non—PMA workers In nonmanufacturing industries.

"Represents the mean of 14 coefficient estimates (1969—83).
—3/Represents
                  the mean of 14 coefficient standard errors (1969—1983).

"Represents the coefficient          a1 from the 13-observation regression
        —         =                 —
            Xt)       a0 + ai((GNP+1 GNPt)/GNPt) + e               ,   where           is the estimated

  coefficient in year t
                                                         Table 4

        MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATES FROM JOINT SECTORAL CHOICE/SECTORAL WAGE                  ESTIMATION'

                                            White Males — 1969—1982


                                        Sector Selection Equations                             Wage Equations

                          Pr(choose PMA Pr(choose Mfg Pr(Choose PMA                  PMA             Mfg.       NonMfg.
                          over NonM fg.) over NonMfg.) over NonMfg.)V
                                (1)                (2)                  (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)


Education
                                               -.0495                  .2222         .0505        .0530            .0493
Mean Coefficient             .1727
                             .0202              .0256                  .0425         .0287        .0143            .0196
Mean Std Error
                             .0223              .0092                  .0162         .0071        .0124            .0093
Std Dev of Coefficients
                             .0007              .0010              -.0003        —.0006           .0015*       -   .0007
Cyclical Coefficient
                                               (.0008)             (.0014)       (.0007)         (.0010)       (.0014)
                            (.0011)

Age
                            -.0964                 .0262           -.1226            .0774        .0717            .0715
Mean Coefficient
                                                   .0162               .0248         .0167        .0080            .0111
Mean Std Error                  .0121
                                                   .0117               .0081         .0083        .0012            .0065
Std Dev of Coefficients         .0163
                            -   .0006          -   .0012*              .0006         .0004       -.0001            .0O12
Cyclical Coefficient
                                               (.0006)             (.0009)       (..0005)        (.0007)       (.0009)
                            (.0008)

Age Squared
                                                                                 -   .0007       -   .0007     -   .0008
Mean Coefficient             .0012             -   .0003            .0014
                             .0002                 .0002            .0003            .0002           .0001         .0001
Mean Std Error
                             .0002                 .0002            .0001            .0001           .0002         .0001
Std Dev of Coefficients                                                                                     - .00001
                             .00001             .000014*           -.00001       -.0001          -.000002
Cyclical Coefficient
                            (.00001)           (.000009)           (.00001)      (.0001)         (.000010) (.00001)

Region South

Mean Coefficient            -.1655             —.2090                   .0435
Mean Std Error               .0814              .0844                   .0878
Std Dev of Coefficients      .0808              .0326                   .0707
                             .0023              .0004                   .0019
Cyclical Coefficient
                            (.0057)            (.0049)                 (.0056)

Region $est

Mean Coefficient            —.0994             _.3393                   .2399
Mean Std Error                  .1023            .0928                  .1124
Std Dev of Coefficients         .1150            .0480                  .1006
                            -   .0053            .0055                 — .0108
Cyclical Coefficient
                            (.0081)             (.0064)                (.0095)

Union
                                                                                      .0524           .1840         .4386
Mean CoefficIent
                                                                                      .0746           .0440         .0570
Mean Std Error
                                                                                      .0306           .0550         .0440
Std Dev of Coefficients                                                                                         — .0099*
                                                                                      .0003           .0048
Cyclical Coefficient
                                                                                     (.0038)         (.0044)       (.0043)




                                                         (continued)
                                               Table 4 -   continued


                                      Sector Selection Equations                            Wage Equations
                           Pr(choose PMA   Pr(choose Mfg   Pr(Choose PMA
                           over NonMfg.    over NonMfg.                           PMA             Mfg.
                                                           over NonMfg. )/                                   NonMfg.
                               (11             (21              (3)               (4)             (5)          (6)
 Constant
 Mean Coefficient           —.5905          — .3084           .2820          —.1254          —.1072      —.1694
 Mean Std Error              .3376           .2979             .1184           .3084          .2075        1528
 Std Dev of Coefficients     .1084           .1007            .1050           .0650           .0665       .0705
 Cyclical Coefficient        .0006           .0165*           .0159*          .0042          -   .0046   - .0058
                            (.0116)         (.0099)          (.0087)         (.0035)         (.0050)     (.0034)
 Standard Error

 Mean Coefficient             -—-            -——
                                                                                 .5321        .4117       .5985
 Mean Std Error
                                                                                 .0086        .0094       .0097
 Std Dcv of Coefficients
                                                                                 .0620        .0438       .0296
 Cyclical Coefficient                                                        -   .0009        .0010      -.0019
                                                                             (.0022)         (.0027)     (.0020)



 Correlation Coefficients3'
                                              rlEN             r2CM              r 2N            r 3eP
Mean Coefficient             .0087          -.0083            .0082          -.0271           .0088      -.0082
Mean Std Error               .3928           .2585                            .5380           .3945       .3554
Std Dcv of Coefficients      .0095           .0188            .0144           .0159           .0097       .0143
Cyclical Coefficient         .0010           .0032            .0015           .0009           .0010      —.0015
                            (.0008)         (.0026)          (.0017)         (.0021)         (.0008)     (.0017)

                                               r12
Mean Coefficient                               .5035            .4982             —.4982
Mean Std Error                                 .7066           .7487
Std Dcv of Coefficients
                                                                                   .7487
                                               .0139           .0070               .0070
Cyclical Coefficient                           .0004          —.0002               .0002
                                               .0021)         (.0010)             (.0010)

*Sjgnifjcant at 10* level

      footnotes to Table 3 for sectoral definitions and further explanation of row categories.

"Coefficients in coluan (3) are calculated for the
                                                   coefficient estimation in columns (1) and (2).
  See Appendix.

"See Appendix for definition of correlation coefficients.
                                                 Table 5


                                 A. MOVERS BETWEEN SECTORS1'

                                         White Men -1969—1982


                                  PMA-       PMA-            Mf g.-          Mfg.+      Nonnf g.- Nonmf g.-
                                  Mfg.      Nonmfg.          PMA             Nonmfg.      PMA       Mfg.



Mean Percent of Workers1"          .71        2.86            .94             2.14       3.51        2.06
  Who Move per Year

                                  .0004   - .0005*                             .0002                  .0018*
Cyclica1ity Coefficient" —.0001
  on Percent of Movers   (.0003) (.0010) (.0003)                              (.0008)    (.0008) (.0007)

Average Wage Change/               .18        -.39           1.65         -.23            .40        —.14
  (average std dev)              (3.37)      (1.43)         (2.80)            (.70)     (1.06)      (1.03)

Cyclicality Coefficientf/ .2173    .0419   —.2125                             —.0402      .0664       .0076
  on Wage Change          (.3545) (.1525) (.2922)                             (.0740)    (.1120) (.1100)


                                  B. STAYERS WITHIN SECTORS



                                                 PMA                  Mfg.                Nonafg.


Mean Percent of Workers!"                        30.19                17.57               40.03
  Who Stay for 2 Years

Cyclicality Coefuicient"                         — .0020                .0010               .0009
  on Percent of Stayers                           (.0029)              (.0014)             (.0031)

                                                      .30               .22                 .20
Average Wage Change/
  (average std dev)                               (.41)                (.31)                (.26)


Cyclicality CoefficIent4"                          .0315                .0860*               .0427*
  on Wage Change                                  (.0429)              (.0208)              (.0246)



*Sjgnificant at 10% level.

For definition of Sectoral groups, see Foonote 1, Table 3.

1/Represents mean.(over 13 two—year periods) of the percent of workers who move
  from 1st to 2nd sector In these two years.

VRepresents the coefficient a1 from the regression *movers(t,t+l)/#workerst =
       +                —                  + e        estimated     over 13 observations.
  a0       a1((GNP+i        GNPt)/GNPt)           ,




"Represents mean wage change over 13 two—year periods.

"Represents the coefficient a1 from the regression Wage1 — Wager =
       +                —                  + e
  a0       ai((GNPt÷i       GNPt)/GNPt)
                                                                   APPENDIX

                                   ESTIMATING A JOINT SECTOR SELECTION/WAGE MODEL

          A worker is choosing one sector out of three (F, M, or N), each of which

 have their own separate wage determination process. Let the utility available

 in each sector to worker i be characterized by the equations

 (Al) Up = Sap + Vp
                =             4- vt.
           UM       SaM

and UNSaN+VN
Choice of one sector over another is based on a utility comparison between the

sectors, which leads to the three equations ((12) -                                       (14)   in the text):

(A2) UpN = U,                  -
                                   UN
                                        =
                                             Z6l +   p,   where 61 =            - aN, i =        Vp
                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                              vN;
         =                     -        =
                                             Z62 +        where 62 = aM                   2 =
                                                                                -                     -
                      UM           UN                                               aN,          vM           vN;
and        U*PM =     U        -
                                   UM
                                        =
                                             Z63 +        where 63 = ap         -
                                                                                    aM, p3 = Vp
                                                                                                      -       VM.

It is straightforward to see that upM = UPN                                 -
                                                                                    UN,    63 = 61        -
                                                                                                               2'   and
      =        - • Thus,                we need only estimate the determinants of the two com-

parisons upN and                             from which we can derive the determinants of the third
                *
choice,        U PN

          As indicated in the text, the wage equations for each sector are

(A3) WpXI3p+p
          WM =      M+
and       WN
                =
                    N 4N
The correlation matrix between the errors in the equations in (A2) and (A3) is

                          1

                                        1


                      r13              F23      1

                                        o      r3 an
                          0            r2CM F3K 0             aM

                      rlN r2N                   0         0    0
                                                                       aN
                                                                                                                          Appendix

                                -                                                                    =            -
where F3p =       F1/42(1           F12), F3M -F2EN/.T2(l - F12),                              r13

and r23 = --.1(1     -
                          r12)/42       Thus, jointly estimating a full sectoral choice/wage

model requires estimating three variances and five correlation coefficients.

       The likelihood that worker i is observed in sector P, with wages Wp is

(A5) Lp = Pr( Cp = (Wp
                                    -
                                        XI3p)/cp    ,   iij > -Z1              '       3i >     Z63      )


This   can be written as the product of a univariate and a conditional bivariate

distribution function:

(A5t) L1 =        (Ep)     I'( li' 2i
where      is a univarity normal density function, and +'                                 is    a conditional

bivariate normal distribution. I' can be rewritten as a unconditional bivariate

normal distribution using straightforward statistical techniques, which

results in the likelihood

                           (Z61 + FpEp ,                          +   F3ptp        ,    F13
                                                                                               - FpF3p)
(A5'')Lpj =       •(Ep)                                 Z&3

                               4(1F1p)
 In    a similar manner, the likelihood that individual i is paid                                            in   sector N is

              =                                               -                        F23 -
(A6) LMi                  I(-Z52 + F2ENCM ,         Z&3               F3N€M

                                                        r(l-r3tM)
while the likelihood that individual i is paid in sector N is

                                                              -                               - rl€Nr2€N).
(A7) "Ni =                +( z&1 -      F1cNN   ,   Zs52              F2ENtN   ,




The overall likelihood function for an individual i is

(A8) L SpjLpj +                         +   (l_Spi)(l_S)Lj
                  1 if individual i is in sector P, 0 otherwise; and SMi =                                            1   if
where Sp =
individual i is in sector M, 0 otherwise. The estimated likelihood function

for the entire sample of n individuals is
      n
(A9) Z L.
        i=1
