NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPLICATIONS OF MEDICAID FINANCING REFORM FOR STATE GOVERNMENT
BUDGETS
Jeffrey Clemens
Benedic Ippolito
Working Paper 23965
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23965

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2017

We thank Joe Antos, Nicholas Bagley, Alex Brill, Matt Fiedler, John Klemm, Sean Speer,
Michael Strain, and the participants of the Harrington Symposium on Health Economics at the
University of Texas at Austin for helpful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jeffrey Clemens and Benedic Ippolito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Implications of Medicaid Financing Reform for State Government Budgets
Jeffrey Clemens and Benedic Ippolito
NBER Working Paper No. 23965
October 2017
JEL No. H72,H75,H77
ABSTRACT
We analyze potential reforms to Medicaid financing through the lens of fiscal federalism.
Because substantial dollars are at stake, both the economic and political sides of
intergovernmental transfers have high relevance in this setting. We show that changes in
Medicaid financing formulas can shift amounts exceeding several hundred dollars per capita from
"winning" states to "losing" states. In some cases, these amounts exceed 10 percent of states'
own-source revenues. States' balanced budget requirements imply that such changes would, if
not phased in gradually, require significant budgetary adjustment over short time horizons. We
next show that alternative Medicaid financing structures have significant implications for states'
exposure to budgetary stress during recessions. During the Great Recession, an acyclical block
grant structure would have increased states' shortfalls by 2--3.5 percent of own-source revenues
relative to either an explicitly countercyclical block grant or the current matching system.
Finally, we assess the implications of several financing structures for the extent to which they
subsidize states' decisions on both the "extensive" and "intensive" margins of coverage generosity
over the short and long term.

Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu
Benedic Ippolito
American Enterprise Institute
1789 Massachusetts Avenue
Washington, DC 20036, USA
benedic.ippolito@aei.org

While intergovernmental transfers rarely steal headlines, federal contributions to
state Medicaid programs are an occasional exception. This reflects the sheer magnitude of federal Medicaid spending and, by extension, its importance for state government budgets. In 2015, federal contributions to state Medicaid programs totaled
$350 billion. These transfers equaled 2 percent of GDP, roughly one-fifth of state
governments’ general revenues, and more than half of total federal transfers to the
states.
Because Medicaid plays a prominent role in state government finances, Medicaid
financing reforms have significant fiscal implications. This paper assesses the implications of alternative Medicaid financing structures along several dimensions. We show
that the fine print of financing reform can have first-order implications for the distribution of federal Medicaid spending across states. We thus consider the “distributive
politics” of financing reforms in some detail.
Beyond the distributive politics perspective, we consider several issues with roots
in the economics of fiscal federalism. One set of issues involves states’ incentives
regarding both the generosity and management of their Medicaid programs. A second,
related issue involves the division of long-run financing responsibilities between states
and the federal government. The more quantitative and novel portion of our analysis
highlights two important yet underappreciated issues involving the continuity of state
government finances.
Medicaid is financed jointly by the federal and state governments. The existing
program’s basic financing structure involves federal “matching grants.” For each
dollar a state spends, the federal government provides the state with an amount
determined by the applicable match rate. The primary match rate is known as the
federal medical assistance percentage (FMAP). This match rate varies in accordance
with a formula involving the ratio of a state’s per capita income to the national
average. Match rates for coverage of traditional Medicaid beneficiaries range from a

2

legislated floor of 50 percent for high-income states to a ceiling of 83 percent for lowincome states.1 In addition to varying across states, the federal share varies across
coverage groups. It is higher for children covered through the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program and for adults covered through the Medicaid expansion created
by the Affordable Care Act than for traditional Medicaid eligibility groups.
Proposals to reform federal Medicaid financing have a long history. The primary reform of interest involves converting Medicaid from its long-standing “matching grant” structure into either a traditional “block grant” or an intermediate “perbeneficiary” allocation structure. As documented by Lambrew (2005) and Park and
Broaddus (2011), proposals to convert federal Medicaid contributions into a block
grant have appeared in every decade since the 1980s.2
Key features of block grant design vary across proposals. Under traditional block
grant proposals, states’ allocations would be independent of both their programs’
eligibility rules and the generosity of the benefits to which each participant is entitled. The financing reforms included in recent legislative proposals to reform the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) can be described as a hybrid between the current matching grant structure and the traditional block grant structure. In this paper we will
emphasize the specific proposal included in the American Health Care Act (AHCA),
which involves matching payments up to a maximum federal contribution that rises
with the number of beneficiaries a state’s program covers.3 Beyond this maximum
contribution, the effective match rate under the AHCA proposal is 0 percent.4 The
1

Roughly 10–15 states receive the minimum 50 percent match rate in a given year. In FY 2015
those states were Alaska, California, Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Rhode Island, Virginia, Washington, and Wyoming.
In practice, the 83 percent maximum on FMAPs is not binding, as matching rates have not risen
above 75 percent in recent years (Mississippi typically receives the highest federal match).
2
Iterations include a 1981 proposal from President Ronald Reagan, a 1995 proposal from Congressman Newt Gingrich, a 2003 proposal from President George W. Bush, and a 2010 proposal
from Congressman Paul Ryan and Alice Rivlin of the Brookings Institution.
3
This financing structure was commonly described as a “per capita cap” despite being neither a
cap on state spending nor a per capita allocation.
4
For a detailed discussion, see Adler, Fiedler, and Gronniger (2017).

3

key feature of per-beneficiary structures is that they subsidize the generosity of states’
coverage rules on extensive margins (i.e., the margins that determine how many individuals are eligible) while eliminating the matching grant’s subsidy of coverage on
intensive margins (i.e., the margins that determine the amount of spending on care
per beneficiary).
The academic literature on intergovernmental transfers highlights a broad set of
conceptual issues related to their design. A first set of issues involves the incentives
intergovernmental transfers create. The central considerations can be summarized as
involving a trade-off between creating incentives to provide public goods and maintaining incentives for states to operate their programs efficiently. That is, match rates
can be viewed as subsidies that correct for underinvestment in public goods (BerndSpahn, 2007). At the same time, “optimal” match rates must account for distortions
to states’ incentives to manage their programs efficiently (Smart, 2007).
A second set of issues involves the distribution of resources across jurisdictions (in
the context of education finance, for example, see Hoxby, 2001; Card and Payne, 2002;
Jackson, Johnson, and Persico, 2016). Redistribution across jurisdictions can reflect
a variety of policy objectives. Relevant “optimal policy” objectives may include a
desire to narrow long-run differences in economic capacity or a desire to facilitate
short-run recovery from economic shocks (Von Hagen, 2007).
Both the incentive effects and the distributional effects of intergovernmental grants
can be analyzed through a political economy lens as well as through an optimal policy
lens. Sato (2007) analyzes the straightforward political economy considerations that
arise when designing transfers that redistribute across jurisdictions. Boadway and
Shah (2007) and Baicker, Clemens, and Singhal (2012) discuss the political economy
implications of using intergovernmental transfers as a means for one level of government to encourage or coerce other levels of government into engaging in particular
activities.

4

Our analysis empirically assesses three features of Medicaid financing reform. We
first show that financing reforms have substantive implications for the distribution of
federal Medicaid dollars across states. We highlight the dramatic difference between
two straightforward alternatives: status-quo block grants and uniform, need-based
grants. We first allocate federal funding via “status-quo block” grants that are equal
to the federal contributions states received in 2015. We next allocate the same aggregate of federal funding using an alternative formula. Specifically, we consider a
“uniform, need-based” block grant determined by variations in per capita income
across states.
The funding formulas we consider differ significantly because of variation in the
generosity of states’ existing programs. This is due in part to states’ decisions regarding the ACA’s Medicaid expansions; ACA related funding accounts for more than one
third of some states’ federal Medicaid dollars. Many states’ federal Medicaid allocations differ by more than 50 percent across the financing formulas we consider. New
York, for example, would receive nearly $16 billion less per year under the incomebased block grants we consider compared to the status quo. Texas, by contrast, would
receive nearly $8 billion more under income-based block grants than under the status
quo.
In addition to distributive politics, we highlight two underappreciated issues involving the continuity of state government finances. Budget continuity is relevant
because of states’ fiscal institutions. Because of their balanced budget requirements,
states in which federal Medicaid allocations decline must adjust their finances over
relatively short time horizons.5 Options include increasing own-source revenues and
reducing expenditures. The shifts implied by the alternative allocation rules we consider are sufficiently large that the adjustments required to satisfy states’ balanced
5

This is particularly true of states in which balanced budget requirements include a so-called “No
Carry” provisions. “No Carry” provisions prevent states from carrying short-term general obligation
debt from one fiscal year into the next, which leads in practice to relatively rapid fiscal adjustment
in response to unexpected shocks (Poterba, 1994; Clemens and Miran, 2012).

5

budget requirements would be significant. Fiscal institutions thus provide a rationale
for relatively gradual transitions from Medicaid’s current financing structure toward
any final allocation Congress intends to achieve.
The example of New York illustrates the relevance of federal Medicaid contributions’ magnitudes. As noted above, New York would lose nearly $16 billion under a
purely income-based allocation of federal Medicaid funds. This amounts to 16 percent of New York’s own-source general revenues from 2014. Closing such a shortfall
through revenue measures would thus require all taxes, user fees, and charges to rise
substantially to make up for lost federal contributions.
Fiscal rules are also relevant for states’ exposure to the business cycle. Medicaid’s
current matching grant structure limits this exposure by automatically increasing
federal spending as a recession increases the number of individuals who are eligible for,
and participating in, the program. Traditional block grants are acyclical and would
not have this feature. Consequently, acyclical block grants would increase the extent
to which states must engage in contractionary adjustments to satisfy their balanced
budget requirements during recessions. We analyze two alternatives to acyclical block
grants that would relieve these recessionary fiscal strains.
Reducing states’ exposure to the business cycle requires increasing federal contributions during recessions. Block grants could ease cyclical strains if aggregate Medicaid funding is indexed to business cycle conditions. A simple approach, for example,
would be to increase the federal government’s contribution by some fixed percent per
unit change in the national unemployment rate. We illustrate the implications of this
approach in the context of the Great Recession. As desired, the adjustment can be
calibrated to make federal Medicaid financing more, less, or roughly as countercyclical
as the current system. We also analyze a “per-beneficiary allocation” approach that
is similar in spirit to the AHCA’s proposed changes to Medicaid financing. Because
federal allocations rise with a states’ number of beneficiaries, this approach is more

6

countercyclical than traditional block grants.
A final set of issues involves the long-run division of Medicaid financing responsibilities between the states and the federal government. With block grants, the
evolution of this division depends crucially on the rate at which federal contributions
are scheduled to grow. Under the AHCA and other recent proposals, the federal
share tends to decline over time because the growth rate is set lower than the expected growth rate of per-person medical expenditures. We show that alternative
financing structures have quite different long-run implications for states’ incentives
to cover new beneficiaries. Over the very long run, the division of Medicaid financing
between states and the federal government may be viewed as a federal mechanism for
maintaining a floor on the generosity of states’ Medicaid programs.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 briefly describes the
data on which we rely. Section 2 defines the financing structures we subsequently
analyze. Section 3 illustrates the cross-state distributional implications of alternative funding schemes. Section 4 presents simulations of federal contributions under
alternative funding structures during the Great Recession. Section 5 discusses the
long-run implications of alternative funding structures. Section 6 considers states’
potential responses to changes in the incentives alternative structures entail. Section
7 concludes.

1

Data Sources

States’ Medicaid expenditures are the primary focus of our analysis. We take data
on Medicaid spending from 2006 through 2015 from financial management reports
submitted by states on Form CMS-64. The data we use describe total spending in
each state, with a division into state and federal contributions. We analyze all 50
states and the District of Columbia, but exclude the U.S. territories. In addition,

7

we use state enrollment figures from the Medicaid Analytic eXtract (as of December
2016). All enrollment figures are person-year equivalents.6
Our analysis uses data from a number of additional sources. We use data on
personal income per capita from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Our analysis of
states’ exposure to business cycle fluctuations uses data on state unemployment rates
(for the population ages 16 and over) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We use
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) estimates of the number of each state’s residents
with incomes below the poverty line. These estimates were prepared by KFF using the
March 2016 Current Population Survey. Finally, we analyze state budget data from
the Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances, which is also collected
by the U.S. Census Bureau. Our analysis of state budgets focuses on own-source
revenues, defined as the sum of all revenue raised directly by the state through taxes,
fees, and charges.

2

Defining Alternative Financing Structures

Our analysis considers three financing structures: status-quo block grants; uniform,
need-based grants; and per-beneficiary allotments. While not exhaustive, these options capture the central design features at issue in discussions of alternative Medicaid
financing structures. In this section we describe the basic features of each financing
structure.

2.1

Status-Quo Block Grants

We first consider a block grant based on each state’s current federal Medicaid allocations. This financing structure has been included in a number of proposals over
recent decades. For example, it was recently included as part of the Medicaid reform
6

We thank John Klemm of the Office of the Actuary at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services for generously providing previously formatted data on enrollment and spending.

8

proposal in Speaker Paul Ryan’s A Better Way.7 This design sets each state’s baseline
block grant equal to its federal allocation from a base year t, with annual increases
at growth rate gt . For state s in year t, the federal allocation under the status-quo
block (SQB) grant is thus

Block

GrantSQB
s,t

t
Y
= Federal Fundings,t × (1 + gi ).

(1)

i=t

Our analysis of the cross-state distributional implications of this funding formula
focuses on a baseline of fiscal year 2015. We expand on the cyclical implications of
this funding structure in section 4.

2.2

Uniform, Need-Based Block Grant

We next analyze a block grant design that divorces federal allocations from current
spending levels. Under a uniform, need-based block grant, federal dollars are allocated based on measures of states’ need.8 This financing system would allocate
similar amounts to states in similar economic circumstances, adjusted for population, irrespective of their historical choices regarding the generosity of their Medicaid
programs (Helms, 2007).
Our analysis of uniform, need-based grants bases federal allocations on variations
in states’ per capita personal incomes. We use a measure quite similar to the measure
used to determine states’ match rates under the current matching grant structure.
Doing so helps isolate changes in federal spending due to financing design from those
due to alternative measures of state need.9 Specifically, the adjustment factor is based

7

See https://abetterway.speaker.gov
Designs of this form have long been advocated by critics of the current funding structure (e.g.,
Helms, 2007). Recent proposals, including the Healthcare Accessibility, Empowerment, and Liberty
Act of 2016, envision a transition from the status-quo structure towards some form of uniform,
need-based allocation.
9
Distributions are changed modestly by using alternative measures of funding need.
8

9

on a lagged three-year moving average of state per capita income (PCI):10

Income Factors,t =

3-year moving avg PCIU S,t
,
3-year moving avg PCIs,t

(2)

The allocations we consider allow for the full range of variation in the Income Factor
implied by the formula above. This contrasts with the existing FMAP formula, which
is constrained to lie between a maximum subsidy rate of 83 percent and minimum
subsidy rate of 50 percent.11
To simulate a state’s federal allocation under the uniform need-based structure,
we begin by calculating Income Factors,t . We then multiply this factor by the state’s
population (Pop.s,t ). We then set a global scaling factor such that the sum of federal
dollars across states equals actual federal spending from the base year t. The scaling
factor is grown at the legislatively specified rate gt . For state s in year t, we have:
Block GrantUs,tN B = Income Factors,t × Pop.s,t × Scaling Factort ×

t
Y
(1 + gi ). (3)
i=t

Our analysis of the cross-state distributional implications of this funding formula
again focuses on a baseline of fiscal year 2015.

2.3

Per-Beneficiary Allocations

Finally, we consider a proposed alternative to block granting – namely, per-beneficiary
allocations (PBA).12 In this financing system the federal government fixes the amounts
10

Matching rates under the current system are: FMAPs,t = 1 −

11



(3-year moving avg PCI)2s,t
(3-year moving avg PCI)2U.S.,t


· 0.45

Congress’ decision to constrain the range of FMAPs may reflect a desire to avoid subsidy rates
deemed either too stingy or too generous. This highlights a dimension along which the block grant
and matching grant structures differ. In the block grant context, the Income Factor’s sole function
is to generate redistribution from high-income states to low-income states. In the matching grant
context, the Income Factor both generates redistribution and subsidizes program expenditures on
the margin.
12
Speaker Paul Ryan’s reform agenda A Better Way, for example, offers states the option to chose
between a per-beneficiary allotment and a status-quo block grant. Similarly, the AHCA proposal
included a provision to define a state’s maximum federal contribution on a per capita basis.

10

it will reimburse states for each Medicaid enrollee. As such, program enrollment,
but not other features of program generosity, would dictate a state’s federal funding
allocation. As with traditional block grants, program parameters can have significant
implications for the initial allocation of federal funds. Funds may be allocated, for
example, based on current state spending per beneficiary (e.g., the average amount
each state currently spends per beneficiary), on a uniform per-beneficiary basis across
states (e.g., the national average per-beneficiary spending), or on a hybrid of these
basic approaches.
Our analysis focuses on a variant of PBA in which allocations are based on statespecific estimates of spending per beneficiary. This is the general approach taken in
the recent AHCA proposal. Also as in the AHCA proposal, the variant we analyze
allows per-beneficiary allocations to vary across eligibility categories. This limits the
severity of selection incentives that would arise, for example, if states receive the
same allocation for covering a child as for covering a disabled adult. The AHCA
differs in that the per-beneficiary amount dictates the maximum amount the federal
government will contribute, rather than an explicit allotment. In practice, it is likely
that the AHCA’s proposal would closely mirror that of a per-beneficiary allotment as
long as state Medicaid cost growth exceeds the growth of the per-enrollee cap.13 The
funding structure we consider is such that in year t with a set of enrollment categories

13

The Medicaid provision in the AHCA is technically a per-enrollee cap on the federal contribution. For a detailed discussion, see Adler, Fiedler, and Gronniger (2017). The number of enrollees
in a state, multiplied by the average baseline federal contribution, dictates the maximum amount
the federal government will contribute to a state’s program. In practice, the AHCA formula would
mirror the current matching structure until the cap is reached, whereupon the effective match rate
becomes zero. The federal cap is based on current spending, and the federal matching rate is unchanged, implying that incentives for incremental spending per beneficiary would be unchanged by
the AHCA until the cap is reached. If per-beneficiary costs grow faster than the cap, the AHCA’s
incentives are such that states will tend to be willing to spend up to the amount associated with
the maximum federal match. States would then face the full cost of incremental spending per beneficiary, but would receive additional funding for covering additional qualifying beneficiaries. As
emphasized by Adler, Fiedler, and Gronniger (2017), state cost growth varies nontrivially. States’
incentives for incremental spending per beneficiary will thus vary with whether their underlying cost
growth exceeds or falls short of the growth of the federal cap.

11

C, state s receives:

Block GrantPs,tBA =

X

Enrollmentc,s,t × Per-beneficiary spendingc,s,t̄ ×

c∈C

t

Y
(1 + gi )
i=t

n
o
with C = children, adults, disabled, aged, other . (4)

That is, federal funding per category c ∈ C is the product of enrollment and baseline
per-beneficiary spending grown out at rate gi . Total federal spending for a state is
simply the sum across categories.

3

Cross-State Distributional Implications of Alternative Financing Structures

In this section we illustrate the implications of status-quo block grants and uniform,
need-based grants for baseline distributions of federal dollars across states. We show
that the choice of funding structure is highly consequential for cross-state variations
in the allocation of federal dollars. Because of its significance to this analysis, we
begin by outlining the role of Medicaid expansion under the ACA.

3.1

Incorporating Medicaid Expansion Under the Affordable
Care Act

When allocating federal funds under any of the financing structures we consider,
policymakers must ask how baseline allocations will treat spending associated with
Medicaid expansions implemented under the ACA. The ACA made federal funds
available to states to finance expansions of Medicaid to cover nearly all individuals
with incomes at or below 138 percent of the poverty line. For this expansion population, the federal government initially covered 100 percent of costs. That match rate

12

was scheduled to decline to 90 percent over time. Consequently, the 32 states (counting the District of Columbia) that chose to expand Medicaid (as of January 2017)
substantially increased the amount of federal funding they received. In 2015, federal
spending through ACA Medicaid expansions reached $70 billion, which is roughly 20
percent of total federal Medicaid spending.
Among expansion states, ACA-related federal funding accounts for an average of
19 percent of total Medicaid spending and just under 30 percent of federal spending.
These figures vary considerably across states. Figure 1 shows federal ACA expansion
funding as a percent of each state’s total federal Medicaid funding. In some states,
expansion funds make up as much as 40 percent of total federal funding. The treatment of these funds thus has substantive implications for expansion states’ budgets
and for the redistribution of federal funds under alternative financing structures. On
average among these states, expansion funds are equivalent to nearly 9 percent of
own-source revenue. The relevance of these funds to state budgets is underscored
by the fact that eight expansion states have legislated that the Medicaid expansion
be unwound if federal funding falls below a legislatively specified threshold.14 In the
analysis that follows, we will illustrate key figures with and without the inclusion of
ACA-related federal funding.

3.2

Status-Quo Block Grants

Under a status-quo block grant, as defined in subsection 2.1, each state receives a
block grant equal to its 2015 federal allocation. Grants of this form would involve
perfect continuity with the existing federal matching grant structure in the short
term. This structure would thus lock in the considerable existing variations in federal
14

The states are Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Montana, New Hampshire, New Mexico,
and Washington. Reports surrounding CBO’s score of ACA “repeal-and-replace” legislation in early
2017 suggested that some uncertainty existed regarding the impacts of these provisions. In particular,
some expressed doubt about whether states would fully commit to repealing expansion in the event
of a reduction in match rates.

13

allocations to states.
Existing variations are driven by a combination of historical federal match rates
and historical state decisions regarding the expansiveness of their Medicaid programs.
Relevant margins include states’ eligibility rules, the generosity of their benefit packages, and the generosity of their provider payments. Status-quo variations in federal
funding per capita, which are presented in figure 2, are substantial. Panel A shows
total federal spending inclusive of ACA expansion funds (i.e., the current status quo),
while panel B excludes them. In 2015, total federal spending per state resident varied from a low of $535 per person in Virginia to more than $2,700 in the District of
Columbia. Figure 3 illustrates a separate measure of the variation in federal Medicaid
spending across states – namely, their federal spending per resident in poverty. Again,
we present these data with and without ACA-related federal spending. Inclusive of
ACA-related funds, these values range from roughly $3,700 in Georgia to more than
$15,000 in the District of Columbia, Minnesota, and Vermont.
In addition to large absolute differences in funding levels, there are strong geographic variations in federal Medicaid funding. In particular, states on the Pacific
Coast and in the Northeast receive relatively large federal allocations per state resident. The opposite is true of states in the Southeast and the Mountain West. This
pattern was evident before the ACA but is particularly pronounced with the inclusion of ACA-related funding. This reflects a link between states’ pre-ACA Medicaid
generosity and their willingness to expand their programs under the ACA.
From the perspective of federal policymaking, it is relevant to consider what forces
underlie this variation. Existing variations reflect some combination of differences in
underlying need, differences in policy preferences, and differences in the efficiency
with which states’ programs are run. The relative importance of these factors may
be quite relevant for whether existing variations are viewed as a socially desirable
allocation or an allocation in need of reform.

14

3.3

Uniform, Need-Based Block Grants

Under a uniform, need-based block grant, as defined in subsection 2.2, each state
receives a grant tied solely to its population and its income per capita relative to
national income per capita. Federal allocations would thus be based solely on a
metric of need and would cease to be linked to the historical generosity of states’
programs. In this section, we illustrate the implications of shifting the 2015 pool of
federal funding from status-quo allocations to the allocations implied by the uniform,
need-based block grants described by equation (3).
Figure 4 presents the percentage change in federal funding levels under a uniform
PCI-based block grant relative to current funding. In panel A we include ACA expansion funds, while in panel B we exclude them.15 States in the Southeast and Plains
regions tend to see increases in federal funding relative to the status quo. States in
the Northeast and on the Pacific Coast tend to lose funding. In general, funding shifts
from states with high baseline spending levels toward states with low baseline spending levels. This pattern holds using a variety of metrics for state Medicaid spending
needs. Because high-income states tend to have more extensive existing programs
(on both a per-resident and per-beneficiary basis), they tend to lose funds under a
uniform, need-based allocation. The opposite is true for low-income states.
We illustrate the magnitudes of the funding changes implied by uniform needbased grants in figure 5. We include ACA-related federal spending for this and all
subsequent analysis. Panel A shows that funding changes can be quite large. The
District of Columbia, for example, would experience a decline of more than 50 percent,
while several states would see their federal funding increase by more than 50 percent.
Between Texas and New York, which are among the larger gainers and losers, the
spread in the relative change amounts to $1,000 per capita.

15

Note that the effect of excluding ACA expansion funds is primarily to reduce the overall pool
of funding by roughly $70 billion.

15

For perspective, it can be helpful to contrast the magnitudes of these formulas’
implications with past analyses from the literature on distributive politics. Berry,
Burden, and Howell (2010), for example, estimate that congressional districts represented by a member of the president’s political party receive $40 per capita more
than districts that are not. Levitt and Snyder (1995) analyze spending distributions
at the end of an extended period of large Democratic majorities in Congress. Their
estimates suggest that decades of control over spending formulas yielded differences
that would translate into $1,000 current dollars per capita when comparing a district
with a Democratic vote share of 25 percent to a district with a Democratic vote share
of 75 percent. It is remarkable that this same amount could currently be shifted
through straightforward alterations to Medicaid financing formulas.
In panel B of figure 5 we illustrate each state’s change in federal funding as a
percentage of its total own-source revenue. The magnitudes presented in panel B
provide perspective on the gaps state budgets would face due to a shift to the uniform
need-based grant structure. Because of their balanced budget requirements, states
would need to fill such gaps through a combination of tax increases and spending
reductions over short time horizons following federal funding changes.
Because balanced budget requirements bind in the face of deficits, we emphasize
the set of states that would experience declines in federal funding. A number of
states would experience funding declines that exceed 10 percent of their own-source
revenues. In New York, for example, a decline of $16 billion is equivalent to 16 percent
of own-source revenue. States could make up funding through reductions in spending,
though these spending reductions would need to be similarly substantial. The $16
billion shortfall in New York, for example, exceeds the entirety of the state’s education
budget by 30 percent. Elimination of ACA funding through use of a pre-ACA baseline
funding level would significantly exacerbate states’ shortfalls.
The magnitude of these budgetary shifts makes immediate transitions across fund-

16

ing structures disruptive. Funding reforms may thus be likely to incorporate transition
periods that allow budgetary adjustments to be smoothed, in particular in states that
lose funding. We explore the trade-off between the smoothness of states’ transitions
and increases in federal spending in section 3.6.

3.4

Per-Beneficiary Allocations

Per-beneficiary allocation (PBA) structures give federal legislators an intermediate
level of control over the distribution of federal funds. By design, PBA structures
deliver greater funds to states with programs that cover relatively large numbers of
beneficiaries. The formulas that determine states’ allocations per beneficiary, however, remain under federal legislators’ discretion.
Legislators have discretion over the extent to which per-beneficiary payments are
connected to historical beneficiary costs at the state or national level. The redistribution that would result from allocating spending on the basis of national average spending rather than state-specific spending would be significant, but less dramatic than
the redistribution associated with moving from status-quo block grants to uniform,
need-based block grants. The desirability of redistributing federal funds depends,
once again, on what factors underlie historical variations. As before, the relative
roles of underlying need, policy preferences, and efficiency are relevant to whether
current allocations are thought to be appropriate or in need of reform.

3.5

Political Economy of Static Redistribution

The static distributional implications of Medicaid financing reforms come with political economy considerations. States that gain and lose under alternative systems
are not randomly distributed across the political landscape. To better understand
the political dynamics underlying this redistribution, we augment panel A of figure
5 with shading that indicates states’ outcomes in the 2016 presidential election. In
17

the resulting figure 6, Trump states are shaded red, while Clinton states are shaded
blue. Divorcing block grants from current Medicaid spending disproportionately benefits Trump states. Notable exceptions include several Republican voting states that
have enacted Medicaid expansions under the ACA. These include Alaska, Arkansas,
Arizona, Kentucky, and Ohio.
Table 1 summarizes correlations between several state characteristics and the
changes in federal funding implied by a shift from the status quo to uniform, needbased grants. More precisely, it presents estimates of equation (5):

Block GrantUs N B − Block GrantSQB
= β0 + State Traitss γ + s .
s

(5)

In the estimates we present, the vector State Traitss includes various combinations
of state income per capita, an indicator for implementation of the ACA Medicaid
expansion, and Hillary Clinton’s vote share in the 2016 presidential election.
Column 1 of table 1 shows that funds would tend to shift from high-income states
toward low-income states; an income differential of $10,000 per capita predicts a
differential funding change of $320 per capita. Column 2 shows that funds would
tend to shift away from states that expanded their Medicaid programs through the
ACA; states that expanded Medicaid would, on average, see their funding decline
by nearly $600 per capita relative to states that did not expand Medicaid. Column
3 shows that funding would tend to shift away from states that had relatively high
Clinton vote shares in the 2016 presidential election; a 10 percentage point higher
Clinton vote share predicts a relative funding decline of $260 per capita. Together,
these three factors predictively explain just under 60 percent of the variation in the
differences in states’ funding across the regimes under consideration.

18

3.6

Transitioning to a Uniform Allocation System

The fact that a uniform need-based allocation would significantly redistribute federal
funding would make rapid transitions a source of strain on state government budgets.
Compliance with balanced budget requirements would require “losing” states to implement large and disruptive spending reductions and/or revenue increases over short
time horizons. It is thus useful to consider the design of transition rules.
The design of transition rules involves balancing between competing interests.
States with high baseline federal contributions would benefit from slow transitions
to alternative regimes. Cushioning these states’ losses, however, involves increases
in the transition’s cost to the federal government. In contrast, rapid transitions will
benefit taxpayers in states that stand to gain from shifting to the final allocation. In
this section, we analyze the trade-offs associated with transitions of different speeds
under an illustrative transition mechanism.
We model a transition rule that allows states to chose between two options – the
uniform, need-based block described in section 2.2 or a status-quo block grant. The
uniform block is allowed to grow at rate g0 , so that Block GrantUs,tN B = Block GrantUs,tN B ×
(1 + g0 )t−t , where t represents a base year. Similarly, the status-quo block grant is
× (1 + g1 )t−t . We assume g1 < g0 , so that the
Block GrantSQB
= Block GrantSQB
s,t
s,t
status-quo allotment grows more slowly than the uniform block grant. Over time,
this generates a transition in states’ preferences for the uniform grant relative to the
status-quo grant. With a transition rule of this form, a state’s federal allocation in
year t is:

Allocations,t =




Block GrantUs,tN B if Block GrantUs,tN B ≥ Block GrantSQB
s,t


Block GrantSQB
if Block GrantSQB
≥ Block GrantUs,tN B
s,t
s,t

Our simulation uses a base year of 2015 and allows the uniform, need-based block

19

to grow at g0 = 3.4% – the Congressional Budget Office’s long-run estimate of Medicaid cost growth. We hold g0 fixed to focus attention on the implications of alternative
specifications of g1 –the growth rate of the status-quo block grant–for aggregate federal
spending.
Figure 7 presents our results. Panel A shows aggregate federal funding under alternative growth rates, while panel B shows the corresponding excess of federal spending
relative to an immediate transition, which is revenue neutral by construction. The
range of growth rates we consider is motivated by practical considerations of likely
transition windows. Twenty-eight states are initially better off under the uniform,
need-based allocation and thus chose to transition immediately. By initially holding
states harmless, base-year spending is $55 billion higher than the current system.
If the status-quo block is held constant in nominal terms (i.e., g1 = 0), it will
take 16 years before all states choose to switch to the uniform, need-based allocation.
Because of its exceptionally high federal funding relative to its per capita income, the
District of Columbia would not transition within the 20-year window we consider.
Excess federal funding under this design amounts to a substantial $440 billion over
20 years, with more than $350 billion occurring during the initial 10-year budget
window.
Faster transitions require the status-quo block grant to decline in nominal terms
(i.e., g1 < 0). While faster transitions reduce the federal government’s costs, transition costs remain nontrivial under the growth rates we consider. If g1 = −7%, for
example, the transition would take seven years, and federal spending would exceed
status quo spending by $140 billion over that time period.
Transition costs reflect variations in federal funding under the status quo. That
is, high spending states have considerable amounts of “surplus” funding relative to
low spending states. Consequently, transition costs can have substantive implications
for the federal budget.

20

4

Responsiveness to Business Cycle Fluctuations

In addition to static distributional effects, alternative funding structures have implications for state governments’ exposure to business cycle fluctuations. Standard
analyses in the tradition of fiscal federalism highlight the federal government’s advantages relative to lower levels of government in the conduct of stabilization policy
(Oates, 1972, 1999; Gramlich, 1987). Limitations on states’ capacity to engage in
countercyclical policy are formalized by their balanced budget requirements, many of
which restrict the use of short-term debt to finance general fund expenditures.16
To illustrate the implications of block grant design, we simulate the evolution of
alternative federal financing structures over the course of the Great Recession. The
assumption underlying the exercise is that the actual path of states’ Medicaid spending reflected underlying changes in need. This assumption is conservative for our
purposes. Spending will tend to rise less than underlying need during a recession
because states take actions, like reducing Medicaid’s physician payments, to balance their budgets (NASBO, 2011; 2012). Our simulation provides an answer to the
following question: Under alternative financing structures, how much would states’
own-source contributions have needed to rise to finance the spending that occurred
under the existing system?
Our simulation is slightly complicated by the American Reinvestment and Recovery Act (ARRA). The ARRA increased federal Medicaid funding from 2009 to
2011 through increases in the applicable Medicaid match rates. Our simulation of the
existing system nets ARRA spending out of the federal government’s contributions.
16

For a recent discussion, see Bagley (2017). Research on the implications of states’ balanced
budget requirements for their responsiveness to short-run shocks includes Poterba (1994); Clemens
and Miran (2012); and Clemens (2013). Additional research on the relevance of fiscal institutions
for state budgeting practices includes Bohn and Inman (1996); Levinson (1998); Hou and Smith
(2006, 2010); Smith and Hou (2013); Poterba (1995); and Costello, Petacchi, and Weber (2012).
Zhao (2014) highlights that the need for fiscal adjustment in response to shocks is driven in part
by the fact that states save too little in their rainy day funds to smooth their expenditures during
downturns.

21

We do this so that the baseline describes how the current system would operate in the
absence of ad hoc interventions by Congress. We net out spending through the ARRA
by assuming that each state would have paid the same fraction of its program’s costs
from 2009 to 2011 as they paid prior to 2009 (about 40 percent, on average).17

4.1

Acyclical Block Grants

We first consider the acyclical block grant allocations described by equation (1).
For this section’s purposes, the key feature of these grants is that they make no
adjustments for fluctuations in economic conditions. For our analysis of the Great
Recession, we set the base year to t = 2006. We consider growth rates equal to the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) and the consumer price index
for medical care services (CPI-M).
Figure 8 presents the resulting paths of federal and state funding. Actual federal
and state spending are indicated by solid lines. Federal and state funding under the
acyclical block are shown as dashed lines. State funding is defined as the amount
of spending required by states to achieve realized total Medicaid spending, given the
changes to federal funding.
Acyclical block grants can lead federal funding to rise much less than matching
grants during economic downturns. While this qualitative result is unsurprising, the
magnitudes are informative. If federal funding had grown with the rate of overall
inflation (CPI-U), acyclical block grants would have risen by $22 billion, from $178
billion to $200 billion from 2006 to 2011. Under the matching grant structure, nonARRA federal spending grew by a more substantial $63 billion. The rise in federal
funding through acyclical block grants would thus have fallen roughly $41 billion
short of the rise under the current system. If federal funding had grown instead with
medical inflation (CPI-M), the relative shortfall in 2011 would have been $29 billion.
17

Our estimate of ARRA Medicaid spending – $102 billion – is nearly identical to figures from the
Kaiser Family Foundation: https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8252.pdf

22

It is again useful to express variations in federal funding as a share of states’ ownsource revenues. Figure 9 illustrates the relative shortfalls that would have occurred
in 2011 under a nonresponsive block grant that grew at the rate of medical inflation
from 2006 through 2011. To maintain the spending that occurred under the existing
system, 44 states would have needed to increase their contributions. Looking across
all states, the shortfall averages just over 2 percent of own-source revenues. Under
a nonresponsive block grant that increases at CPI-U, this increases to nearly 3.5
percent.

4.2

Countercyclical Block Grants

We now illustrate the potential for block grants to incorporate short-term adjustments
for business cycle fluctuations. Specifically, equation (6) describes a block grant that
increases with inflation and adjusts with the national unemployment rate. We call
such grants countercyclical block grants (CCB). For a state s in year t, the block
grant is equal to:

Block

GrantCCB
s,t

t


Y
= Fed Fundings,t × (1 + gi ) 1 + (Ut − U ) × Cyclical Factor . (6)
i=t

We again base initial federal allocations on their levels from 2006. Equation (6)
augments equation (1) with an adjustment (Cyclical Factor) driven by the difference
between the national unemployment rate, Ut , and an estimate of its long-run natural
rate, U . Our simulation sets the natural rate to U = 5%. The choice of Cyclical
Factor dictates the extent to which the block grant adjusts in response to changes in
the unemployment rate. In our example, we construct a block grant that is roughly as
generous over this time period as was the existing matching grant structure. We scale
such that, with the growth factor gt set to the rate of CPI-M, the federal government
spends approximately the same amount in total from 2006 to 2012 as under the

23

current system. The Cyclical Factor that achieves this outcome is 0.03. That is,
aggregate federal spending increases 3 percent for every percentage point increase in
the national unemployment rate.
Figure 10 illustrates aggregate state and federal spending under the current system
and both the acyclical and countercyclical block grants. The evolution of federal
funding is markedly different across regimes. In comparison to the current system,
federal spending under the countercyclical block grant responds relatively rapidly to
the economic downturn beginning in 2008. As the recession fades, the growth of the
countercyclical grant declines.

4.3

Per-Beneficiary Allocations

Per-beneficiary allocations respond automatically to economic downturns because federal funding expands with Medicaid enrollment. Growth in the number of enrollees is
the primary driver of short-run Medicaid expenditures. Consequently, the dynamics
of per-beneficiary grants would differ relatively little from the dynamics of the current
system. Nonetheless, there are subtle design issues worth considering. In particular,
the characteristics of marginal enrollees matter. If, for example, the typical individual made eligible by a recession is healthier than the average Medicaid beneficiary,
the per-beneficiary allocation would be “too generous.” That is, the per-beneficiary
allocation could exceed the cost of the marginal enrollee. The direction and magnitude of selection along these lines has straightforward implications for the relationship
between increases in federal funds relative to funding needs.

4.4

Additional Cyclicality in State Government Finances

The strains state governments face during downturns extend beyond those associated
with their Medicaid programs. Most notably, states’ tax bases contract at the same
time their Medicaid enrollments rise. We conclude this section by observing that the
24

Cyclical Factor in a countercyclical block grant design can be used to stabilize state
budgets beyond their Medicaid spending needs.
The contraction of revenue bases during recessions places significant strain on
state budgets. Estimates of the short-run elasticity of personal income and sales tax
revenue with respect to aggregate state income typically exceed one (e.g., Dye 2004;
Bruce, Fox, and Tuttle 2006). Relative to 2007 (the nearest full year preceding the
recession), per capita personal incomes had fallen by 4.5 percent as of 2009. State
tax revenues would thus have likely fallen by 5 percent or more in the absence of rate
increases. A 5 percent decline on aggregate 2007 state income and sales tax revenue
of $730 billion translates into a $35 billion decline in revenue. With decreasing tax
revenues, rising Medicaid costs, and balanced budget requirements, business cycle
fluctuations can exert substantial pressure on state finances.
Countercyclical block grants provide a straightforward means for easing the adjustments required to stabilize state government budgets during economic downturns.
If revenue declines are of a magnitude similar to increases in Medicaid program needs,
for example, state budgets could be stabilized by simply doubling the Cyclical Factor
in the countercyclical block grant formula. An important feature of this approach
to budget stabilization is that it would be embedded in the block grant structure as
an automatic stabilizer. That is, it could be designed and implemented in advance
rather than legislated on an ad hoc basis as an economic downturn unfolds.

5

Long-Run Growth Rates and State Incentives
for Generous Coverage

Thus far we have focused on the cyclical and cross-sectional implications of Medicaid
financing reforms. We now turn to the long run. Over the long run, the evolution of
federal Medicaid financing depends largely on the rates at which federal allocations
25

are legislated to grow. We emphasize two points. First, growth rates can play an
important role in shaping states’ incentives for expanding coverage. Second, the
growth of federal financing has substantial implications for the long-run division of
financing between the state and federal governments. This can be viewed in part as
a determinant of the long-run floor on the size of states’ Medicaid programs.
The financing arrangements we analyze differ significantly in their implications for
the rates at which the federal government subsidizes both the intensive and extensive
margins of Medicaid program generosity. Among the financing arrangements we
consider, only the current matching structure subsidizes the generosity of states’
programs along intensive margins. Neither traditional block grants nor per-beneficiary
block grants provide incremental subsidy for states that expand the sets of services
they cover or increase the generosity of their payments to health care providers.
While per-beneficiary federal allocations do not subsidize the intensive margin of
coverage generosity, they do subsidize the extensive margin. On the extensive margin,
per-beneficiary allocations thus perform like matching grants; when a state covers an
additional beneficiary, it receives an additional per-beneficiary payment. Matching
grants similarly subsidize coverage expansions, as each dollar a state spends generates
an increase in federal funds. Traditional block grants, by contrast, provide no subsidy
for coverage on the extensive margin.
The per-beneficiary allocation structure has additional implications for states’ incentives to enroll relatively high-cost individuals. While a per-beneficiary allotment
maintains an extensive margin subsidy, that subsidy is constant across individuals
within an enrollment category. The risk of spending in excess of the average is thus
borne entirely by the state, much as with the risks faced by health maintenance organizations. As emphasized by Layton, Montz, and McGuire (2017), this incentivizes
states to enroll relatively low-cost individuals within each category across which fed-

26

eral allocations are differentiated.18
With these issues in mind, we consider the implications of the long-run growth rate
of federal funding. The key point is that growth rates drive the long-run evolution
of the extensive margin subsidy under the per-beneficiary allocation structure. We
illustrate this with reference to the recent AHCA proposal. As proposed in the AHCA,
states’ initial per-beneficiary allocations would cover roughly 60 percent of the cost
of covering new beneficiaries. The proposal allows these allocations to grow at a rate
equal to the consumer price index for medical care (CPI-M). This growth rate is
slower than projected growth in health expenditures per capita. Consequently, the
generosity of the AHCA’s subsidy for coverage expansions would decline over time.
CBO projects that spending on Medicaid beneficiaries will grow at a rate equal to
GDP growth plus 1 percentage point from 2028 to 2047.19 Per-beneficiary spending
growth is projected to outpace the AHCA’s allocations by the rate of real GDP
growth.20 From 2018 to 2047, CBO projects that real GDP will grow at a rate of 1.9
percent per year.
Figure 11 presents simulations of the evolution of the fraction of new beneficiaries’
costs that would be covered by per-beneficiary allocations that grow at alternative
rates. The rates we consider include CPI-M, CPI-U, and the growth rate of per
capita medical expenditures. From 2018 to 2047, we project that the extensive margin
subsidy rate would decline from 60 percent to 35 percent with a growth rate of CPI-M.
Over this same time period, the subsidy rate associated with allocations that grow at
a rate of CPI-U would decline by more than half. Allocations that grow with health
care costs would, by design, result in a constant subsidy rate. As emphasized by
18

For evidence on the effects of selection incentives in the Medicaid managed care setting, see
Kuziemko, Meckel, and Rossin-Slater (2013).
19
CBO projects that Medicaid spending growth in earlier years will be affected by coverage
changes embedded in current law, from which we wish to abstract.
20
CBO’s projection of per-beneficiary cost growth is real GDP growth + CPI-U + 1 percentage
point, while the AHCA’s allotments grow at a rate of CPI-M. Because CPI-M is projected to grow
at a rate of CPI-U + 1 percentage point, per-beneficiary cost growth is projected to exceed the
growth of the AHCA’s allotments by the rate of real GDP growth.

27

Adler, Fiedler, and Gronniger (2017), Medicaid cost growth has varied substantially
across states in recent years. It is thus worth noting that even with a growth rate
equal to average health care cost growth, the effective subsidy may vary across states
over time.
The evolution of extensive margin subsidies has direct bearing on the responsiveness of federal funding to business cycle fluctuations. As discussed in section 4, the
current funding structure automatically responds to economic downturns as higher
enrollment drives spending increases. Federal funding under a per-beneficiary allotment retains some of this feature by rising in tandem with enrollment increases. It
is thus relevant that the extent to which federal funding increases during economic
downturns mechanically decreases as the extensive margin subsidy is reduced. If the
extensive margin subsidy declines, the responsiveness of federal Medicaid dollars to
business cycle fluctuations will erode.
What role does the growth of federal funding play under a traditional block grant
structure? Under traditional block grants, federal financing subsidizes states’ decisions on neither the intensive nor the extensive margin of coverage generosity. The
marginal subsidy rate is thus zero both at present and in the future regardless of
the growth rate. With traditional block grants, federal funding becomes a form of
foundation aid (Hoxby, 2001). So long as this funding remains contingent on its use
in the provision of health insurance, federal funding effectively imposes a floor on
a state’s overall Medicaid funding. If it is not made contingent, it may in practice
become a form of general fund support. Under block grant structures, rules establishing the population groups and sets of health care services that states must cover are
the primary lever through which the federal government influences the generosity of
states’ programs. Examples of such rules in other contexts include the “Maintenance
of Effort” requirements associated with federal education funds and the 1996 federal
welfare reform.

28

6

Potential State Responses to Declines in Federal
Funding

Our analysis has explored how alternative financing arrangements affect the overall
magnitude and distribution of federal contributions to states’ Medicaid programs.
We find that alternative structures can have significant implications for the federal
government’s contributions over the very short run, over the course of the business
cycle, and over the long run. We conclude by considering the channels along which
states might respond to such shifts, and in particular to declines in federal support.
That is, we discuss who is likely to bear the incidence of federal funding declines
and how that incidence may vary with institutional features of alternative Medicaid
financing reforms.
The incidence of declines in federal funding depends crucially on the channels
through which states elect to restore balance to their budgets. Options include maintaining expenditure levels by replacing lost federal funds with own-source revenues,
reducing Medicaid expenditures, and reducing expenditures elsewhere in the budget.
Incidence may thus be born by a combination of those who pay state taxes and fees,
Medicaid beneficiaries, health care providers, and the beneficiaries of other programs
whose budgets are affected.
Historical experience suggests that a mix of these groups has borne the incidence
of adjustments to states’ budgetary shortfalls over the business cycle. Surveys from
the National Association of State Budget Officers (NASBO), for example, suggest
that recessions lead states to enact an eclectic mix of increases in tax rates, increases
in fees, reductions in spending outside of their Medicaid programs, and reductions
in spending inside their Medicaid programs. Reported Medicaid program changes
include reductions in provider payment rates, reductions in optional benefit packages
such as dental care, and expansions in the prevalence of managed care models.

29

States’ decisions regarding the channels through which they adjust may be shaped
by a combination of political, institutional, and economic forces. In the discussion
that follows, we highlight the range of considerations that may be relevant for states’
responses to the funding arrangement envisioned by the AHCA proposal. We begin
by discussing the implications of the proposal’s purely economic incentives, then we
consider the potential relevance of political and institutional factors.
The AHCA proposal would convert federal funding into a per-beneficiary allotment that grows less quickly than projected health expenditures. As discussed above,
the proposal eliminates federal subsidy for “intensive” margins of coverage generosity.
States may respond to the elimination of this subsidy by reducing the generosity of
both their benefit packages and their provider payments. As per-beneficiary allotments decline in relation to expected cost, the proposal would similarly reduce the
federal subsidy of coverage on the extensive margin. States may thus respond to this
aspect of the proposal by reducing the generosity of their eligibility rules. The incidence of these changes in the incentives associated with federal funding formulas would
fall on a combination of health care providers, ongoing beneficiaries whose benefits
become less generous, and potential beneficiaries whose eligibility fails to materialize.
The beneficiaries of reduced spending would, in general, consist of taxpayers.
Political and institutional factors may have high relevance for states’ responses to
alternative financing arrangements. Politically, it may matter whether voters view
existing benefit arrangements as being excessive, insufficient, or roughly in line with
their preferences. Criticisms of proposals that reduce long-run funding growth often
articulate the view that the incidence of federal spending declines will be borne by the
Medicaid program’s current and intended beneficiaries. This will tend to be true if
voters perceive that their programs’ costs exceed their benefits, such that they would
direct funds to alternative uses if federal subsidy rates decline.
Institutionally, it is important to bear in mind that subsidies are not the only lever

30

through which federal policy shapes states’ Medicaid programs. Additional levers
include “Maintenance of Effort” (MOE) requirements and, more generally, federal
rules that dictate what constitutes a Medicaid program that is “compliant” for receipt
of the block grant. The structure of block grants administered through the Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program provide a useful illustration.21 Under
TANF’s funding design, the size of each state’s block grant is contingent on whether its
spending satisfies its MOE requirement. In principle, states were required to spend
roughly as much as they did on welfare before the introduction of TANF. When
a state falls short of its MOE requirement, the federal government’s contribution
declines dollar-for-dollar. In this way, the MOE requirement makes it costly for states
to reduce their spending on the program. Through levers of this form, the federal
government can exercise substantial influence over the design of states’ Medicaid
programs whether it maintains a matching grant structure or transitions to either a
block grant or a per-beneficiary allocation structure.

7

Conclusion

We have assessed the implications of alternative Medicaid financing structures along
three dimensions. First, alternative financing mechanisms can significantly alter the
distribution of federal dollars across states. A uniform, need-based block grant, for
example, would reduce federal funds by the equivalent of 10 percent of several “losing”
states’ own-source revenues. Second, financing mechanisms differ in the extent to
which they shield state government finances from the business cycle. During the
Great Recession, we show that an acyclical block grant would have reduced federal
spending by an average of 2 to 3.5 percent of states’ own source revenues, relative to
the current matching structure. Third, alternative financing mechanisms have quite
21

For a thorough discussion of the TANF program, including its funding structure, see Ziliak
(2015).

31

different implications for the incentives states face when deciding how generous to
make their programs. We show that the growth rates specified for per-beneficiary
allotments like those envisioned by the American Health Care Act (AHCA) have
significant implications for states’ incentives to cover new beneficiaries over the long
run. The growth rate stipulated by the AHCA, for example, would reduce the rate at
which the federal government subsidizes coverage of new beneficiaries by nearly half
within 30 years.
We conclude by connecting these issues to classic themes from the literature on
fiscal federalism (Oates, 1972, 1999). Oates (1999) observes that “At the most general
level, this theory contends that the central government should have the basic responsibility for the macroeconomic stabilization function and for income redistribution in
the form of assistance to the poor.”22 Considerations connected to fiscal federalism
thus argue for a substantial federal role in the financing and management of Medicaid. Fiscal federalism envisions a prominent federal role in financing expenditures
that are redistributive and evolve countercyclically. The Medicaid program quite
clearly fits both of these criteria. At the same time, state-level program management
facilitates the use of local information in designing benefits that most effectively meet
beneficiaries’ needs.
Our analysis illustrates how the design of federal transfers shapes states’ incentives
and is thus an important determinant of the generosity of the redistribution that
occurs through states’ Medicaid programs. Society’s commitment to financing this
redistribution is an issue that must be settled through the political process. We thus
conclude by observing that fiscal federalism’s prescriptive content can only take our
analysis so far.

22

Limitations on states’ stabilization efforts stem from both their balanced budget requirements
and the policy instruments at their disposal. Limitations on states’ redistributive efforts relate to
migration; individuals can move to and from localities based on the structure or generosity of social
programs.

32

References
Adler, L., M. Fiedler, and T. Gronniger (2017): “Effects of the Medicaid PerCapita Cap Included in the House-Passed American Health Act,” White paper, The
Brookings Institution.
Bagley, N. (2017): ”Federalism and the End of Obamacare,” Yale Law Journal (April 24), http://www.yalelawjournal.com/forum/federalism-and-the-end-ofobamacare.
Baicker, K., J. Clemens, and M. Singhal (2012): “The Rise of the States:
US fiscal Decentralization in the Postwar Period,” Journal of Public Economics,
96(11), 1079–1091.
Bernd-Spahn, P. (2007): “Equity and Efficiency Aspects of Interagency Transfers
in a Multigovernment Framework,” Intergovernmental Transfers, Principles and
Practice, pp. 75–106.
Berry, C. R., B. C. Burden, and W. G. Howell (2010): “The President and
the Distribution of Federal Spending,” American Political Science Review, 104(04),
783–799.
Boadway, R. W., and A. Shah (2007): Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers: Principles and Practices. World Bank Publications.
Bohn, H., and R. P. Inman (1996): “Balanced-Budget Rules and Public Deficits:
Evidence from the US States,” in Carnegie-Rochester conference series on public
policy, vol. 45, pp. 13–76.
Bruce, D., W. F. Fox, and M. H. Tuttle (2006): “Tax Base Elasticities: A
Multi-State Analysis of Long-Run and Short-Run Synamics,” Southern Economic
Journal, pp. 315–341.
Card, D., and A. A. Payne (2002): “School Finance Reform, the Distribution of
School Spending, and the Distribution of Student Test Scores,” Journal of Public
Economics, 83(1), 49–82.
Clemens, J. (2013): “State Fiscal Adjustment During Times of Stress: Possible
Causes of the Severity and Composition of Budget Cuts,” Discussion paper, University Library of Munich, Germany.
Clemens, J., and S. Miran (2012): “Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational
Government Spending,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2), 46–
68.
Costello, A. M., R. Petacchi, and J. Weber (2012): “The Hidden Consequences of Balanced Budget Requirements,” MIT Sloan School of Management
Working Paper.
33

Dye, R. F. (2004): “State Revenue Cyclicality,” National Tax Journal, pp. 133–145.
Gramlich, E. M. (1987): “Subnational Fiscal Policy,” Perspectives on Local Public
Finance and Public Policy, 3(3-27).
Helms, R. (2007): The Medicaid Commission Report: A Dissent. American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
Hou, Y., and D. L. Smith (2006): “A Framework for Understanding State Balanced Budget Requirement Systems: Reexamining Distinctive Features and an
Operational Definition,” Public Budgeting & Finance, 26(3), 22–45.
(2010): “Do State Balanced Budget Requirements Matter? Testing Two
Explanatory Frameworks,” Public Choice, 145(1-2), 57–79.
Hoxby, C. M. (2001): “All School Finance Equalizations are Not Created Equal,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1189–1231.
Jackson, C. K., R. C. Johnson, and C. Persico (2016): “The Effects of School
Spending on Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance
Reforms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(1), 157–218.
Kuziemko, I., K. Meckel, and M. Rossin-Slater (2013): “Do Insurers RiskSelect Against Each Other? Evidence from Medicaid and Implications for Health
Reform,” NBER Working Paper 19198.
Lambrew, J. M. (2005): “Making Medicaid a Block Grant Program: An Analysis
of the Implications of Past Proposals,” Milbank Quarterly, 83(1), 41–63.
Layton, T., E. Montz, and T. McGuire (2017):
“The Downstream Consequences of Per Capita Spending Caps in Medicaid,”
http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2017/06/26/the-downstream-consequences-ofper-capita-spending-caps-in-medicaid/.
Levinson, A. (1998): “Balanced Budgets and Business Cycles: Evidence from the
States,” National Tax Journal, pp. 715–732.
Levitt, S. D., and J. M. Snyder (1995): “Political Parties and the Distribution
of Federal Outlays,” American Journal of Political Science, pp. 958–980.
Oates, W. E. (1972): Fiscal Federalism. Edward Elgar Publishing.
(1999): “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,” Journal of Economic Literature,
37(3), 1120–1149.
Park, E., and M. Broaddus (2011): “Medicaid Block Grant Would Shift Financial
Risks and Costs to States,” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Poterba, J. M. (1994): “State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The Effects of Budgetary
Institutions and Politics,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(4), 799–821.
34

(1995): “Balanced Budget Rules and Fiscal Policy: Evidence from the
States,” National Tax Journal, 48(3), 329–336.
Sato, M. (2007): “The Political Economy of Interregional Grants,” Public Sector
Governance and Accountability Series-Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers: Principles and Practices, pp. 173–197.
Smart, M. (2007): “The Incentive Effects of Grants,” Intergovernmental Fiscal
Transfers, Washington: Banco Mundial, pp. 203–223.
Smith, D. L., and Y. Hou (2013): “Balanced Budget Requirements and State
Spending: A Long–Panel Study,” Public Budgeting & Finance, 33(2), 1–18.
Von Hagen, J. (2007): “Achieving Economic Stabilization by Sharing Risk Within
Countries,” Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers: Principles and Practice. Washington, DC: World Bank, pp. 107–29.
Zhao, B. (2014): “Saving for a Rainy Day: Estimating the Appropriate Size of
US State Budget Stabilization Funds,” Discussion paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston.
Ziliak, J. P. (2015): “Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,” in Economics
of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, volume 1, ed. by R. A.
Moffitt, pp. 303–393. University of Chicago Press.

35

Federal Expansion Funding Across States

AK
AL
FL
GA
ID
KS
LA
ME
MO
MS
MT
NC
NE
OK
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
WI
WY
PA
IN
DC
VT
NY
OH
WV
AZ
NH
MA
IA
MN
MI
DE
RI
IL
CT
CO
MD
AR
NJ
ND
NM
CA
NV
HI
KY
OR
WA

0

Expansion Funds as Percent of Total Federal Funding
10
20
30
40

Panel A: Federal Expansion Funds as a Percentage of Federal Funding

AK
AL
FL
GA
ID
KS
LA
ME
MO
MS
MT
NC
NE
OK
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
WI
WY
PA
IN
VT
NY
OH
WV
AZ
NH
MA
IA
MN
MI
DE
RI
IL
CT
CO
MD
AR
NJ
ND
NM
CA
NV
HI
KY
OR
WA

0

Expansion Funds as Percent of Own Source Revenue
5
10
15
20

Panel B: Federal Expansion Funds as a Percentage of Own-Source Revenue

Figure 1: Federal Expansion Funding Across States: This figure illustrates federal funding
for Medicaid recipients in the ACA expansion group (group VIII enrollees) across states. Panels A
and B show federal funding for the newly eligible as a percentage of each state’s total federal funding
and own-source revenue, respectively. Data on spending are taken from Form CMS-64 for fiscal year
2015. Total federal spending is the sum of the federal share of total computable net expenditures
for the medical assistance program and the federal share of total computable net expenditures for
administration. Group VIII spending includes spending on all recipients within this enrollment
category, including those that are newly and not newly eligible. Note that states which expanded in
September of 2015 or later–Alaska, Louisiana, and Montana–have zero spending in our data for fiscal
year 2015. Data on states’ own-source revenues are taken from the 2014 Annual Survey of State
and Local Government Finances, which was the latest survey available at the time we conducted
our analysis.

36

Federal Medicaid Spending per State Resident in 2015
Panel A: Including ACA Expansion Funds

Over $1,600
$1,400-$1,599
$1,200-$1,399
$1,000-$1,199
$800-$999
$600-$799
Less than $600

Panel B: Excluding ACA Expansion Funds

Over $1,600
$1,400-$1,599
$1,200-$1,399
$1,000-$1,199
$800-$999
$600-$799
Less than $600

Figure 2: Federal Medicaid Spending per State Resident in 2015: This figure presents
federal Medicaid spending per state resident. Panel A includes federal funding associated with the
ACA Medicaid expansion population, while panel B excludes these funds. Spending data are from
Medicaid financial management reports submitted by states on Form CMS-64. Total federal spending
is the sum of the federal share of total computable net expenditures for the medical assistance
program and the federal share of total computable net expenditures for administration. Group VIII
spending includes spending on all recipients within this enrollment category, including those that are
newly and not newly eligible. State populations are estimated using data from the Census Bureau’s
March 2016 Current Population Survey, as processed by the Kaiser Family Foundation.
37

Federal Medicaid Spending per Person in Poverty in 2015
Panel A: Including ACA Expansion Funds

Over $12,500
$11,000-$12,500
$9,500-$10,999
$8,000-$9,499
$6,500-$7,999
$5,000-$6,499
Less than $5,000

Panel B: Excluding ACA Expansion Funds

Over $12,500
$11,000-$12,500
$9,500-$10,999
$8,000-$9,499
$6,500-$7,999
$5,000-$6,499
Less than $5,000

Figure 3: Federal Medicaid Spending per Person in Poverty in 2015: This figure presents
federal Medicaid spending per person in poverty, by state. Panel A includes federal funding associated with the ACA Medicaid expansion population, while panel B excludes these funds. Spending
data are from Medicaid financial management reports submitted by states on Form CMS-64. Total
federal spending is the sum of the federal share of total computable net expenditures for the medical
assistance program and the federal share of total computable net expenditures for administration.
Group VIII spending includes spending on all recipients within this enrollment category, including
those that are newly and not newly eligible. Estimates of states’ populations in poverty are constructed using the Census Bureau’s March 2016 Current Population Survey, as processed by the
Kaiser Family Foundation.

38

Percentage Change in Federal Medicaid Funding under a Uniform, Need-Based Block
Grant
Panel A: Including ACA Expansion Funds

Panel B: Excluding ACA Expansion Funds

>75
50 − 75
25 − 50
0 − 25
-25 − 0
-50 − -25
<-50

>75
50 − 75
25 − 50
0 − 25
-25 − 0
-50 − -25
<-50

Figure 4: Percentage Change in Federal Medicaid Funding under a Uniform, NeedBased Block Grant: This figure presents the percentage change in federal Medicaid funding by
state under a uniform, need-based block grant relative to the current system. Each state’s needbased block is determined by equation (3). Panel A includes federal funding associated with the
ACA Medicaid expansion population, while panel B excludes these funds. Total federal spending is
calculated from Medicaid financial management reports submitted by states on Form CMS-64. Total
federal spending is the sum of the federal share of total computable net expenditures for the medical
assistance program and the federal share of total computable net expenditures for administration.
Group VIII spending includes spending on all recipients within this enrollment category, including
those that are newly and not newly eligible. Data on states’ personal income per capita are taken
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

39

Changes in Federal and State Medicaid Funding under a Uniform, Need-Based Block
Grant

DC
NY
CT
MA
VT
RI
CA
NM
AK
OR
KY
MN
DE
NJ
WV
AR
OH
MD
PA
ME
MI
ND
WA
LA
NH
HI
AZ
MS
MO
IA
CO
IN
IL
TN
WI
NC
OK
TX
NV
SC
MT
WY
KS
ID
AL
FL
NE
VA
GA
SD
UT

-100

Percent Change in Federal Funding
-50
0
50
100

150

Panel A: Changes in Federal Funding under a Uniform, Need-Based Block Grant

Non-Lower Bound States

Lower Bound States

NY
CT
MA
VT
RI
CA
NM
AK
OR
KY
MN
DE
NJ
WV
AR
OH
MD
PA
ME
MI
ND
WA
LA
NH
HI
AZ
MS
MO
IA
CO
IN
IL
TN
WI
NC
OK
TX
NV
SC
MT
WY
KS
ID
AL
FL
NE
VA
GA
SD
UT

Required Percent Change in Own Source Rev
-20
-10
0
10
20

Panel B: Required Change in State Own-Source Revenue to
Maintain Constant Total Spending

Figure 5: Changes in Federal and State Medicaid Funding under a Uniform, NeedBased Block Grant: This figure illustrates funding changes under a uniform, need-based block
grant, relative to the current funding structure. Panel A shows the percentage change in federal
funding for each state under the block grant relative to its allocation under the current financing
system. Panel B shows the absolute change in federal funding as a percentage of each state’s
own-source revenue. State block grants are determined according to equation (3). Data on states’
own-source revenue are taken from the 2014 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances.

40

Changes in Federal Funding under a Uniform, Need-Based Block Grant
150

Percent Change in Federal Funding

100

50

0

-100

DC
NY
CT
MA
VT
RI
CA
NM
AK
OR
KY
MN
DE
NJ
WV
AR
OH
MD
PA
ME
MI
ND
WA
LA
NH
HI
AZ
MS
MO
IA
CO
IN
IL
TN
WI
NC
OK
TX
NV
SC
MT
WY
KS
ID
AL
FL
NE
VA
GA
SD
UT

-50

Democrat

Republican

Figure 6: Changes in Federal Funding under a Uniform, Need-Based Block Grant: This
figure illustrates funding changes under a uniform, need-based block grant, relative to current federal
funding. Bars are shaded based on each state’s vote in the 2016 presidential election, with solid and
patterned fills corresponding to Republican and Democrat voting states, respectively. State block
grants are estimated according to equation (3).

41

Federal Funding under Transitions to a Uniform, Need-Based Block Grant

Aggregate Federal Spending (in billions)
300
400
500
600
700

Panel A: Aggregate Federal Funding

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025
year

2027

2029

2031

2033

Status Quo Growth 0%

Status Quo Growth -3%

Status Quo Growth -5%

Status Quo Growth -7%

2035

Immediate Transition

0

Excess Federal Spending (in billions)
20
40
60

Panel B: Excess Federal Funding Relative to Immediate Transition

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025
year

2027

2029

2031

2033

Status Quo Growth 0%

Status Quo Growth -3%

Status Quo Growth -5%

Status Quo Growth -7%

2035

Immediate Transition

Figure 7: Federal Funding under Transitions to a Uniform, Need-Based Block Grant:
This figure illustrates federal spending associated with alternative rules for transitioning from statusquo allocations to uniform, need-based block grants as described in section 3.6. Panel A illustrates
aggregate federal funding under each scenario, while panel B shows the difference between federal
funding with an immediate transition, which is revenue neutral by construction. Under each transition rule, states are offered the choice between the uniform, need-based block or a status-quo block.
All transition rules assume that the uniform, need-based block grows at rate g0 = 3.4%, which is the
CBO estimate for long-run growth of per beneficiary Medicaid costs. Transition alternatives differ
in the choice of g1 – the rate of growth of the status-quo allotment.

42

Federal and State Medicaid Funding under Acyclical Block Grants and Alternative
Growth Rates

160

Aggregate Federal Funding (billions)
180
200
220
240
260

Panel A: Federal Funding

2006

2007

2008

2009
year

Current System

2010

2011

2012

Non-Responsive Block, CPI

Non-Responsive Block, CPI-M

130

Aggregate State Funding (billions)
150
170
190
210
230

Panel B: State Funding Required for No Change in Total Spending

2006

2007

2008

2009
year

Current System

2010

2011

2012

Non-Responsive Block, CPI

Non-Responsive Block, CPI-M

Figure 8: Federal Medicaid Funding under Acyclical Block Grants and Alternative
Growth Rates: This figure illustrates federal funding from 2006 to 2012 under the current system
(solid lines) relative to two acyclical block grants. The block grants are determined according to
equation (1), with the base year corresponding with fiscal year 2006. For one of the block grants,
the growth rate is set equal to the consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U), while for
the other it is set equal to the consumer price index for medical care services (CPI-M).

43

California
Texas
Minnesota
Colorado
Wisconsin
Michigan
Virginia
Delaware
Oregon
Idaho
Maryland
Connecticut
Louisiana
North Dakota
Arizona
Oklahoma
Arkansas
Florida
Vermont
Mississippi
New Mexico
Massachusetts
West Virginia
Hawaii
Ohio
Washington
Kentucky
Pennsylvania
Nevada
Alaska
Montana
Tennessee
Illinois
Kansas
Georgia
Iowa
South Carolina
Missouri
Maine
Alabama
New Hampshire
Utah
North Carolina
Rhode Island
New York
Indiana
Wyoming
South Dakota
New Jersey
Nebraska

Required Percent Change in Own Source Rev
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10

Increased Cyclical Gaps as Shares of Own-Source Revenue

Figure 9: Increased Cyclical Gaps as Shares of Own-Source Revenue: This figure shows
the percentage change in own-source revenue required for each state to cover the estimated shortfall
of federal funding under an acyclical block grant relative to the current system in 2011. State block
grants are determined according to equation (3), with the base year corresponding with fiscal year
2006. The growth rate is set equal to the consumer price index for medical care services (CPI-M).
Own-source revenue is taken from the 2011 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances.

44

Aggregate State and Federal Funding under Medicaid Funding Alternatives

160

Aggregate Federal Funding (billions)
180
200
220
240
260

Panel A: Federal Funding

2006

2007

2008

2009
year

Current System

2010

2011

2012

Responsive Block, CPI-M

Non-Responsive Block, CPI-M

120

Aggregate State Funding (billions)
140
160
180
200
220

Panel B: State Funding Required for No Change in Total Spending

2006

2007

2008

2009
year

Current System

2010

2011

2012

Responsive Block, CPI-M

Non-Responsive Block, CPI-M

Figure 10: Aggregate State and Federal Funding under Medicaid Funding Alternatives:
This figure illustrates estimated state and federal funding under alternative funding systems for
2006-12. Federal funding for the acyclical block and countercyclical block are based on equations
(1) and (6), respectively. State funding is set equal to actual Medicaid spending minus the federal
contribution. That is, we illustrate the amount of state funding that would have been required to
finance the amount of Medicaid spending that occurred under the existing financing system.

45

Federal Percent of New Enrollee Cost
-10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Federal Subsidization of New Enrollee Coverage: Long-Term Projections

2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046
Year
PBA, Health Care Growth Rate

PBA, CPI Growth Rate

PBA, CPI-M Growth Rate

A-Cyclical Block

Figure 11: Federal Subsidization of New Enrollee Coverage: Long-Term
Projections: This figure illustrates the evolution of the rates at which federal contributions subsidize the coverage of new enrollees under alternative financing structures.

46

Table 1: Correlates of Differences in Federal Allocations between Status Quo Block
Grants and Uniform, Need-Based Block Grants
(1)

Per Capita Income (in 1000s)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Change Fed Funding Per Capita
-32.194**
-12.940+
(10.945)
(7.009)

Expansion State

-585.181***
(98.948)

Clinton Vote Share
R-Squared
N

0.31
51

0.38
51

-343.424**
(114.949)
-26.187***
(6.433)
0.45
51

-14.097*
(6.919)
0.59
51

Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels
respectively. This table presents estimates of equation (5). The dependent variable is the difference
in the size of states’ federal Medicaid contributions under the uniform, need-based grant structure
relative to the status quo. Note that states that enacted ACA Medicaid expansions in September
of 2015 or later–Alaska, Louisiana, and Montana–do not have ACA expansion spending in our data
for fiscal year 2015. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.

47

