                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  INFORMING SPR POLICY THROUGH OIL FUTURES AND INVENTORY DYNAMICS

                                       Richard G. Newell
                                         Brian C. Prest

                                      Working Paper 23974
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23974


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017




We acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy and
NBER under grant 36269.00.04.00. We thank Christiane Baumeister and Lutz Kilian for helpful
comments and data, as well as participants in an NBER conference on energy markets. This work
is partially based on the OECD oil inventory data developed by the International Energy Agency,
but the resulting work has been prepared by the authors and does not necessarily reflect the views
of the International Energy Agency, nor the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Richard G. Newell and Brian C. Prest. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Informing SPR Policy Through Oil Futures and Inventory Dynamics
Richard G. Newell and Brian C. Prest
NBER Working Paper No. 23974
October 2017
JEL No. H4,L78,Q41,Q48

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines how information on the time pattern of expected future prices for crude oil,
based on the term structure of futures contracts, can be used in informing whether to draw down,
or contribute to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR). Such price information provides insight
on expected changes in the supply-demand balance in the market and can also facilitate cost-
effective transitions for SPR holdings. Backwardation in futures curves suggests that market
participants expect shocks to be transitory, creating a stronger case for SPR releases. We use
vector autoregression to analyze the relationship between the term structure of futures contracts,
the management of private oil inventories, and other variables of interest. This relationship is
used to estimate the magnitude of the impacts of SPR releases into the much larger global
inventories system. Under the assumption that strategic releases can be modeled as surprise
inventory additions, impulse response functions suggest that a strategic release of 10 million
barrels would temporarily reduce spot prices by about 2% to 3% and mitigate backwardation by
approximately 0.8 percentage points. Historical simulations suggest that past releases reduced
spot prices by 15% to 20% and avoided about 5 percentage points of backwardation in futures
curves, relative to a no-release counterfactual. This research can help policymakers determine
when to release SPR reserves based on economic principles informed by market prices. It also
provides an econometric model that can help inform the amount of SPR releases necessary to
achieve given policy goals, such as reductions in prices or spreads.


Richard G. Newell
Duke University
Box 90328
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
newell@rff.org

Brian C. Prest
Duke University, Box 90328
Durham, NC 27708
brian.prest@duke.edu
                      Informing SPR Policy Through Oil Futures
                               and Inventory Dynamics
                                   Richard G. Newell               Brian C. Prest∗
                                                  October 21, 2017



                                                        Abstract
          This paper examines how information on the time pattern of expected future prices for crude oil,
      based on the term structure of futures contracts, can be used in informing whether to draw down, or
      contribute to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR). Such price information provides insight on expected
      changes in the supply-demand balance in the market and can also facilitate cost-effective transitions
      for SPR holdings. Backwardation in futures curves suggests that market participants expect shocks to
      be transitory, creating a stronger case for SPR releases. We use vector autoregression to analyze the
      relationship between the term structure of futures contracts, the management of private oil inventories,
      and other variables of interest. This relationship is used to estimate the magnitude of the impacts of SPR
      releases into the much larger global inventories system. Under the assumption that strategic releases can
      be modeled as surprise inventory additions, impulse response functions suggest that a strategic release of
      10 million barrels would temporarily reduce spot prices by about 2% to 3% and mitigate backwardation by
      approximately 0.8 percentage points. Historical simulations suggest that past releases reduced spot prices
      by 15% to 20% and avoided about 5 percentage points of backwardation in futures curves, relative to a
      no-release counterfactual. This research can help policymakers determine when to release SPR reserves
      based on economic principles informed by market prices. It also provides an econometric model that can
      help inform the amount of SPR releases necessary to achieve given policy goals, such as reductions in
      prices or spreads.




1     Introduction and Motivation

Understanding the relationship between crude oil prices, inventories, and market expectations is crucial for

understanding not only private market dynamics, but also the value and effectiveness of public inventories,

particularly strategic reserves. If a significant portion of oil supply is disrupted, how would releasing oil from

the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) and other international oil stock holdings affect oil prices? This

depends on a number of factors, including whether the disruption is expected to intensify or attenuate, the
   ∗ Newell: Resources for the Future, 1616 P St NW, Washington, DC 20036, Duke University, Box 90328, Durham, NC 27708,

and NBER (email: newell@rff.org). Prest: Duke University, Box 90328, Durham, NC 27708 (email: brian.prest@duke.edu).
We acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy and NBER under grant 36269.00.04.00.
We thank Christiane Baumeister and Lutz Kilian for helpful comments and data, as well as participants in an NBER conference
on energy markets. This work is partially based on the OECD oil inventory data developed by the International Energy Agency,
 c OECD/IEA 2016 but the resulting work has been prepared by the authors and does not necessarily reflect the views of the
International Energy Agency.



                                                             1
elasticity of oil demand and supply, and whether members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting

Countries (OPEC) are likely to react to such a release. While these questions are important to guiding

SPR drawdown policy, economic research on this topic is highly limited. This leaves policymakers with

little economically-driven guidance. As a result, SPR release policy is typically informed by a combination

of back-of-the-envelope estimates, qualitative market assessment, and simply “counting barrels”, whereby

policymakers release an amount of crude oil equal to the estimated size of the disruption.

    This paper argues that the term structure of futures prices for crude oil can provide an indicator to

policymakers on the severity of oil disruptions, and its relationship to inventories can help guide the magnitude

of any response using strategic reserves. In particular, the spread between long- and short- dated crude

futures prices reflects market expectations about the persistence of supply and demand shocks.1 In particular,

SPR releases are more effective and appropriate in response to temporary supply shocks, and less so in

the face of persistent shocks. The degree of contango (a positive spread between future and current prices)

or backwardation (a negative spread) in crude oil markets provides market-based information about how

persistent supply shocks are likely to be, with a higher degree of backwardation suggesting larger transitory

shocks. While this differs from the common focus on the levels of spot prices, the economic theory of storage

clearly implies that price spreads are the more important factor for stockpiling decisions (e.g., Working 1949;

Brennan 1958; Fama and French 1987, 1988; Pindyck 2001).2 This suggests that policymakers can look to oil

price spreads to gauge the expected persistence of a supply shock when considering SPR releases. It also

suggests that better understanding of the dynamic relationships between spreads and private inventories can

offer insights for when to release strategic reserves.

    Aside from the question of whether to release oil reserves, policymakers also face the question of how much

to release to achieve given policy goals. To consider this question, this paper also uses a vector auto-regression

(VAR) model to empirically analyze the dynamic relationships between oil spot prices, price spreads, and

privately-held commercial inventories. Once estimated, we use this model to estimate the impacts of a shock

to private inventories (say, from an emergency infusion from public inventories) on oil prices, spreads, and

other variables of interest. These estimated responses show substantial relationships between inventories and

spreads, with a 1% crude oil inventory increase—equivalent to approximately 10 million barrels of crude

oil—temporarily changing spreads by approximately 0.8 percentage points (i.e., a reduction in backwardation,
   1 Throughout    this paper, the spread is defined as the difference between the 12-month and 1-month real crude oil futures
prices: p12 − p1 , where prices are expressed in log terms to represent percentage differences. We also note the important caveat
discussed in Baumeister and Kilian (2016b) that futures prices also reflect a risk premium in addition to expectations about
future spot prices. We discuss this caveat more below and present a sensitivity analysis in the appendix.
   2 We use the term “spot” price informally as a shorthand to refer to the prompt-month oil future price, distinguishing it from

longer-term futures prices.


                                                               2
or increase in contango). This inventory shock reduces both spot and futures prices of crude oil. Spot prices

temporarily fall by about 2% to 3%, while 12-month futures prices fall by a smaller amount, implied by the

changing spread. Prices fall despite some potential offset by a decrease in OPEC supply, which is imprecisely

estimated in our model.

     We also use the model to simulate counterfactual release scenarios during relevant historical periods.

These periods include times when oil was released from the SPR and times when such releases were considered

but not executed. A simulation for 1991, during the Gulf War, suggests that the release contributed to

the price decline and reduced backwardation that occurred in the months following the release and U.S.

military actions. A simulation for 2011, during the Arab Spring, suggests that SPR release did indeed reduce

backwardation in spreads, as well as prevented temporary steep rises in oil prices. A simulation for 2003,

when oil futures entered steep backwardation but no SPR release occurred,3 suggests that a release during

this period could have muted the strong backwardation and reduced prices temporarily. These simulations

also provide guidance on the size of SPR releases needed to achieve given policy goals, such as reductions in

oil prices or changes in price spreads.



2      Background and Literature

Governments have long held strategic petroleum reserves. In the wake of the 1973 OPEC oil embargo, the

International Energy Agency (IEA) was established with a key purpose being the coordination of strategic

reserves to respond to oil supply disruptions. The U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve was established shortly

thereafter in 1975 for the same reason. Reserves have been released on three major occasions since then:

during the 1991 Gulf War, during Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and during the 2011 Arab Spring.4 There were

also other times when SPR releases were considered but ultimately not used, such as in early 2003 when the

Venezuelan oil strike and the Iraq War disrupted oil production.5

     Despite the importance of SPR release decisions, the economics literature provides little guidance for

optimal policy. Instead, policymakers typically rely on expert judgment and back-of-the-envelope estimates

of the impacts of releases on oil prices. A 2006 GAO report asked a group of experts about SPR policy,

who generally suggested that strategic releases should be used to offset supply disruptions that the market
    3 Thiswas amid the Venezuelan oil strike and run-up to the Iraq War, which together disrupted millions of barrels per day.
Some experts argued that this case clearly called for SPR releases, but no releases were ultimately made.
   4 Reserves have also been released on other occasions, which mostly represent test sales, temporary loans, and sales for

deficit-reduction.
   5 See Dobbs, Michael. “Oil Reserve Is ‘First Line of Defense’ for U.S.”, New York Times, 18 Feb. 2003.




                                                              3
cannot make up on its own (e.g., through private inventory drawdowns or supply responses in other regions).6

In other words, this is a policy of “counting barrels” that are disrupted on net, and releasing that amount

of reserves. Indeed, in its recent strategic assessment and benefit analysis for the SPR, the Department of

Energy assumed exactly this decision rule.7

   This policy of counting barrels is inadequate because it does not incorporate market expectations about

the expected persistence of supply disruptions. Further, it embodies the outdated notion that the SPR is for

addressing physical shortages. In a globally integrated market, the SPR primarily addresses the economic

impacts of price shocks—both its macroeconomic and distributional effects. If the goal of the SPR then is to

dampen or eliminate price shocks associated with supply disruptions, how do policy-makers decide whether

a particular situation warrants release and how large it should be, given that simply counting barrels is

insufficient? There is no literature on this issue that we are aware of.

   The initial literature on SPR management dates back to the late 1970s and early 1980s–the years following

the oil shocks of the Arab oil embargo, the Iranian Revolution, and the establishment of the reserve. These

studies include Teisberg (1981) and Chao and Manne (1983), which use dynamic programming to model

optimal SPR filling and release policies. One result of those studies is that releasing reserves is more desirable

when the disruption is likely to be temporary (rather than persistent).

   But they did not explore how to determine the probabilities of persistence in practice; rather, the authors

assumed constant transition probabilities. One reason for this is that literature did not have access to the

information about expectations provided by oil futures markets, simply because the studies pre-dated the

existence of those markets. Hubbard and Weiner (1983, 1985, 1986) use economic models to study the impacts

of SPR releases, but they also pre-dated the establishment of long-dated futures contracts. Short-run oil

futures markets were established in 1983, and liquid markets for long-dated contracts did not arise until the

late 1980s. In light of this, Devarajan and Hubbard (1982) was ahead of its time in arguing that the SPR

should sell futures contracts to accelerate the impact of strategic releases. The establishment of long-dated

contracts creates more information about expected future spot prices, to which the existing dated literature

did not have access.

   Literature conceptualizing the relationship between inventories and price spreads dates back to Working

(1949); Brennan (1958), was supported empirically for many commodities in Fama and French (1987, 1988)
  6 See GAO, “Strategic Petroleum Reserve”, 2005.
  7 See Department of Energy, “Long-Term Strategic Review (LTSR) of the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) Report
to Congress”, 2016. In particular, the benefit analysis assumed that net supply disruptions would be offset one-for-one by
coordinated IEA releases.




                                                            4
(although they did not consider oil) and is summarized by Pindyck (2001). Intuitively, these studies present a

now standard no-arbitrage result from finance that in equilibrium the futures price spread (the benefit from

holding inventories) must equal the net cost of storage and lost interest accounting for the risk premium

(together representing the cost of holding inventories). While inventory activity upholds this equilibrium,

inventories do not appear explicitly in this result or as a function of spreads. We directly estimate this

relationship.

    There is a recent empirical literature on oil inventories, including Kilian and Lee (2014) and Baumeister

and Kilian (2016a), and we follow those studies in using vector autoregression (VAR) to model oil market

dynamics methods. However, those studies estimate the relationship between inventories and oil price levels,

not spreads. Kilian and Murphy (2014) considered spreads as an auxiliary analysis, but they were not used

in their main model or structural analysis. None of those studies are focused on informing SPR policy. In

addition, a working paper by Stevens (2014) considers the impacts of SPR purchases and releases (both

emergency and routine) on crude oil prices (but not spreads), finding little impact except in times of high

market uncertainty. That study does not incorporate price spreads into its analysis, which is the focus of this

paper. That study does consider the effect of SPR releases on (a subset of) U.S. crude inventories, but only

as an auxiliary analysis.8

    This study also contributes to a larger literature that uses time series methods to study oil market

dynamics. These include Kilian (2008, 2009); Hamilton (2009); Kilian (2016, 2017a,b), which generally

consider dynamics between oil prices and supply and demand factors. None of those studies, however, focuses

on the relationship of inventories and price spreads. The only study of which we are aware estimating a

relationship between crude oil inventories and price spreads is Scheitrum, Carter, and Jaffe (2015), which

considers whether strategic releases themselves (or expectations thereof) affect the behavior of private

inventories. The spread-inventory relationship is not the relationship of interest in that study. In addition,

the study considers only the effects of spreads on inventories, and not the reverse relationship (inventories

affecting spreads) that we also estimate.

    One other study that is relevant for this research is Baumeister and Kilian (2016b), which distinguishes

between oil price futures and expected future oil prices. While often conflated, these two differ according to

the risk premium. Conceptually, this matters when using futures prices as a proxy for expected prices in the
   8 Specifically, it considers the impacts on oil inventories located in U.S. PADDs 2 and 3 (as opposed to our more comprehensive

global measure) as a side analysis. It ultimately does not include private inventories in its main analysis. That study also differs
from ours in that it uses routine SPR purchases and sales for identification of the impacts of releases on oil price levels, whereas
we consider variation in private inventories to identify impacts on spreads (as well as prices and other variables).




                                                                 5
future and hence the expected persistence of supply shocks. Econometrically, this matters when computing

the price “spread” against the prompt-month oil price. To explore the impact of this distinction on our results,

we estimate our models using both methods. We first estimate the model with the spread computed as the

difference between long-dated and prompt-month futures prices. We then run sensitivities by estimating

the model with spreads computed as the difference between the expected future spot prices (estimated by

Baumeister and Kilian 2016b) and prompt-month futures prices. Our key results are robust to using either

method.

    In summary, there is little to no recent economic literature considering the relationship between oil

inventories and price spreads or guiding SPR policy. This paper contributes significantly in these areas, and

provides important guidance to future SPR release policy.



3       Methods and Data

In this section, we overview the methods and data we use in our estimation and simulations. First, we provide

an overview of the vector autoregression model, the computation of cumulative impulse response functions,

and how we run counterfactual simulations of SPR release scenarios. This section also includes a summary of

the data used and its sources.


3.1     Methods

3.1.1    VAR Model

We estimate a vector autoregression (VAR) with K = 5 variables: OECD petroleum consumption, OECD

commercial crude inventories, OPEC crude oil production, crude oil prices, and price spreads. With one

exception (spreads), variables are expressed in log-changes, implying percentage changes after taking first

differences. We take first differences because the series are generally non-stationary in levels, but are stationary

in differences. We include the spread in levels, rather than first differences, because futures and spot prices

are cointegrated (although the results are very similar if we estimate with the spread in first differences).

    It is natural to include crude inventories, prices, and spreads based on the discussion above. We also

include OECD petroleum consumption as a measure of oil demand. We control for oil demand shocks

to disentangle inventory shocks that are driven by supply-driven versus demand-driven factors. OPEC




                                                         6
crude production is included because OPEC supply responses are a potential moderating factor in inventory

dynamics and SPR releases.9

    As our measure of crude oil prices, we use monthly changes in West Texas Intermediate (WTI) prices for

years prior to 2010, switching to changes in Brent crude oil prices in January 2010. We make this adjustment

for several reasons. First, while the Brent price is the most common benchmark in recent years, WTI contracts

were the benchmark in earlier decades. The Brent futures market was significantly less liquid than WTI in

the 1980s and 1990s, making the latter a better metric historically. Second, as documented by Kilian (2016),

the tight oil boom in the United States de-linked WTI and Brent prices beginning in 2010.10 As a result of

this disconnect in recent years, backwardation in WTI prices have not always coincided with backwardation

in Brent prices, the latter of which is now the common benchmark considered as an indicator for the global

oil market. For this reason, we use Brent prices post-2010. For the remainder of this paper, we use the term

“crude oil” prices, referring to this combined time series.

    Our VAR specification is



                                                            24
                                                            X
                                              y t = A0 +          A` yt−` + εt ,                                                (1)
                                                            `=1


where

                                                                                            
                                            ∆OECD Petroleum Consumptiont
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                  ∆OECD Commercial Crude Oil Inventoriest 
                                                                          
                                                                          
                             yt = 
                                      ∆OPEC Crude Oil Productiont         ,
                                                                                                                               (2)
                                                                          
                                   ∆Real Crude Oil Prompt-Month Pricet 
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                        Crude Oil 12-Month Spreadt


and variables are measured in logs. Spreads represent the log difference between the 12-month and prompt-

month real crude futures price, so it can be interpreted as a percentage point. In interpreting our results, we

implicitly treat the 12-month futures price as a market-based expectation of future spot prices. However,

as documented by Baumeister and Kilian (2016b), futures prices differ from expected spot prices due to a
   9 Our key results are qualitatively similar if we were to exclude OPEC production (or replace it with world crude oil production).

We include it nonetheless because it is an important factor affecting oil markets. Further, including it allows us to simulate its
dynamics as well, including OPEC supply responses to inventory shocks.
  10 Prices and spreads were similar for both Brent and WTI in both December 2009 and January 2010, making this a reasonable

breakpoint.




                                                                  7
time-varying risk premium. As a sensitivity, we also estimated the VAR using a time series of 12-month-ahead

expected spot prices generously provided by Baumeister and Kilian (2016b) to construct our spread variable.

The estimates are very similar and can be found in the appendix.11 We nonetheless present the results using

actual futures prices because that is the information that would be available to a policymaker during an

emergency oil supply disruption.

    We also include twelve monthly dummy variables in the estimation, but do not include them in the

equations below for notational convenience. The sample period is December 1988 through June 2016, monthly.

We use 24 lags (2 years), following Hamilton and Herrera (2004); Kilian (2009); Kilian and Lee (2014); Kilian

and Murphy (2014), and Kilian and Lütkepohl (2017), which stress the need for including many lags to

account for slow-moving dynamics in oil markets.


3.1.2    Cumulative Impulse Response Functions

In what follows, we overview impulse response functions (IRFs) for those less familiar with them. Readers

comfortable with IRFs may wish to skip to the next subsection, 3.1.3. We present the results through

cumulative orthogonalized impulse response functions. These represent how each of the variables change over

time (t + s) in response to a one-unit orthogonalized shock to one of the variables (j) at time t. The formula

for IRFs can be derived analytically through the moving average representation of the VAR:


                                           yt = Φ0 εt + Φ1 εt−1 + Φ2 εt−2 + . . . ,


where Φ0 = IK , Φ1 = A1 and the subsequent Φs matrices are defined recursively as

                                                             s
                                                             X
                                                      Φs =         Φs−` A` .
                                                             `=1


The (i, j) element of Φs gives the expected response of variable i, s periods after a unit shock to only variable

j. Of course, the shocks to the five variables are likely to be correlated, meaning a shock to variable j is

likely to be accompanied by shocks to other variables. For example, expectedly large inventory shocks are

likely to put downward pressure on oil prices immediately, and indeed we find a negative correlation between
  11 The impulse response functions were qualitatively unchanged when using the Baumeister and Kilian (2016b) data to

construct the spreads. The only significant impacts were on the IRFs involving spreads themselves. The responses of spreads to
all impulses are somewhat larger when using the Baumeister and Kilian (2016b) data, and the response of prices and OPEC
production to spread shocks also increased somewhat (although with large standard errors). These changes generally do not
affect our relationships of interest, which is the effect of inventory shocks. Further, caution should be taken in comparing these
across models, since they represent conceptually different spread variables; one measure includes the risk premium and the other
does not.


                                                                8
these residuals. The orthogonalization process accounts for the correlation in these shocks, de-correlating

the εt vector by multiplying it by the Cholesky decomposition of the residual covariance matrix, L (so

LL0 = Σεε0 = cov(εt , ε0t )). This results in uncorrelated shocks, denoted ut = Lεt . The orthogonalized IRF

(OIRF) is

                                                          Ψs = Φs L,


representing the expected responses of the variables to these orthogonalized shocks.12 Intuitively, this accounts

for the immediate relationships between the variables through the correlation of the residuals.

    As is well known, the ordering of the variables matters in the orthogonalization because the Cholesky

decomposition is lower triangular. Variables placed earlier in the ordering are effectively assumed to be

“slower moving” than variables placed later.13 For example, OECD petroleum consumption, being placed first

in equation 2, is not allowed to respond within-period to any shocks in other variables, only responding with

a lag through the lag structure in equation 1. OPEC production, being placed in the middle, can immediately

respond to shocks to consumption and crude inventories, but it only responds to shocks to crude prices and

spreads through the lag structure in equation 1. Crude prices and spreads are placed at the end, allowing

them to response to shocks in all preceding variables.14 We argue that this ordering is reasonable. Prices

and spreads can and do change instantly in response to news, justifying their placement at the end. OPEC

production (placed third) is clearly slower moving than prices, and OPEC’s historic status as swing producer

suggests that it can adjust more quickly than commercial inventories (placed second), which requires changes

to flow supply or demand and the movement of physical barrels. Lastly, petroleum consumption is a very

slow moving series, justifying its placement first in the VAR.

    Because our variables are in monthly changes (with the exception of the spread), Ψs represents the impacts

of a shock on monthly changes in variables after s periods. Since we are interested primarily in the levels of

variables of interest (e.g., oil prices) and not their monthly changes, we present cumulative impulse response
           Ps
functions ( `=1 Ψ` ) for all variables in first differences. This accumulates the effects on monthly changes in

the variables to show the impact on their (log) levels over time. For spreads, we report standard impulse

response functions because that variable is already in levels. We construct 95% confidence intervals through

residual-resampling bootstrap.
  12 While the multiplication by L itself scales the shocks to one standard deviation shocks (instead of one-unit), we rescale

these responses by the inverse of the standard deviations to once again represent unit changes.
  13 The alternative would be to use non-orthogonalized shocks. This would implicitly make the stronger assumption that shocks

are contemporaneously unrelated, contrary to the observed correlations.
  14 The relative ordering of spreads and prices prevents prompt-month prices from immediately responding to spread shocks,

implicitly treating spread shocks as shocks to futures prices alone. Interchanging the order of these two variables has zero effect
on the key OIRF of interest, which is the response to inventory shocks.


                                                                9
3.1.3    Simulations

In addition to computing impulse responses, we conduct counterfactual historical simulations to estimate

how SPR releases would affect crude oil prices and spreads over time. We model a strategic release as an

unexpected inflow to (i.e., increase in) commercial crude inventories.

    For each simulation, we first choose a month (τ ) and size (rτ ) for incremental SPR release we are

simulating.15 We compute a new “counterfactual” shock that month, εcf
                                                                   τ , by adjusting the observed residual

that month ετ , according to an orthogonalized inventory shock of rτ :

                                                                     
                                                                      0
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                    rτ 
                                                                     
                                                               1
                                                εcf
                                                                     
                                                 τ    ≡ ετ +       L 0                                                    (3)
                                                             L(2,2) 
                                                                     
                                                                        
                                                                    0
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                      0

The division by L(2,2) (which is approximately the standard deviation of the inventory residual) is required

because the pre-multiplication by L scales the magnitude of shock into one of rτ standard deviations. This

conversion ensures that the inventory residual, ε2,τ , changes by precisely the assumed SPR release size, rτ .

The orthogonalization captures the immediate impacts that inventory releases may have on oil prices and

spreads, based on the correlation of the VAR residuals.16

    All other residuals are left unchanged: εcf
                                             t ≡ εt for t 6= τ .

    With this one residual changed, counterfactual values of ytcf can be recursively simulated as

                                                            24
                                                            X
                                              ytcf ≡ A0 +             cf
                                                                  A` yt−` + εcf
                                                                             t ,                                            (4)
                                                            `=1



where ytcf = yt for t < τ and the monthly dummies are suppressed for notational convenience. While ytcf are

in log-differences, we aggregate up to levels when presenting the simulation results (e.g., barrels for inventories

or dollars per barrel for oil prices) to make them easier for the reader to interpret. We compute simulated

confidence intervals using the same bootstrap method commonly used to construct such intervals for IRFs.
  15 In simulations where we are simulating a counterfactual of no SPR release, r is set to equal to the negative of the actual
                                                                                    τ
observed historical release. This effectively “subtracts” the observed historical release.
  16 For example, a 1 percent shock in inventories is estimated to be associated with an immediate reduction in spot prices of

approximately 0.9 percent and an increase in spreads of approximately 0.4 percent. That is, with rτ = 0.01, the last term in
equation (3) is approximately (0, 0.01, −0.0003, −0.009, 0.004)0 (with the final two elements representing percentage changes in
oil prices and spreads, respectively).




                                                              10
3.2     Data

We use data from three sources. Oil prices are obtained from Bloomberg L.P.17 Daily prices are averaged to

the monthly level and converted to real 2014 dollars using the CPI All Urban Consumer (All Items) index.

Spreads are computed as the log of real 12-month futures prices minus the log of real prompt-month prices.

This log difference thus approximately represents spreads in percentages. It also creates an exact linear

relationship between log prices and spreads, which aids in interpreting the results.

    The OECD commercial crude oil inventory series is from the International Energy Agency (IEA).18 It

corresponds to the crude stocks reported in their monthly Oil Market Reports, typically shown in their table

titled “OECD Industry Stocks and Quarterly Stock Changes”.19 The OECD petroleum consumption and

OPEC crude oil production series are from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).20 All five

time series are shown in Figure 1. That figure shows the series in levels, but as previously mentioned we use

their log-changes in the estimation.



4     Results

4.1     Cumulative Impulse Response Functions

While there are many impulse-response relationships implied by our VAR estimation, the primary relationship

of interest is the effect of a shock to inventories. This is because we wish to model the effect of SPR releases,

which amounts to making additional strategic inventories available to the market. To this end, we consider

the responses of each variable to a 1% impulse to commercial crude inventories, shown in Figure 2 along

with 95% confidence intervals.21 When the responses are statistically significant, their direction and size

generally comport with economic theory and intuition. As seen in the top middle chart (the effect of the

inventory shock on inventories themselves), the inventories remain elevated after the shock, although much of

the surplus is drawn down within two months.22 The impacts on crude oil prices and spreads are shown in
   17 We use WTI and Brent prices, which use the CL1 Comdty and CL12 Comdty tickers (for WTI) and CO1 and CO12 Comdty

tickers (for Brent), where the 1 and 12 in the tickers represent the prompt-month and 12-month contracts respectively.
   18 IEA data is from the Monthly Oil Survey, c OECD/IEA 2016, www.iea.org/statistics. License: www.iea.org/t&c; as

modified by the authors.
   19 See https://www.iea.org/oilmarketreport/reports/ for an archive of these reports. Our data does not precisely match

the data in the archived reports because the series is continually updated by IEA. We obtained the series from IEA in August
2016, and it is complete through June 2016.
   20 These series are publicly available at https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/browser/index.php?tbl=T11.02#/?f=M&

charted=10 and https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/#international, respectively.
   21 A 1% inventory shock is on the order of 10 million barrels of crude oil, since private inventories are on the order of 1 billion

barrels (see Figure 1). Because of the linearity of the VAR model, all effects scale linearly with the inventory shock. For example,
an inventory shock of 2% would be estimated to produce responses that are exactly twice as large as those from a 1% shock.
   22 This is consistent with Hubbard and Weiner (1986), which finds that private inventories do not fully absorb strategic releases.




                                                                 11
0 10 20 30 40 50 60                OECD Petroleum Consumption                                                             OECD Commercial Crude Inventories                                                          OPEC Production




                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
 (millions of barrels per day)




                                                                                                                                                                            (millions of barrels per day)
                                                                                                                   1000
                                                                                                  (millions of barrels)




                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                OPEC Production
      Oil Consumption




                                                                                                     Inventories




                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                         600




                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                              0 200




                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                                            1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                                       1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                                       Crude Oil Prices                                                         Crude Oil 12M−1M Spreads
                                                                        150




                                                                                                                                         −10 0 10 20 30
                                                                                  Prompt Month Price
                                                                                  12 Month Price
                                               Crude Oil Prices ($/bbl)




                                                                                                                                       (percentage points)
                                                              100




                                                                                                                                            Spreads
                                                    50




                                                                                                                                                    −30
                                                               0




                                                                              1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                                  1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

    Figure 1: Time Series of OECD Petroleum Consumption, OECD Commercial Crude Inventories, OPEC
    Crude Oil Production, Crude Oil Prices, and Crude Price Spreads


    the bottom two charts of Figure 2. We see an immediate reduction in spot prices which grows in magnitude

    to -2% to -3% over several months, before beginning to revert towards zero after approximately one year (in

    both point estimate and statistical significance). At the same time, spreads temporarily change by about 0.8

    percentage points as this spot price reduction is accompanied by a smaller reduction in futures prices.23 Price

    spreads revert back toward baseline conditions within about one year. Under the assumption that releases of

    strategic reserves can be modeled as surprise inventory builds, this suggests that SPR releases can reduce

    prices and mitigate backwardation, relative to a counterfactual of no release.

                       The response of OPEC production is slightly negative, implying OPEC reducing output somewhat in

    response to inventory builds, although the estimate is generally statistically insignificant.24 The response of

    OECD petroleum consumption is also small and statistically insignificant.25
      23 While the 12-month futures price does not explicitly appear in the VAR, it appears implicitly through its additive

   relationship between spot prices and spreads. Namely, since spreads are computed as the log-difference between future and
   spot prices (Spread = ln(F uture) − ln(Spot)), the effect on futures prices is the sum of the effect on spot prices and spreads
                                                   ∂ ln(F uture)  ∂ ln(Spot)
   (ln(F uture) = ln(Spot) + Spread, which implies     ∂u
                                                                 = ∂u        + ∂Spread
                                                                                 ∂u
                                                                                       ). So, for example, after about 12 months, a
                                                                                                                             j,t                   j,t              j,t
   -2.3% change in spot prices accompanied by a 0.4% change in spreads implies a -1.9% change in futures prices (= −2.3% + 0.4%).
      24 Excluding OPEC production from the model has little effect on the responses of the remaining variables.
      25 If we exclude OECD petroleum consumption from the estimation, the price and spread responses to an inventory shock

   are larger and more persistent, suggesting that its inclusion is controlling for demand-driven inventory builds, as desired. As
   suggested by a commenter on an early version of this paper, excluding demand from the estimation would threaten to attribute
   the effects of (relatively persistent) demand shocks to an effect of inventories, thereby overstating of the strength and persistence
   of inventory shocks that are driven by transitory factors such as supply shocks. The fact that excluding petroleum demand from
   the estimation results in larger and more persistent estimates suggests that its inclusion is acts as a valuable control for our
   purposes.



                                                                                                                                      12
                               OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                                                             Inventory (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                                                            OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)
             0.1 0.2 0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                      0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
Percentage Points




                                                                                                                    Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percentage Points
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −0.4
  −0.1




                                                                                                                             0.2
             −0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −0.8
                                                                                                                             0.0
                           0    2     4     6   8   10                        12             14       16       18                        0        2        4        6        8   10                      12       14       16       18                        0        2        4        6        8   10   12   14   16   18
                                                Month                                                                                                                        Month                                                                                                                Month

                                                                                         Crude Price (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                                                                  Spread (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)




                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
                                                          0
                                                 Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                              Percentage Points
                                                    −4    −6−2




                                                                                                                                                                                         −1.0

                                                                          0              2        4        6        8   10                   12       14       16       18                           0        2        4        6        8   10                   12       14       16       18
                                                                                                                    Month                                                                                                                Month


                                    Figure 2: Cumulative Impulse Responses from a 1 Percentage Point Shock to Inventories

                                          Notes: Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals computed through 100 bootstrap iterations.




                                                                                                                                        Inventory (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                     Percentage Points
                                                                     −0.2     0.0−0.4




                                                                                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9    11                                                                                                13            15                       17
                                                                                                                   Month

                                      Figure 3: Cumulative Inventory Response from a 1 Percentage Point Shock to Spreads

                                          Notes: Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals computed through 100 bootstrap iterations.




                                                                                                                                                                             13
    We explored the other impulse response functions, which estimate the effects of impulses in each of the

other variables (e.g., petroleum consumption, OPEC production, and spreads) on each other. These OIRFs

can be found in the appendix. When the responses are statistically significant, their direction and size

generally comport with economic theory and intuition. Of interest, we find that the effect of spread shocks

on inventories is small and statistically insignificant, as shown in Figure 3. This suggests that the causal

relationship runs from inventories to spreads, not vice versa.26 This is intuitive, since market prices can and

do change instantly in response to news about inventories, whereas inventory builds require adjustments to

flow supply and/or demand and the movement of physical barrels.


4.2        Simulations

We use our estimated VAR to conduct counterfactual simulations to illustrate the estimated impacts of actual

and hypothetical strategic releases during three historical periods: the 1991 Gulf War, the 2003 Venezuelan

oil strike and Iraq War, and the 2011 Arab Spring. The first and third scenarios involve historical strategic

releases (1991 Iraq War, 2011 Arab Spring), so we simulate a no-release counterfactual. In the second scenario,

we consider the impact of an SPR release at a time when it was considered but not executed, so we simulate

a counterfactual release.


4.2.1       Simulation 1: 1991 Gulf War

The first simulation is in January 1991, when the run-up to the Gulf War caused prices to double and enter

steep backwardation amid uncertainty about Iraq’s oil supply. In January 1991, the United States and IEA

jointly made available approximately 60 million barrels of oil.27 Oil prices declined sharply after the release,

but economists note that it is difficult to disentangle the contributions of the release itself and the relatively

swift resolution to the conflict. The latter is unmodelled in our approach and hence appears in the residual.

As explained above, our simulation retains the residual but estimates the effect of the change in crude oil

inventories by implementing an additional inventory shock (here, by subtracting from inventories the 60

million barrels that were actually made available by IEA). This simulation helps to disentangle these two

effects.
  26 This   finding is robust to the ordering of the variables in the VAR, implying it is not simply the result of the orthogonalization.
  27 See   http://articles.latimes.com/1991-01-18/business/fi-102_1_oil-prices.




                                                                    14
                                               Crude Oil Prices                                                       Crude Oil 12M−1M Spreads




                                                                                                     40
                          60
  Crude Oil Prices ($/barrel)




                                                                                                          20
                                                                                        (percentage points)
                                                                                             Spread
               40




                                                                                      −20       0
   20




                                                                         Actual
                                                                         Simulated




                                                                                                     −40
                 0




                                1990    1991        1992          1993         1994                            1990   1991      1992      1993   1994

                                           Figure 4: Simulation without Strategic Release in January 1991

Notes: The shaded areas represent bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. The assumed inventory shock is -60 million barrels of
crude oil (≈ −6.9% of inventories then), approximately equal to the amount total IEA release at the time.



            Figure 5 shows oil prices and spreads, both actual values (in black) and simulated values without the

release (in green). The shaded areas represent bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals for the simulation.28

The simulation suggests that, absent the IEA release, oil prices would have remained somewhat elevated,

although not at the $60 peak level. Prices would have only declined to approximately $45, rather than the

actual levels of about $37, for an impact of about $8 (or 20%). The reduction in backwardation would have

been somewhat smaller, with spreads remaining at about -10% compared to the observed values of about

-5%, for an impact of about +5 percentage points attributable to the release.

            For both prices and spreads, the simulated impact of the release is only statistically significant for a

short period of time, and generally insignificant after about 9 to 12 months, with the point estimates of the

simulated values eventually reverting to actual levels, implying no strong long-run effect.29 The simulation

suggests that the release led to an economically significant, short-run reduction in prices and backwardation.


4.2.2                            Simulation 2: 2003 Iraq War

The next simulation is for spring 2003, when there were two significant supply disruptions in a short period

of time: the Venezuelan oil strike and the Iraq War. The Venezuelan oil strike began in late 2002, disrupting
  28 These intervals are confidence intervals based on uncertainty of parameter estimates, not to be confused with prediction

intervals, which would additionally simulate new draws for the error terms.
  29 This temporary nature of the effect is not an inevitable consequence of the VAR model or the assumed number of lags (24).

First, as is clear from the moving average representation of VARs, the model allows effects to persist for much longer. Second,
these responses represent accumulated effects on monthly changes. While the effect on monthly changes asymptotes to zero in
the long run, the accumulation of these changes need not do so.



                                                                                     15
                                                 Crude Oil Prices                                                       Crude Oil 12M−1M Spreads




                                                                                                       40
                              80
  Crude Oil Prices ($/barrel)




                                                                                                            20
                                                                                          (percentage points)
                    60




                                                                                               Spread

                                                                                                  0
          40




                                                                                        −20
  20




                                                                           Actual
                                                                           Simulated




                                                                                                       −40
                   0




                                   2002   2003        2004          2005         2006                            2002   2003      2004      2005   2006

                                                 Figure 5: Simulation with Strategic Release in February 2003

Notes: The shaded areas represent bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. The assumed inventory shock is +48 million barrels
of crude oil (≈ 5.5% of inventories then), equal to the net disruption in production of 0.8 million barrels per day for a period of 2
months.



over 2 million barrels per day in supply (Nov-2002 to Jan-2003). This disruption was in the process of being

resolved in early 2003, when the invasion of Iraq disrupted 1.3 million barrels per day (Mar-03 to Apr-03).

Some of this disruption was offset by a 0.5 million barrel per day increase in production from other OPEC

nations, so the net disruption from OPEC members was 0.8 million barrels per day. Spot crude prices rose

sharply, sending the futures market into deep backwardation in excess of 20% (during Jan-03 to Mar-03). We

model a strategic release of 48 million barrels, equal to two months of disrupted supply (0.8 million barrels

per day for 60 days). Other recent strategic releases were of similar order of magnitude (typically about 60

million barrels), so this figure is a reasonable approximation of what an actual release might have been. We

simulate the release occurring in February 2003, which was the month of steepest backwardation.

             As seen in Figure 4, the simulated release of crude oil temporarily results in a spot price reduction of

about $6, or approximately 15%. Simulated spreads show temporarily reduced backwardation, falling to

about -10% instead of -15%, for an impact of about +5 percentage points attributable to the release. As

before, these effects are only statistically significant for a period of a few months, and the estimated effect

virtually disappears after a year or more. Simulated spreads eventually recover to the actual levels, and the

counterfactual prices rise toward actual prices.

             In summary, this simulation suggests that strategic releases could have mitigated the short-term price

increases and backwardation brought on by the 2003 Iraq War and Venezuelan oil strike.




                                                                                       16
                                                 Crude Oil Prices                                                       Crude Oil 12M−1M Spreads




                                                                                                       40
                            150
  Crude Oil Prices ($/barrel)




                                                                                                            20
                                                                                          (percentage points)
                100




                                                                                               Spread

                                                                                                  0
    50




                                                                                        −20
                                                                           Actual
                                                                           Simulated




                                                                                                       −40
                  0




                                  2010    2011        2012          2013         2014                            2010   2011      2012      2013   2014

                                                 Figure 6: Simulation without Strategic Release in June 2011

Notes: The shaded areas represent bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. The assumed inventory shock is -60 million barrels
(≈ −6.4% of inventories then), equal in magnitude to the total IEA release that year.



4.2.3                              Simulation 3: 2011 Arab Spring

Our final simulation considers the strategic release of reserves during the 2011 Arab Spring, which disrupted

oil supply in Libya and other countries. In June 2011, IEA member countries announced a release of 60 million

barrels of oil, which were delivered by August 2011. As in the first simulation, we simulate a scenario without

this release by introducing a negative inventory shock of 60 million barrels in June 2011. The results are in

Figure 6. The figure suggests that the release prevented a temporary increase in prices and backwardation.

With the releases, prices remained relatively stable around $110 with a spread of about -5%, compared to

the counterfactual case where in the short term prices rise to about $135 per barrel and spreads moved

into backwardation of about -10%. This suggests that the 2011 strategic releases may have reduced price

increases by about 20% ($110 versus $135) and backwardation by about 5 percentage points (-5% versus

-10%), consistent with the previous simulations.



5                          Caveats

The results indicate an economically and statistically significant effect of inventory changes on spot prices

and price spreads. Based on these estimated relationships, the above simulations also suggest that strategic

releases can effectively moderate price increases and stabilize futures spreads in times of market dislocation.

There are, however, important caveats. First, we simulate strategic releases as a surprise shock to private



                                                                                       17
inventories. This implicitly assumes that market actors respond to surprise public releases in the same way

that they would respond to surprise increases in private inventories. We have controlled for demand shocks,

so the estimated response to an inventory shock is based on supply-driven factors. Nonetheless, market actors

may interpret supply-driven inventory shocks differently (say, because they believe public releases signal

future government policy), and hence they may react differently, although it is unclear which direction this

would bias the estimates.

   Second, the simulations assume that the strategic releases are unexpected, both in an econometric sense

(as deviations from the statistical expectation of the model) and from the perspective of market participants.30

If strategic releases are expected, then their effects will be incorporated into existing oil prices and spreads.

While this suggests imperfections in the timing of the effects found in the simulation, it does not undermine

their existence. Indeed, as Devarajan and Hubbard (1982) point out, expectations of future releases help calm

markets before they actually occur—so long as policymakers eventually follow through on that expectation.

This relates to another issue in the vein of the Lucas critique. If the government commits to a policy of

releasing inventories when supply disruptions induce steep backwardation, markets will anticipate this policy,

stabilizing oil markets before any particular release is announced. While this expectations channel has

desirable anticipatory and stabilizing effects, it also could undermine the value of the price spread itself as an

indicator of the severity of supply disruptions.

   A third caveat is that the estimated VAR underlying the simulations represents the “average” relationships

between the variables over the sample period. The relationships during times of extreme disruption may differ

from these average relationships. However, the substantial variation in the series during these extreme events

provides a non-trivial portion of the variation identifying our VAR estimates, partially allaying this concern.

   Finally, our model does not directly treat refined product markets. This is mainly a concern in emergency

scenarios where refined markets are disproportionately important, such as during Hurricane Katrina, which

severely damaged refining operations. Future work could apply these techniques to more directly explore

refined product market disruptions, with relevance to the consideration of the value of refined product

reserves.
  30 As pointed out by Kilian and Murphy (2014), with forward-looking investors, these two types of expectations can differ,

although VAR models often implicitly equate them.




                                                            18
6      Conclusion

Understanding the dynamic relationships between oil spot prices, price spreads, and inventories is key for both

market participants and policymakers considering releases from strategic oil reserves, such as the SPR. First,

we make the conceptual point that spreads convey market-based information about expectations regarding

the severity and persistence of supply disruptions, with clear implications for when SPR releases are advisable.

Namely, steep backwardation suggests disruptions are serious, unlikely to be quickly moderated by private

market forces, and expected to be transitory, indicating a stronger case for releasing reserves. The spread thus

provides an indicator guiding policymakers whether to release reserves, or to hold them in case a disruption

might deteriorate further.

     We use a VAR to estimate the dynamic relationship between oil spot prices, price spreads, and commercial

inventories. This relationship illustrates the magnitude of the impacts of SPR releases, with implications for

how many barrels to release in times of supply disruption. The estimates suggest that SPR releases—modeled

as surprise inventory shocks—can have substantial effects on oil prices and spreads. Impulse response functions

suggest that stock releases can temporarily reduce spot prices by about 2% to 3% and mitigate backwardation

by approximately 0.8 percentage point for each 1% addition to commercial inventories (approximately equal

to 10 million barrels). Simulations suggest that past releases may have mitigated increases in oil prices on

the order of 15% to 20% and prevented approximately 5 percentage points of backwardation in crude oil

futures. These estimates can guide policymakers in determining how many barrels to release from the SPR in

times of supply disruption to achieve specified market impacts.



References

Baumeister, C., and L. Kilian (2016a): “Forty Years of Oil Price Fluctuations: Why the Price of Oil

    May Still Surprise Us,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(1), 139–160.

          (2016b): “A General Approach to Recovering Market Expectations from Futures Prices with an

    Application to Crude Oil,” manuscript.

Brennan, M. J. (1958): “The Supply of Storage,” The American Economic Review, pp. 50–72.

Chao, H.-P., and A. S. Manne (1983): “Oil Stockpiles and Import Reductions: A Dynamic Programming

    Approach,” Operations Research, 31(4), 632–651.



                                                      19
Devarajan, S., and R. G. Hubbard (1982): “Drawing down the Strategic Petroleum Reserve: The Case

  for Selling Futures Contracts,” in Stockpile Policy, chap. 11, pp. 187–196. Harvard University, Cambridge,

  MA.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1987): “Commodity Futures Prices: Some Evidence on Forecast Power,

  Premiums, and the Theory of Storage,” Journal of Business, pp. 55–73.

         (1988): “Business Cycles and the Behavior of Metals Prices,” The Journal of Finance, 43(5),

  1075–1093.

Hamilton, J. D. (2009): “Understanding Crude Oil Prices,” Energy Journal, 30(2), 179–206.

Hamilton, J. D., and A. M. Herrera (2004): “Oil Shocks and Aggregate Macroeconomic Behavior: The

  Role of Monetary Policy: A Comment,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36(2), 265–286.

Hubbard, R. G., and R. J. Weiner (1983): “The ‘sub-trigger’ crisis: An economic analysis of flexible

  stock policies,” Energy Economics, 5(3), 178–189.

        (1985): “Managing the Strategic Petroleum Reserve: Energy Policy in a Market Setting,” Annual

  Review of Energy, 10(1), 515–556.

        (1986): “Inventory Optimization in the U.S. Petroleum Industry: Empirical Analysis and Implications

  for Energy Emergency Policy,” Management science, 32(7), 773–790.

Kilian, L. (2008): “The Economic Effects of Energy Price Shocks,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(4),

  871–909.

         (2009): “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the

  Crude Oil Market,” American Economic Review, 99(3), 1053–69.

         (2016): “The Impact of the Shale Oil Revolution on U.S. Oil and Gasoline Prices,” Review of

  Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(2), 185–205.

        (2017a): “How the Tight Oil Boom Has Changed Oil and Gasoline Markets,” Papeles de Energia, 3,

  79–102.

         (2017b): “The Impact of the Fracking Boom on Arab Oil Producers,” Energy Journal, 38(6),

  137–160.


                                                      20
Kilian, L., and T. K. Lee (2014): “Quantifying the speculative component in the real price of oil: The

  role of global oil inventories,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 42, 71–87.

Kilian, L., and H. Lütkepohl (2017): Structural vector autoregressive analysis. Cambridge University

  Press, forthcoming.

Kilian, L., and D. P. Murphy (2014): “The Role of Inventories and Speculative Trading in the Global

  Market for Crude Oil,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29(3), 454–478.

Pindyck, R. S. (2001): “The Dynamics of Commodity Spot and Futures Markets: A Primer,” The Energy

  Journal, pp. 1–29.

Scheitrum, D. P., C. A. Carter, and A. M. Jaffe (2015): “Testing substitution between private and

  public storage in the U.S. oil market: A study on the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve,” Energy Economics.

Stevens, R. (2014): “The Strategic Petroleum Reserve and Crude Oil Prices,” .

Teisberg, T. J. (1981): “A Dynamic Programming Model of the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve,” The

  Bell Journal of Economics, pp. 526–546.

Working, H. (1949): “The Theory of Price of Storage,” The American Economic Review, 39(6), 1254–1262.




                                                    21
A       Appendix

A.1         All Impulse Response Functions

In the body, we focused on a selected set of impulse response functions of interest (those relating the inventories

and spreads). All impulse response functions are shown in Figure A.1. When the responses are statistically

significant, their direction and size generally comport with economic theory and intuition. One interesting

response of note is the effect of a shock to OPEC production on crude oil prices (seen in row 4, column 3),

which suggests 1% to 2% price reductions, albeit with large standard errors. Interestingly, this response does

not primarily represent a direct effect of production on prices. Instead, it derives from an indirect effect of

production shocks on inventory builds (shown in row 2, column 3), which in turn reduces prices. This can be

seen in the IRF by observing that prices do not decline very much immediately after an OPEC production

shock, only beginning to decline after inventories have been building for approximately 8 months.31


A.2         Estimation using Baumeister-Kilian Data

As discussed in section 3.2, we also estimate our model using the expected future (12-month) spot price series

from Baumeister and Kilian (2016b) generously provided by those authors. As described in section 3.1.1, we

use a combined time series of WTI (before 2010) and Brent (2010+). We use an analogous series generated

by combining Baumeister-Kilian’s expected price series for both WTI and Brent. This series is plotted, along

with futures prices, in Figure A.2.

    We re-estimated our VAR using the spread between the Baumeister-Kilian (BK) 12-month expected spot

price and the prompt-month future price (i.e., the (log) blue line minus the (log) black line). By contrast, our

main specification uses the difference between the actual 12-month future and the prompt month price (the

(log) red line minus the (log) black line). Due to data limitations, the sample period here is February 1990 to

December 2015, slightly shorter than the period of December 1988 to June 2016 in our main specification.

    Figures A.3 and A.4 show the IRFs using this alternative spread series. These IRFs strongly resemble

the corresponding ones in our primary specification, shown in Figures 2 and A.1. Focusing on the IRFs of

interest—the effect of an inventory shock shown in Figure A.3—the effect of the BK series is minor. The

only substantial difference is that the spread response is somewhat larger when it is computed using the BK

series (see last panel, about 1.5% versus 0.8%, although the confidence intervals overlap). This difference is
  31 This   result also appears if we use world crude production in place of OPEC-only production in the VAR.




                                                              22
                       OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                           OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                    OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                               OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                                     0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
Percentage Points




                                                                             Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                   Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Percentage Points
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −0.10 −0.05 0.00
            0.8




                                                                                         0.1




                                                                                                                                                           0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.1
                                                                         −0.3 −0.1
   0.4




                                                                                                                                                    0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −0.3
                                                                                                                                                                  −0.2
            0.0




                          0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                            0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                                0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                              0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                             0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                            Month                                                                    Month                                                                         Month                                                                      Month                                                                     Month
                          Inventory (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                                  Inventory (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                      Inventory (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                       Inventory (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                     Inventory (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)
                0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.05
Percentage Points




                                                                         Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                      Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Percentage Points
                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                     0.8
−1.0 −0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −0.15 −0.05
                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                   0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −0.4
                                                                                     0.0




                          0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                            0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                                0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                              0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                             0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                            Month                                                                    Month                                                                         Month                                                                      Month                                                                     Month
                        OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                               OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                        OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                   OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                       OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)




                                                                                                                                                                    1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
   Percentage Points




                                                                         Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                   Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Percentage Points
                0.4




                                                                                     0.0




                                                                                                                                                            1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −0.2
        0.0




                                                                             −0.4




                                                                                                                                                     0.5
−0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −0.05
                                                                                     −0.8




                                                                                                                                                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −0.6
                          0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                            0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                                0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                              0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                             0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                            Month                                                                    Month                                                                         Month                                                                      Month                                                                     Month
                        Crude Price (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                                 Crude Price (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                    Crude Price (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                   Crude Price (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                     Crude Price (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)
                  8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                   −6 −4 −2 0 2
                                                                                           0
Percentage Points




                                                                          Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Percentage Points
              6




                                                                         −6 −4 −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0
        4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
   2        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                          0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                            0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                                0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                              0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                             0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                            Month                                                                    Month                                                                         Month                                                                      Month                                                                     Month
                           Spread (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                                     Spread (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                           Spread (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                        Spread (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                        Spread (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)
                                                                                                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                0
Percentage Points




                                                                            Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                       Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Percentage Points
                                                                                         1.0




                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
         −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −0.2
                                                                                 0.0




                                                                                                                                                           0.5
   −2




                                                                         −1.0




                                                                                                                                                   −0.5
            −3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −0.5
                          0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                            0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                                0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                              0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                             0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                            Month                                                                    Month                                                                         Month                                                                      Month                                                                     Month


                                                                                                                     Figure A.1: All Impulse Response Functions

            Notes: All shocks are 1 percentage point in magnitude. Columns represent impulse variables, rows represent response variables.
            For example, the 2nd column shows the response of all variables to an impulse to inventories, corresponding to the graphs shown
            in Figure 2. And the 4th row represents how prompt-month oil prices respond to shocks to each of the five variables. Shaded
            areas represent 95% confidence intervals computed through 100 bootstrap iterations.



            modest, which suggests that inventory shocks do not substantially affect the risk premium, since that is the

            only difference between the two series.

                              Most of the other IRFs (shown in Figure A.4) are also qualitatively unchanged. The exception is the final

            column of that figure, showing the effects of a spread shock on the other variables. It is unsurprising that

            these IRFs show the largest difference because this spread shock represents a different economic concept.

            Namely, it excludes shocks to the risk premium. However, the standard errors under each method generally

            overlap both zero and each other.




                                                                                                                                                                                                  23
                                                   150

                                                                                                        Actual Prompt Month
                                                                                                        Actual 12M Future
                                                                                                        BK Expected 12M Price
                                                   100
                          WTI Prices ($/bbl)
                                                   50
                                                   0




                                                                       1990                                     1995                                           2000                                          2005                                            2010                                2015


                                          Figure A.2: Crude Oil Futures Prices and Baumeister-Kilian (BK) Expected Spot Prices

                        OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                                                                    Inventory (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                                                           OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)
                                                                                                                              1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
         0.3




                                                                                                                      0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
Percentage Points




                                                                                                                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percentage Points
           0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −0.2
 −0.1




                                                                                                                              0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −0.6
         −0.3




                                                                                                                              0.0




                    0    2                     4         6   8   10                  12       14       16       18                       0        2        4        6        8   10                     12       14       16       18                        0        2        4        6        8   10   12   14   16   18
                                                             Month                                                                                                           Month                                                                                                               Month

                                                                                          Crude Price (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                                                                Spread (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)
                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                             Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                              Percentage Points
                                                                         −2




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                 −4




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                      −6




                                                                                                                                                                                        −1




                                                                                 0        2        4        6        8   10                  12       14       16       18                          0        2        4        6        8   10                   12       14       16       18
                                                                                                                     Month                                                                                                              Month


     Figure A.3: Cumulative Impulse Responses from a 1 Percentage Point Shock to Inventories, using BK Data

     Notes: Compare to IRFs in Figure 2. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals computed through 100 bootstrap iterations.



                                                                                                                                                                             24
                        OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                           OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                 OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                  OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                              OECD Oil Cons. (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)




                                                                                                                                                     −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.00 0.10 0.20
                                                                                            0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −0.10 −0.05 0.00
Percentage Points




                                                                          Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                         Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Percentage Points
            0.8




                                                                            −0.1 0.1
   0.4




                                                                                      −0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −0.10
            0.0




                           0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                             0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                            0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                                 0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                           0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                             Month                                                                     Month                                                                     Month                                                                         Month                                                                   Month
                           Inventory (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                                   Inventory (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                  Inventory (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                          Inventory (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                   Inventory (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)
                                                                                      1.2




                                                                                                                                                                 1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −0.20 −0.10 0.00 0.10
                  0.0
Percentage Points




                                                                          Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Percentage Points
                                                                                     0.8




                                                                                                                                                                1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
 −1.0 −0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −0.1
                                                                             0.4




                                                                                                                                                        0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −0.3
            −1.5




                                                                                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                 0.0




                           0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                             0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                            0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                                 0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                           0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                             Month                                                                     Month                                                                     Month                                                                         Month                                                                   Month
                         OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                               OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                     OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                      OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                     OPEC Prod. (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                  0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.10
Percentage Points




                                                                              Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Percentage Points
                                                                                           0.2




                                                                                                                                                                1.0
          0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                  −0.2
 −0.2




                                                                                                                                                       0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −0.10
                                                                          −0.6
            −0.6




                                                                                                                                                                 0.0




                           0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                             0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                            0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                                 0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                           0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                             Month                                                                     Month                                                                     Month                                                                         Month                                                                   Month
                         Crude Price (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                                  Crude Price (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                Crude Price (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                      Crude Price (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                   Crude Price (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)
                                                                                                                                                                 2
                   8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                            0
 Percentage Points




                                                                          Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                        Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Percentage Points
                                                                                                                                                     −8 −6 −4 −2 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
              6




                                                                          −6 −4 −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
          4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −1
                           0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                             0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                            0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                                 0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                           0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                             Month                                                                     Month                                                                     Month                                                                         Month                                                                   Month
                            Spread (%) = f(1% OECD Oil Cons. Shock)                                      Spread (%) = f(1% Inventory Shock)                                       Spread (%) = f(1% OPEC Prod. Shock)                                           Spread (%) = f(1% Crude Price Shock)                                      Spread (%) = f(1% Spread Shock)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5 1.0 1.5
          −1 0 1




                                                                                                                                                     0 1 2 3 4
Percentage Points




                                                                          Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Percentage Points
                                                                                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −0.5
  −3




                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −1.0
                                                                                      −1




                                                                                                                                                                 −1
            −5




                           0    2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                             0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16    18                            0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16   18                                 0      2   4    6   8 10     12   14   16   18                           0     2   4   6    8 10    12   14   16    18
                                             Month                                                                     Month                                                                     Month                                                                         Month                                                                   Month


                                                                                                  Figure A.4: All Impulse Response Functions, using BK Data

             Notes: Compare to IRFs in Figure A.1. All shocks are 1 percentage point in magnitude. Columns represent impulse variables,
             rows represent response variables. For example, the 2nd column shows the response of all variables to an impulse to inventories,
             corresponding to the graphs shown in Figure 2. And the 4th row represents how prompt-month oil prices respond to shocks to
             each of the five variables. Shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals computed through 100 bootstrap iterations.




                                                                                                                                                                                                25
